Title       : Renovation of Unusable Laboratories into a Modern Pharmaceutical Engineering
               Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : STI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9602602

Award Number: 9602602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      STI  OFF OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTR
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando J. Muzzio muzzio@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Riman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Lordi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto M. Cuitino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henrik Pedersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In September 1995, Rutgers University's Department of Chemical and Biochemical
              Engineering created the Pharmaceutical Engineering Program, the first one of
              its kind in the United States.  The Program was established to improve the
              performance of the pharmaceutical  manufacturing process by systematically
              applying engineering concepts to generate a wide array of technologies needed
              for the making and processing of materials.  In some instances, the resulting
              manufacturing procedures are highly unstable with respect to changes in
              processing conditions or in raw materials properties, that the validity of the
              production process is compromised.  Engineering concepts such as mass, momentum
              and energy balances, thermodynamics, transport phenomena, colloidal and surface
              chemistry, are used to characterize basic operations in the process. 
              Generating advanced technologies, for improving the predictability,
              reliability, and controllability of the manufacturing process, is one of the
              important objectives of the program.  Currently, research activities of the
              program are conducted in five different buildings scattered across campus. 
              This geographic dispersion makes it difficult to achieve cohesiveness and
              develop effective collaborations.  Moreover, available laboratory space is
              poorly suited to perform many of the necessary research investigations.  This
              award will partially support the renovation of Building C of the Engineering
              Complex on the Busch Campus. Originally built in 1963, the existing structure
              has not been renovated since that time and laboratories are in an advanced
              state of deterioration.   This project will correct deficiencies interfering
              with the conduction of research by installing fume hoods, air handling
              equipment for proper ventilation, new electrical and plumbing services, and
              reconfiguring laboratories.  Targeted space will be renovated into a modern
              powder technology research facility consisting of five laboratories and six
              auxiliary instrument rooms, providing sufficient space to consolidate all of
              the Program's experimental activities. Improved research capabilities and
              strong collaborations, facilitated by the project, will accelerate and multiply
              the development of new technologies, enhancing the predictability and
              controllability of the manufacturing process.  Because the US suffers from an
              acute shortage of researchers trained in powder technology, the project will
              have a major impact on the Department's ability to develop research training
              activities, ensuring access to underrepresented groups in this
              multidisciplinary area of study.  It is anticipated that once the Program is
              fully established, other academic institutions will be interested in developing
              similar programs addressing the needs of an industry critical to the US
              economy.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
