Title       : RTG: Linking Levels of Ecological Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9602252

Award Number: 9602252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $884603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary G. Mittelbach Mittelbach@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Getty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine L. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen K. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Tessier  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9602252  This award renews support for a Research Training Group in  Linking
              Levels of Ecological Organization at the Kellogg  Biological Station of
              Michigan State University.  During the  period of the award, NSF support will
              be gradually phased  out as other sources of funding are identified.  The
              faculty  group currently has 8 members drawn from 5 departments.  The  funds
              awarded will provide stipends for graduate students,  for trainee travel to
              other institutions for specialized  training not available at Michigan State,
              and to bring  investigators from other research and academic institutions  to
              the Kellogg Station for seminars and workshops.  During  the initial 5 years of
               funding, a number of new courses in  both basic and applied aspects of
              ecology.  Several of these  have now become a standard element of graduate
              training in  ecology and evolution at the University.  In addition to the 
              funds provided by this award, institutional and other  resources  help extend
              the program to include the  participation of elementary and high school
              students, and a  separate NSF award for an REU-site activity supports the 
              participation of undergraduate students during the summer.  The need to train
              scientists who can attack research  problems across levels of ecological
              organization is  significant and growing.  The problems of global change and 
              of maintenance of biological diversity combine to make such  training
              increasingly important.  This program will provide  such training, taking
              advantage of the techniques and  concepts of researchers who address a variety
              of  evolutionary and ecological problems at the level of genes,  individual
              organisms, populations, communities, ecosystems  or entire landscapes.
