Title       : Molecular Genetics Analysis of rRNA Function in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9602135

Award Number: 9602135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meng-Chao Yao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  981091024    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9602135  Yao   The genetic properties of rRNA will be investigated using
              Tetrahymena thermophila as a model organism. Work from this laboratory has
              demonstrated that one of the variable regions of the ribosome, D8, has an
              essential conserved role in cell growth. Furthermore, that work has shown that
              some variable regions can accommodate short insertions without affecting
              ribosome function and antisense ribosomes" have been made and used to suppress
              specific regions in the mRNA. That study will be continued by determining the
              optimal length of the antisense RNA, the best target regions in the mRNA and
              the most appropriate sites within the rRNA variable regions for such
              insertions. The interaction between the targeted mRNA and the ribosomes will be
              studied. The antisense ribosome technology will be used to develop a new
              strategy for cloning Tetrahymena genes by their null phenotypes. Additionally,
              the study will create rRNAs that contain active ribozymes as inserts. The well
              characterized "hammer-head" ribozyme will be inserted into a characterized
              variable region of the rRNA. The ability of this ribozyme to cleave targeted
              mRNA in vivo will be determined by analyzing the phenotype and molecular
              composition of transformed cells.   %%%  The ribosomal RNAs of eukaryotes are
              composed of well conserved sequences that are interspersed with highly
              divergent regions. Despite extensive study, only some conserved sequences and
              none of the variable sequences have been linked to specific ribosome functions.
              This study will give insight into the genetic properties of the rRNA,
              especially the variable regions and explore a novel role of the ribosome using
              Tetrahymena thermophila as a model organism. This ciliated protozoan has only
              one copy of the rRNA genes in its germline genome. Transformation methods for
              replacing the rDNA with reconstructed copies have been developed making
              Tetrahymena the only organism in which both classical and molecular genetical
              analysis of rDNA can be conducted.
