Title       : FSML: Oceanographic and Meteorological Monitoring System at Bodega Marine
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9602508

Award Number: 9602508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70759              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Connors pgconnors@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Clegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) is a research unit of the  University of
              California (UC)located on the Sonoma coast 70  miles north of San Francisco.
              Since 1966 the Laboratory has  provided unique opportunities for field research
              on a rich  flora and fauna in close proximity to the Laboratory  buildings. 
              BML has well-equipped laboratories, strong on-  site support staff and a firm
              commitment from the Davis  campus to continue developing  the facilities and
              support  needed by the growing number of resident and visiting  researchers.
              The Laboratory is located on the Bodega Marine  Reserve (BMR), a 362-acre
              protected field site with a  diverse set of marine and terrestrial coastal
              habitats.  Adjacent subtidal areas are protected and available for  study
              within the Bodega Marine Life Refuge.    Oceanographic and meteorological data
              are essential  components of many of the field studies conducted at the  site. 
              Environmental monitoring systems at BML have incurred  problems in recent
              years, and now require replacement and  upgrades to improve reliability,
              flexibility and  accessibility to researchers.  The oceanographic pressure 
              sensor, operating in the severely adverse conditions of a  shallow water, high
              energy nearshore environment, has been  inoperable since winter storms two
              years ago.  This project  will significantly improve the monitoring system to
              provide  automated, quality-controlled, oceanographic and  meterological data
              and a processing and management system  providing improved access to
              researchers.    System will provide researchers with measurements of wind 
              speed and direction, air temperature, relative humidity,  barometric pressure,
              rainfall, total solar radiation,  photosynthetically active radiation, surface
              seawater  temperature, and seawater salinity, all in real time.  With  data
              logger technology, tidal heights, directional waves,  directional currents,
              bottom temperature, and bottom  salinity will be monitored nearshore where such
              measurements  are important to intert idal and shallow subtidal 
              investigations.  In deeper water, an Acoustic Doppler  Current Profiler will
              monitor the ocean currents responsible  for transport of sediments, plankton,
              and larvae.  Re-  engineered data acquisition and management systems will 
              increase the number of variables surveyed, improve the  quality and reliability
              of data collected, and provide  researchers with greater access to on-line and
              archived data  via modem, local area network, and the Internet/World Wide  Web.
