Title       : Ethical Issues for Food Biotechnology - A North America- Europe Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9602968

Award Number: 9602968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67397              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarla R. Peterson tpeterson@bushschool.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Thompson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 5948,9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Philosophers often analyze ethical issues in debates over food and agricultural
              biotechnology as involving conflicts between different understandings of
              scientific responsibility.  Some views stress prediction of consequences; some,
              sets of social rules or personal and community virtues that must characterize
              scientific conduct and government regulation, irrespective of consequences. 
              This tension runs through debates over environmental impact, food safety,
              animal protection, and social consequences of agricultural biotechnology, as
              well as in debates over the morality of intellectual property rules and
              questions about public trust and confidence in science.  Yet, many questions
              remain as to whether philosophical accounts of ethical issues represent actual
              lay persons' concerns, and whether these accounts have any cross cultural
              validity.   This project will produce a comprehensive philosophical overview of
              these ethical issues and subject it to scrutiny with respect to its
              incorporation of lay concerns and its cross cultural relevance.  To begin,
              selective empirical studies of public documents and media representations of
              the US controversies concerning ethics and food biotechnology will be analyzed
              and compared with the philosophical accounts.  The comparison will assess
              whether these accounts represent amplified discussions of lay persons' beliefs,
              if they serve as alternative vocabularies for interpreting issues, or if they
              are largely irrelevant to lay persons' concerns, (or perhaps some combination
              of these three possibilities).  This assessment uses results from empirical
              research in the US on moral language in the formation of lay attitudes towards
              environmental conflicts, and on the role of mass media in affecting public
              perception of risk.  The project also involves developing a collaboration with
              researchers in The Netherlands that will enable cross cultural comparison of 
              Dutch and other European philosophical accounts and lay persons' views.  The
              debates and philosophical analyses of debates from the US and the Netherlands
              could then be compared to assess a) whether the debates themselves are
              consistent with one another, and with the respective philosophical analyses of
              them; and b) how different cultural approaches to ethical philosophy may
              themselves create different ways of conceptualizing ethical issues in food and
              agricultural biotechnology.  The research would address this question by
              placing a North American and a European analysis of biotechnology controversy
              into philosophical dialogue with one another, and by using the speech and media
              studies empirical analyses of both to ask questions about the respective roles
              of philosophy and culture in framing the points of debate.   This award helps
              to support the US research component and several initial meetings and
              explorations between the US and Netherlands research teams.  If progress
              warrants, a supplement and extension to the award may allow for a workshop in
              Europe and follow-on research activities.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
