Title       : Thermal Noise in Test Masses and Suspensions for Gravitational Wave
               Interferometers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9602157

Award Number: 9602157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Berley                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $689178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Saulson saulson@physics.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              According to the Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem, thermal  noise arises from any
              mechanism that dissipates mechanical  energy.  This means that a gravitational
              wave interferometer  test mass and its suspension will work better, the lower
              is  the level of dissipation.  The Syracuse group will carry out  studies of
              various test mass and suspension designs,  characterizing them by their
              dissipation levels.  One means  of doing this is to measure the quality factors
              of the  various mechanical resonances in the system.  A novel  method, newly
              developed by the Syracuse group, involves  careful measurement of the response
              of the system after a  steady stress has been released.  Both methods will be 
              employed in the search for the best ways to build and  suspend test masses for
              LIGO.  In order for the search for gravitational waves to succeed,  it is
              necessary that detectors be free from disturbing  influences that can mimic or
              mask the weak gravitational  wave signal.  Thermal noise, also known as
              Brownian motion,  is among the noise sources most in need of reduction.  The 
              aim of the research program of the Syracuse University group  is to understand
              the sources of thermal noise in  interferometric detectors of gravitational
              waves (such as  those of the LIGO Project), and to thereby learn ways of 
              minimizing its strength.  In addition to its main goal of  improving the
              performance of LIGO and other gravitational  wave detectors, this work may
              stimulate progress in  understanding the structure of noncrystalline solids,
              such  as the fused silica from which test masses are made.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
