Title       : Transitions in Bulk and Mesoscopic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9602884

Award Number: 9602884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19890              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Austen Angell caa@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602884  C. Austen Angell    "Transitions in Bulk and Mesoscopic Liquids"   
              This award will provide partial support for three months of  a six month visit
              to the University of Sydney, Australia,  by  Professor C. Austen Angell of the
              Department of Physics,  Arizona State University.  Professor Angell will
              conduct  collaborative research with Professors P. Harrowell and G.  Warr on
              current aspects of the dynamics and thermodynamics  of the glass transition, or
              polyamorphism glassy and liquid  systems, and of the relation of such
              polyamorphism to major  structural transitions in mesoscopic systems such as
              protein  and RNA folding transitions.  Angell's interest in glass  transition
              phenomenology will be combined with Harrowell's  theoretical expertise in
              kinetic Ising models, and the  consequent microscopic origins of liquid
              fragility, and  Warr's experience in microemulsion structure and stability,  to
              improve current understanding of glasses and  polyamorphism in glasses and
              biopolymers.  The investigators  will 1) use control of system size at constant
              chemical  potential to see system size effects, in particular in  systems  with
              dimensions comparable to those attributed to  microheterogeneities which now
              seem to appear near the glass  temperature; 2) perform theoretical studies
              based on a  facilitated spin microheterogeneous model to determine the 
              conditions necessary to produce the smeared-out, glass-  liquid transformation
              characteristic of hydrated protein  systems;  3) undertake multi-step
              calorimetric studies of  protein refolding kinetics to assess the relevance of 
              nucleation and growth kinetics to the first order complex  systems transition;
              and 4) utilize microemulsion techniques  to examine effects of confinement on
              folding kinetics and to  explore single molecule observation strategies.
