Title       : Regulation of Pattern Formation in Retinal Photoreceptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9602075

Award Number: 9602075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela A. Raymond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 9602075  Pamela Raymond, PI    Development of an embryo into a mature
              organism is a process in which orderly structures arise out of initially
              unorganized masses of cells, much like a house is built from a pile of crude
              lumber. Groups of cells, especially those that become the neurons of the brain,
              adopt unique and specialized identities, in a process developmental biologists
              call "differentiation". Differentiated cells of the same type are not clumped
              together helter-skelter, but are often positioned in a precise arrangement. For
              example, cone photoreceptors, which constitute a sheet of light-sensitive
              neurons in the retina of the eye, come in several varieties, distinct in that
              they express a specific visual pigment which is maximally sensitive to light of
              a certain color (red, green, blue or, in some animals, ultraviolet). In some
              vertebrates, such as fish, the cones are arranged in a regular, repeating
              lattice or mosaic array. The developmental mechanisms that build the lattice,
              i.e., that control the spacing and determine the fate of the presumptive cone
              photoreceptor cells, are not well understood. Most developmental biologists
              agree, however, that immature, differentiating cells often send signals to
              their neighbors instructing them what, or what not, to become. To begin to
              understand this process, the earliest stages in the differentiation of the cone
              mosaic in the fish embryo are being studied. Fish are an advantageous choice
              for this work, since at early developmental stages the embryo is small (about 1
              mm in diameter) and transparent. Molecular markers are being used to identify
              the cone types by the specific visual pigment that they express -- red, green,
              blue or ultraviolet, and to distinguish them from the other major class of
              photoreceptors, called rods. The hypothesis under investigation is that
              precocious rod photoreceptors are the "founders" of the mosaic array. They
              establish a blueprint of the repeating pattern, and then through specific
              signaling mechanisms (as yet unide ntified), they induce differentiation and
              patterning of the array of red, green, blue and ultraviolet cones. These
              experiments will provide new information about the way cells communicate with
              each other during development.
