Title       : Community Participation and Child Rights: An Ethical and Scientific Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602176

Award Number: 9602176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Carlson carlsom@warren.med.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project undertakes a one-year active engagement with community-based
              service providers and child advocates to structure a process by which to
              evaluate the ethical implications of new concepts of child rights and new
              biomedical technologies for evaluating stress in children.  The academic goal
              is to document a process that other scientific groups can use to work with
              communities and public groups on controversial scientific interventions.  The
              societal goal is to enhance the community basis for the collaboration of
              academia and civil society in generating public policy and practice involving
              science and technology.  The project proceeds by a series of meetings with
              staff and parents of a child service/advocacy organization that will:  a)
              exchange information and points of view, through both written materials and
              discussions, around the ethical concerns and frameworks that guide the design
              and evaluation of their services and those guiding the scholarship and research
              activities of the investigators; b) discuss and debate potential risks and
              benefits of the child rights approach and its relationship to cortisol
              measurements as a strategy to assess stress in children, and c) discuss and
              debate use of this technique to detect early signs of developmental stress, to
              monitor the effectiveness of social services, and to evaluate the
              appropriateness of institutional care settings.  The project will archive
              written material and document discussion covering these issues over the eight
              months of dialogue.  The goal is to attempt to develop a consensus on ethical
              issues relating to conceptual frameworks, research methodologies, service
              design and evaluation to assess stress in disadvantaged children in this
              particular situation as well as more universally.  The research team, an
              experimental psychologist, an ethicist, and a physician will collaborate on
              scholarly publications to provide guidelines for the exchange of information
              between service agencies, advocacy groups and academics who share a commitment
              to improving the well-being of disadvantaged children.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
