Title       : Building on the Crossroads in Mathematics Standards: A Project to Develop
               Introductory Mathematics Curriculum Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9602361

Award Number: 9602361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107817             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Souders   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn E. Mays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carver C. Gayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Simundza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Mahoney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CORD
	      601 Lake Air Drive
	      Waco, TX  767105878    254/772-8756

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building on the Crossroads in Mathematics Standards: A Project to Develop
              Introductory Mathematics Curriculum Materials    Most students entering
              postsecondary education lack the mathematical skills needed to succeed in
              advanced technology education, engineering, and mathematics- and
              science-related programs. Curriculum materials are needed for introductory
              college mathematics to engage students and prepare them for the workplace or
              further education.    In this development project the Center for Occupational
              Research and Development (CORD) and the American Mathematical Association of
              Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC) have formed a partnership with faculty from two-year
              colleges and professional societies who are experts in contextual learning,
              learning technology, and professional development. The goals of this project
              are to identify a core set of mathematical topics and themes that are essential
              for students preparing for careers in the advanced technological workforce and
              to select one such theme or topic and develop a rich collection of learning
              materials around that theme that are based on real-world applications together
              with supporting pedagogical materials. This modular set of material reflects
              the AMATYC content standards for introductory level mathematics which include
              topics in college algebra, trigonometry, introductory statistics, finite
              mathematics, precalculus, and foundation topics often characterized as
              developmental mathematics. Furthermore, the materials are being designed to
              serve the varying needs of all students who need a foundational knowledge of
              mathematics for engineering, advanced technology, and other technical and
              non-technical related careers.
