Title       : Nonmarket Institutions, Coercive Power, and Economic Efficiency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9602038

Award Number: 9602038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175423             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Greif avner@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to extend a comparative  empirical and
              theoretical study of the nature, implications, and  decline of a non-market
              economic institutions that supported  anonymous markets for goods characterized
              by distance in time and  place such as credit markets and contracts for future
              delivery.  This research consists of two separate but related projects.    The
              first is an empirical and theoretical examination of the  relations between
              political institutions, coercive power, and  commercial development during the
              late medieval Commercial  Revolution.  Specifically, these relations will be
              examined in  the context of late medieval Genoa, the second largest maritime 
              Italian city-state during that period.  The extent to which the  potential use
              of military power hindered the ability of feudal  lords, who established the
              Commune of Genoa, to cooperate will be  analyzed.  Further, the extent to which
              political institutions  hindered or fostered such cooperation will be examined.
                 The second project will examine the economic implications of the  ability of
              social groups (such as clans, tribe, and ethnic  groups) to invest economic
              resources in military strength and use  this ability to expropriate wealth from
              other groups.  In this  context, the conditions will be explored under which a
              state with  the ability to predate and demand taxes can promote economic 
              welfare, and the conditions under which economic welfare is not  hindered due
              to the absence of a state with such attributes.   This analysis will combine
              the two prevailing views of the state.  Namely, the state as reflecting a
              social contract and the state  as dictator with limited coercive power.  A game
              theoretical  framework will allow the explicit modeling of self-enforcing 
              contractual relations.   It is expected that this analysis will  provide the
              foundation for future empirical research into the  nature of the state and the
              economic experience of economies in  pre-modern Europe and contemporary Africa.
