Title       : Automated Molecular Anthropological Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9602171

Award Number: 9602171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd R. Disotell todd.disotell@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford J. Jolly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Todd Disotell and his colleagues
              will purchase an ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer. This instrument is an
              automated system used for the sizing, sequencing and quantification of nucleic
              acids. The device integrates multicolor fluorescent labeling of nucleic acids
              with capillary electrophoresis to size and quantitate DNA molecules. Two of the
              advantages of using this technology to measure DNA include the use of polymers
              in capillary tubes rather than gels and the use of fluorescent dyes rather than
              radioactive isotopes for visualization. The instrument has a daily throughput
              of up to 4200 DNA bases when used for sequencing and is fully automated, so
              that once samples are prepared they are automatically loaded, run and analyzed
              without additional user input. This is a great advantage over manual techniques
              that need to be continuously monitored.  The goal of the research is to
              understand the processes involved in the evolution of higher primate species
              and the instrument will be used to sequence multiple loci from large numbers of
              individuals from select primate species. In particular the researchers will
              focus on closely related Cercopithecines (guenons, macaques, mangabeys and
              mandrills) and on two species of baboons which interbreed in a hybrid zone. The
              project is especially interesting because it focuses on species that are just
              on the cusp of evolutionary separation and therefore the work will shed light
              on both the behavioral and biological mechanisms which serve to establish
              interspecific barriers. Intellectually the project falls at the borderline
              between population genetics and taxonomic analysis and serves to integrate
              concepts from both areas.   Acquisition of this instrument will speed research
              in Dr. Disotell's lab and generate data of interest to many biologists and
              social scientists. It will also assist in the training of students in the NYU
              and other New York City university anthropology and biology departments.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
