Title       : U.S.-Pakistan Workshop: Nitrogen Fixation with Non-Legumes Faisalabad, Pakistan,
               October 16-21, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9602185

Award Number: 9602185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans J. deBruijn debruijn@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5943,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support participation by six scientists, four
              from the United States, and two  from the Middle East and South Asia, in a
              U.S.-Pakistan Workshop, and the associated International symposium, on
              `Nitrogen Fixation with Non-Legumes` to be held in Faisalabad, Pakistan,
              October 16-21, 1996.   The organizers are Dr. Frans deBruijn of the Department
              of Microbiology at Michigan State University, in East Lansing, MI, and Dr.
              Kauser Malik, Director, National Institute for Biotechnology & Genetic
              Engineering (NIBGE) in Faisalabad, Pakistan.  The meeting is intended to :1.
              report and discuss the results of recent research being carried out on nitrogen
              fixation with non-legumes and to assess the potential for enhancement of crop
              productivity; 2. to provide opportunities for U.S. and Pakistani scientists to
              establish contacts and to develop collaborative research projects in this area;
              and 3. to identify various aspects of nitrogen fixation research which should
              be emphasized in the immediate future.  The proceedings are expected to be
              published and to become widely available to U.S. scientists and to scientists
              in other countries interested in this topic.  Scope: This award is to fund
              travel of four U.S. scientists and two key scientists from developing countries
              to participate in an important workshop and symposium where discussions will
              deal with a topic of great importance to most of the agrarian countries in the
              world.  The research results to be discussed, and the deliberations on future
              research are intended to accomplish the twin objectives of reducing the burden
              of the cost of nitrogen fertilizers, and also reduce the pollution from the
              manufacture and use of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers.  The resulting
              collaborative research would involve a group of active young researchers from
              Pakistan, a predominantly agricultural country, with scientists from the United
              States, in various fundamental science topics, including genetics, biochemistry
              and physiology, that are related to enhancing nitrogen fixation in non-legumes.
               The project meets the objectives of the Division of International Programs in
              promoting collaboration with foreign scientists in areas of mutual interest.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
