Title       : LIGASE: Long Island Group About Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9602450

Award Number: 9602450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. David Bynum dbynum@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              LIGASE: Long Island Group About Science Education    The goal of LIGASE (Long
              Island Group about Science Education) is to educate a highly skilled work force
              for the growing biotechnology industry on Long Island. A consortium consisting
              of SUNY Stony Brook, Nassau Community College, Suffolk Community College,
              Brentwood High School, Uniondale High School, and firms utilizing the Long
              Island High Technology Incubator has been formed to accomplish this goal. Three
              different strategies are being used to develop and deliver the curricula:  1)
              the Teacher Enhancement Institute, located in the School of Professional
              Development at Stony Brook, is educating high school and community college
              faculty in current concepts and laboratory techniques in biotechnology, 2) with
              the assistance of the biotechnology industry, innovative curricula are being
              developed at the high schools and community colleges, 3) academic year and
              summer programs are being established that allow faculty and students to gain
              hands-on experience at the participating institutions. Campus based teaching is
              being supplemented by off-campus electronically delivered curricula. All
              developed materials are being made available to other institutions via the
              LIGASE home page, publications and workshops. Additional activities stress the
              recruitment of underrepresented minorities and women. Imaginative approaches to
              broaden instructional capability, including teaching with representatives from
              both education and industry are also being emphasized. An ongoing outside
              evaluation allows for positive feedback, modification and change on a regular
              basis. The overarching structure is provided by the LIGASE Steering Committee,
              consisting of teachers, faculty and industry representatives.
