Title       : Economic and Environmental Risk Perceptions: Determinants of Environmental
               Policy in Transitional Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9602098

Award Number: 9602098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83464              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Bostrom ann.bostrom@pubpolicy.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Barke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              All societies face decisions about the relationship between environmental
              protection and economic development, and all societies differ in the cultural,
              historical, and political context in which those decisions must occur. 
              Attempts to generalize across systems have been illuminating but inconclusive,
              in part because study designs often have focused on comparisons across similar
              systems, or because underlying theory was poorly addressed.  For example,
              according to the `postmaterialist thesis,` wide-spread concern about the
              environment only emerges in a society when it has achieved a relatively high
              standard of living, and satisfied other, presumably more basic, needs.  This is
              consistent with the commonly held belief that economic growth conflicts with
              environmental policy.  If post-materialism is correct, environmentalism should
              increase only as economic welfare increases.  Recent data from Bulgaria and
              other countries around the world indicate that concerns about the environment
              remain high even in the face of economic woes. When long-standing political
              regimes fell in Eastern Europe this last decade, it appeared that environmental
              activism was a driving force behind economic and political change.  The Burgas
              area of Bulgaria is particularly suited to a study of these influences, because
              it is now undergoing rapid economic and political restructuring, and has
              suffered considerable environmental damage from the Neftochim petrochemical
              plant, the largest such plant in Europe.  In addition, there is a history of
              heavy pesticide and fertilizer use in the area.  Thus the stresses on risk
              perceptions and environmental policy from economic, environmental, political
              and policy contexts are heightened.  Although multiple sociological theories
              have been proposed to explain variability in  environmentalism, these theories
              do not address individual level beliefs, decisions and actions.  At the
              individual level, perceptions of riskiness and intentions to act to reduce a
              risk are hypothesized to be the result of two attributes of the risk: (1)
              perceptions of exposure to the risk, and (2) perceptions of costs and benefits
              to individuals and to society from the hazard, moderated by (a) knowledge and
              beliefs about the hazard underlying the risk (i.e., mental models), (b) beliefs
              about the ability of individuals or of groups or organizations to reduce or
              increase the risk, and (c) uncertainty about the risk.  This project will
              contribute to the risk perception and environmental policy literatures, by
              characterizing risk perceptions, local environmental policies, and attitudes
              toward those policies in the context of a transitional society.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
