Title       : Renovation of the Biology & Chemistry Research and Research Training Space at
               USI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9602290

Award Number: 9602290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1193947            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne K. Barnett barnett.ucs@SMTP.usi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome R. Cain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie G. Hankins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Indiana
	      8600 Univ Blvd Box 6227
	      Evansville, IN  477123534    812/464-8600

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Southern University of Indiana is the recipient of funds from the Academic
              Research Infrastructure Program to remodel research and research training space
              for the Departments of Biology and Chemistry.  This space is located in the USI
              Science Center, a facility that was constructed in 1969.  In the absence of an
              organized space utilization plan, laboratories were carved out of non-research
              space that resulted in the haphazard dispersal of research space throughout the
              building.  The present arrangement impairs research efficiency and inhibits
              productive communication between faculty and student research groups.  Usage of
              several laboratories for both teaching and investigative activities, severely
              limits the time research can be conducted and compromises security of
              experiments and equipment.   As an outdated facility, the Science Center
              suffers from gross inadequacies in heating ventilation, air conditioning,
              electricity, plumbing, and poor design.  These deficiencies impede on the types
              of experimental work that can be accomplished by research personnel.    Award
              funds will be used to upgrade the HVAC system, improve plumbing and electrical
              systems, and  reconfigure space to improve efficiency.  Fixed equipment
              consisting of fume hoods and casework will be installed. The overall project
              effect will strengthen biological and chemical research in the following areas:
               behavioral ecology and environmental studies, microbiology, molecular biology,
              physiology, organic and inorganic chemistry, physical, and analytical
              chemistry.  Renovated facilities will significantly enhance the University's
              ability to prepare women for advanced degrees and careers in biology and
              chemistry since both departments have a high proportion of women students.
              Modernized laboratories will alleviate the need for students to conduct
              research at other sites during the summer,  and provide additional
              opportunities for students to participate in the research enterprise.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
