Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: An In situ Scanning Tunneling Micro- scopy Study of Group
               III Nitride Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1997     
File        : a9602468

Award Number: 9602468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignatius S. Tsong ig.tsong@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5983,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9602468  Tsong    This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research  between
              Dr. Ignatius S. T. Tsong of the Department of  Physics at Arizona State
              University and Dr. Toshio Sakurai  of the Institute of Materials Research at
              Tohoku University  in Sendai, Japan.  Dr. Tsong will be spending twelve months 
              at Tohoku University to conduct an in situ scanning  tunneling microscopy (STM)
              study of nitride thin films grown  by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).  The
              researchers will  attempt to identify the optimum growth temperature and the 
              most suitable nitrogen flux species for high quality MBE  film growth.  The
              results obtained during the visit will be  correlated with the low-energy
              electron microscopy (LEEM)  study of nitride growth with seeded supersonic
              beams in the  researcher's laboratory at Arizona State University.    The U.S.
              researcher brings to this collaboration his  knowledge of geometric and defect
              structures, atomic  composition, and adsorbate kinetics on the surfaces of 
              metals, alloys and semiconductors.  This is complemented by  similar knowledge
              of the Japanese researcher who has  specific expertise in the area of  STM. 
              His laboratory is  equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentation and his MBE- 
              STM system is one of only a handful of such instruments in  the world.  The
              project is expected to provide new  information of critical value to gaining
              new and deeper  understanding of fundamental materials science phenomena 
              associated with the epitaxial growth as well as other  related processing
              phenomena in a class of materials,  electronic/photonic, having high
              technological and economic  significance.  It is expected that the cooperation
              between  these laboratories should foster future collaborations.  ***
