Title       : Renovation of the Environmental Engineering Analytical Laboratories, and Civil
               Engineering Rooms 3109, 3104 and 3119
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9602824

Award Number: 9602824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad T. Jafvert jafvert@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Inez Hua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loring Nies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Alleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest Blatchley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to
              support the renovation of two analytical instrumentation laboratories,  and one
              graduate environmental research laboratory for the Department of Environmental
              Engineering at Purdue University.  Engineering faculty at Purdue are actively
              engaged in research within  new areas of national interests that include
              hazardous waste treatment and minimization, soil and groundwater remediation,
              and environmental fate modeling.  With new acquisitions of advanced analytical
              equipment, the department is dedicated to make the environmental engineering
              graduate research program internationally competitive.  It is an opportune and
              critical time for the University to renovate facilities that house these and
              future acquisitions, and the laboratories that house graduate and faculty
              research.  Because environmental systems research is interdisciplinary,  modern
              facilities are required to accommodate and maintain analytical instrumentation.
               Research space in the Civil Engineering Building, constructed 33 years ago, is
              deteriorated and deficient in the modern utility systems.  Fume hoods lack
              proper compressed air, vacuum, natural gas, and water outlets.  There is a lack
              of adequate space for large instruments that require full access ventilation. 
              Limited aisle space between benches restricts access and thus does not comply
              with ADA regulations.  Renovations will eradicate physical research barriers
              and add to the existing capabilities.   Modernized facilities will improve
              accessibility and functionality of instruments for research and research
              training, and enhance the quality of the research experience for faculty,
              graduate and undergraduate students, and visiting scientists.  This project
              will positively impact the Department's ability to recruit exceptional
              students, including those of under-represented groups and women in this
              nationally vital area.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
