Title       : Japan STA Program: Quenching of Gaseous Fluroescence by Large Magnetic Fields
               and Magnetic Field Effects on Reaction Products After Excitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9602496

Award Number: 9602496
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wade N. Sisk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NC Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, NC  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602496  Sisk    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Wade Sisk at  the The Institute
              of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN),  Wako, Saitama, Japan.  Dr. Sisk
              will work with Dr. Hisaharu  Hayashi, on a research project entitled,
              "Quenching of  Gaseous Fluorescence by Large  Magnetic Fields up to 10 T and
              Magnetic Field Effects on  Reactions Products After Excitation".    Research on
              the chemical reaction of gas phase molecules has  previously been carried out
              at ordinary fields (H<2.5 T).  The proposed study will investigate the chemical
              reactions  of gaseous molecules with large magnetic fields (H>2.5 T).  When a
              molecule is excited, e.g. via laser light  application, it may relax to its
              intial state through the  emission of light (fluorescence).  Accordingly, the 
              examination of levels of fluoresence is an effective way to  monitor reactants
              or products of a chemical reaction.  When  a molecule is excited in the
              presence of a defined magnetic  field, the magnitude of the fluorescence is
              also altered. In  the proposed research, fluorescence quenching and time- 
              resolved absorbance spectro-scopy will be carried out under  the influence of
              different applications (the emphasis on  magentic fields) in order to: 1) gain
              a more comprehensive  understanding of how large magnetic fields quench 
              fluorescence in gasphase candidates; 2) ascertain the long-  term effects that
              large magnetic fields have on complicated  reaction mechanisms.  ***
