Title       : Modular Approach to Biotechnology Laboratory Instruction Based on a Novel
               Green-Fluorescent Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9602356

Award Number: 9602356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane F. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Modular Approach to Biotechnology Laboratory Instruction Based on a Novel
              Green-Fluorescent Protein    This project is developing laboratory modules in
              biotechnology for secondary school and undergraduate level students and their
              teachers, based on a unique protein, the green-fluorescent protein (GFP), which
              serves as an easily visualized reporter for gene expression and all steps in
              protein purification. Detection requires only a long-wave UV lamp, making the
              system adaptable to low-budget curricula. Because the protein is so easily
              visualized, it enhances the students' understanding of molecular biology and
              biochemistry making each step in the laboratory exercise an exciting
              experience. Initial concepts for GFP-based laboratory modules were developed at
              Rutgers in 1989 and have been successfully "field tested" for five years. Nine
              other institutions including one other major research university, one four-year
              college, two county colleges, three high schools, one major biochemical supply
              corporation, and one national laboratory are joining Rutgers in an informal
              consortium to advance the GFP-based laboratory module concept. Originally
              isolated from a bioluminescent jellyfish. GFP can now be cloned into other
              organisms. Thus. the gene and its protein are available for widespread use. The
              project is developing GFP-based laboratory modules geared for the advanced
              secondary school and junior college levels. The modular "kit" approach to
              teaching biotechnology techniques allows both protein purification and
              recombinant DNA techniques to be transferred to all appropriate settings with
              only minor modifications. This GFP-based modular approach provides major
              changes in the way technicians are trained and can be projected on a national
              scale to be widely applied in the biotechnology community.
