Title       : Replacement, Consolidation, and Upgrade of Existing Anthropology Laboratory
               Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1998    
File        : a9602741

Award Number: 9602741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel C. Kuipers kuipers@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison S. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1884, the Department of Anthropology at  the George Washington
              University has a long history of fieldwork and laboratory-based linguistic,
              biological and archaeological research.  Having a close relationship with the
              Smithsonian Institution provides access to important research collections and
              curatorial expertise for both students and faculty.  Research and training
              activities are currently performed in space, originally designed for
              non-research purposes, which is dispersed throughout the university. 
              Deficiencies, such as crowded conditions, inadequate ventilation, and the lack
              of a fume hood needed for experiments and training involving wet chemistry,
              have forced faculty and students to find other space on or off campus to
              conduct research. Funding from the NSF's ARI Program will be used to relocate,
              consolidate, and upgrade existing laboratory facilities in order to provide
              enhanced research and research training capabilities in biological
              anthropology, archaeology, linguistic anthropology, and visual anthropology. 
              Revamping of facilities for research and training in Anthropology  is only part
              of a long-term university initiative for the department.  This project will
              provide separate facilities for an archaeology and biological anthropology
              laboratory, and for a visual and linguistic anthropology video laboratory. 
              Renovations  will include provisions for adequate bench space, secure storage
              for materials, and proper ventilation.  A newly installed fume hood will allow
              for the preparation of casting materials, acid washes, and chemical analysis of
              ceramics and other procedures presently not feasible.  Upon completion,
              research enabled by this modernization project will include:  full preparation
              of specimens for specialized analysis such as ancient DNA and neutron
              activation, experimental conservation studies of archaeological and
              ethnographic artifacts, casting of unique human fossils, and the analysis of
              communication and behavior using concordance software.  Examples of research
              projects to be housed in the facility include studies of later Pleistocene and
              Holocene fossils and artifacts from  Central Africa, and analysis of
              linguistics and social change in Indonesia and Zaire through long-term visual
              records.  Upgraded laboratories will not only enhance faculty research but also
              the training of students, who have historically been overwhelmingly more than
              75% women and minorities.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
