Title       : Renovation of Science Research Laboratories in Bosshart Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9602760

Award Number: 9602760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pearl W. Bartelt bartelt@heroes.rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Newland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth J. Moore-Landecker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Rowan College of New Jersey is one of nine institutions that consist of the
              State College system, serving a majority of students from the southern region
              of the State. This award from the National Science Foundation will be use for
              infrastructure improvements to Bosshart Hall, the science building at Rowan. 
              Erected in 1961, the facility is home to the Departments of Biology, Chemistry
              and Physics.  However, existing conditions, including dispersed research and
              training space throughout the building,  severely impacts research programs by
              limiting the time assigned to conduct experiments.  Combined with increased
              usage due to the growth in scholarship and enrollments,  Bosshart Hall  cannot
              support research activities.  This project will  improve the environment by
              consolidating research and training activities in dedicated laboratories. 
              Renovations will include: redesigning lab spaces for more flexibility,
              modifying the plumbing system to accommodate required equipment, installing new
              workbenches, cabinets, and fume hoods, and providing gas and vacuum services. 
              As a result of the infrastructure modifications,  a total of eight laboratories
              will be established: three labs for biology (microbiology, tissue cell and
              histology), three labs for chemistry (organic and inorganic, synthesis,
              polymers, and two labs for physics (lasers, superconductivity and magnetic
              properties) respectively.   The increased functioning of these areas will
              permit investigators to concentrate on research that will enlarge both faculty
              and student productivity.  With renovated facilities, the science departments
              which currently have a large representation of students who traditionally have
              not participated in the sciences, will be able to provide additional training
              opportunities for students.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
