Title       : Consolidation and Renovation of Research Facilities at the Transmountain Campus
               of El Paso Community College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9602298

Award Number: 9602298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adena Loston adenl@epcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. McCort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria E. Alvarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Ortega  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Strickland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : El Paso County Cmty Col
	      P O BOX 20500
	      El Paso, TX  799980500    915/594-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1969, El Paso Community College (EPCC) serves a community
              characterized by a high minority population.  Located at the western tip of
              Texas and bordered by New Mexico and Mexico, the mission of the College is to
              provide educational opportunities for students who traditionally have not
              pursued higher learning in a postsecondary educational environment.   Unlike
              many community colleges that have been excluded from the research enterprise,
              EPCC supports the participation of faculty and students in summer research
              activities through bridge programs with the University of Texas at El Paso. One
              program is the NSF Alliance for Minority Participation Summer Bridge Program.  
              Faculty also actively participate in research activities on campus, engaging
              students in the study of the environment.  Research projects share a common
              environmental focus and include a study of environmental factors that affect
              the survival of viruses in groundwater, and microorganisms in the marine
              intertidal zone.  Other investigations conducted include systematic and
              biogeographic studies of the flora and the fauna in the Chihuahaun Desert, and
              the development of sensors for heavy metal contaminants in bodies of water.
              Because research was not considered in the original design of laboratory
              facilities at EPCC's Transmountain campus, other space has been used by
              students and faculty to conduct research.  Fixed equipment including fume hoods
              and an autoclave are in poor condition and must be shared with instructional
              activities.  This award will be used to consolidate the various spaces used for
              research into a state-of-the-art research facility.  In addition to improving
              utility systems, an autoclave, a fume hood, a cold room and fiber optics
              cabling will be installed. Although significant collaborations already exist
              among faculty, having a dedicated research area will initiate a chain reaction
              as more faculty and students experience the thrill of research.  The newly
              renovated laboratory will  expose students, specifically students of Hispanic
              origin,  to research, encouraging them to become critical thinkers,  and
              motivating them to pursue careers in science.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
