Title       : Renovation of Laboratory Space at the Department of Physics William James Hall
               at Southern University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9602674

Award Number: 9602674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali R. Fazely fazely@feynman.phys.subr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Earl Doomes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry C. McGhee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Nickerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern University
	      P O Box 9614
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708139614    504/771-4500

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Southern University, a Historically Black College and University, is the
              recipient of ARI funds to renovate physics research and research training
              facilities.  The institution is the largest of the HBCU system and is composed
              of three campuses, including Baton Rouge, the main campus, and the site of the
              renovation project.   Presently, research faculty and  students engage in
              research activities that include: nuclear, particle and astro-particle physics,
              experimental solid state physics, theoretical solid state physics, and material
              science.  However, existing conditions in James Hall, the home of the Physics
              Department, are inadequate for research and training programs.  Renovations to
              the 1972 structure will encompass: upgrading HVAC, plumbing and electrical
              systems, installing new fume hoods, and ensuring that laboratories comply with
              ADA and state health and fire codes.  A clean room will be created as well as
              rooms to house a cosmic-ray test stand, and a Superconducting Quantum
              Interference Device magnetometer.  The renovations are essential to the growth
              of the department and will enhance research and training capabilities of
              undergraduate and graduate students. The project will be instrumental in the
              creation of a Ph.D. program in material science by providing modernized space
              and facilitating collaboration between physics and engineering.  Because of the
              University's historical mission, many African American scholars will enter the
              pipeline contributing to the nation's scientific infrastructure.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
