Title       : Facilities Renovation in Arey Life Sciences Building for Advanced Molecular
               Biology, Cellular Biology, and Microbiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9602639

Award Number: 9602639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230107             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Russell Cole frcole@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Fekete  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Greenwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur K. Champlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Colby College, in Waterview, Maine, is the recipient of $230,107 from the
              National Science Foundation for the renovation of advanced research training
              and research facilities for cellular and molecular biology and microbiology. 
              This project represents the capstone of the College's five year Plan for the
              Sciences that calls for a new science curriculum focused on -education through
              research.`  In support of the Plan, the Biology Department has established an
              interdisciplinary Cell and Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Program (CMBB). 
              Critically needed reconfigured space appropriate for research and advanced
              research training, suitable for a variety of research projects, is not
              available. ARI funds will be used to aid Colby in its endeavor to improve the
              physical infrastructure needed to support the CMBB Program. Constructed in
              1959, renovations will occur on the third floor of the Arey Life Sciences
              Building. Spaces dedicated to investigative activities of three laboratories
              and support facilities including a cell culture room, an advanced microscopy
              suite, and a radioisotope laboratory will be reconfigured and utilities
              upgraded.  New casework, benches, and fume hoods will be installed, and
              laboratories will comply with ADA regulations. Consolidating laboratories for
              interrelated disciplines of cellular and molecular biology and microbiology,
              and locating them  near related biochemistry  laboratories, will facilitate
              efficient use of space, equipment, and foster interdisciplinary collaborations
              among bioscience students and faculty.  This  modernization will strengthen the
              biology curriculum by enhancing research training and by increasing the number
              of research opportunities for students through independent projects and
              research collaborations with faculty.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
