Title       : Signal Transduction Pathways and Gene Expression in the Circadian Clock System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9602119

Award Number: 9602119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter Wilczynski                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Rob Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Fdn Biomed Res
	      222 Maple Avenue
	      Shrewsbury, MA  015452732    508/842-8921

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9602119  Jackson    Circadian clocks located in the brains of all animal species
               are essential for the regulation of daily rhythms in many  different
              physiological, endocrine, and behavioral  processes.  Such clocks, for example
              regulate the timed  release of hormones, the timing of waking and sleeping, and
               even the changing sensitivity of animals and humans to  pharmacological agents
              used in the treatment of cancer and  other diseases.  Circadian clocks can be
              reset by light  stimuli and this is crucial for the synchronization of these 
              clocks to environmental light/dark cycles.  The proper  synchronization of
              circadian clocks to environmental time  (solar time) is essential and insures
              that physiological  processes (within an organism's body) occur at an 
              appropriate time of day and in a coordinated manner.  Indeed, most travelers
              are aware of the phenomenon of jet-  lag, which results from a
              desynchronization of bodily  rhythms during adaptation to a new time zone. 
              Although it  is known that light can reset the circadian clock, the exact 
              mechanism by which the nerve cells comprising the clock  transduce light
              information into a resetting response is not  well understood.  The major
              purpose of this grant is to  define and study the signaling pathways within
              clock neurons  which are activated during the clock resetting response.  This
              work will be accomplished using the model genetic  system Drosophila
              melanogaster and contemporary molecular  biological approaches.  It will also
              take advantage of  existing Drosophila mutants which have heritable lesions 
              affecting specific cellular signaling pathways.  The  significance of this work
              is that it will lead to a more  complete understanding of how the brain's clock
              is reset by  environmental signals such as light.
