Title       : South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9602440

Award Number: 9602440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine L. Craft   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn G. Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S C St Brd Tech&Compr Edu
	      111 Executive Center Drive
	      Columbia, SC  29210    803/896-5410

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,7348,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of Excellence   
              The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of
              Excellence addresses expanding the pool of skilled technicians in advanced
              engineering technology fields to aid the state's and the nation's manufacturing
              industries in remaining competitive in the global marketplace. The SC ATE
              Center seeks to create a learning environment which models the new
              technologically sophisticated work milieu rather than simply teaching about it.
              Objectives are focused in three broad areas including curriculum reform,
              program improvement, and faculty development. Curriculum reform centers on
              developing integrated engineering technology core curricula using a
              systems-based approach; program improvement encompasses recruitment/retention
              reforms as well as the development of an electronic communications
              infrastructure for state-wide curriculum design and delivery; and faculty
              development emphasizes the use of interdisciplinary/intercampus teams for
              designing and implementing curriculum reforms. The primary target audience of
              the SC ATE Center is technical college students enrolled in, or desiring to
              enroll in, engineering technology programs with a particular emphasis on
              attracting women and underrepresented minorities. The Center seeks to impact
              the educational pipeline from middle school through the baccalaureate level. A
              particular emphasis involves working with Clemson University and other
              four-year colleges to help prepare the middle and secondary school technology
              teachers of the future. Collaborative partnerships encompass over twenty-five
              educational, governmental, and business/industrial entities including the State
              Department of Education, Clemson University, South Carolina State University,
              the Virginia Community College System, the Governor's Math/Science Advisory
              Board, the Governor's Commission on Women, the SC Department of Commerce, AMP,
              Inc., BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., Michelin North America, Bose 
              Corporation, Robert Bosch Corporation, and NCR Corporation. A strong evaluation
              component, headed by the Academy for Educational Development, will facilitate
              the development of program improvement processes and curriculum products which
              will have a significant impact on engineering technology education nation wide.
