Title       : Dissertation Research: Language and Social Change in Post-Apartheid South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9602198

Award Number: 9602198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3225               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Joseph Errington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The end of South Africa's apartheid system has led to the  blurring or
              altering of previously clearly demarcated ethnic,  political, and linguistic
              divisions within the country. As  rhetorics and policies of separateness have
              been superseded by  discourses of multicultural unity and equality, so too 
              ethnically-inflected and gendered social distinctions between  town, township,
              and village have been eroded by a national  culture now developing in, and
              emanating from, the urban centers.  The aim of this research is to locate
              emergent forms of urban  speech which mediate shifting linguistic and social
              identities,  ethnic and national, in Bophuthatswana, a former "ethnic 
              homeland."       The urban speech variety in question derives from two kinds 
              of language, and mediates two kinds of identity for black South  Africans. In
              areas of North-West Province which were formerly  part of Bophuthatswana,
              ethnic identity cleaves to Setswana, a  standardized (and now
              nationally-recognized) language which is  nonetheless socially moribund in
              urban communities. South African  identity, on the other hand, cleaves to
              Tsotsitaal, formerly a  criminal argot with roots in the urban townships.
              Tsotsitaal's  evolution into an urban variety of Setswana, which is 
              increasingly a medium of urban national culture, is the focus of  this study.
              It will be investigated in terms of the gendered  nature of shifting social
              boundaries in South Africa's urban  communities. Research on Tswana peoples'
              speech behavior and  language ideologies will consist of participant
              observation,  recording of unelicited "natural" conversation, informal 
              interviews, and archival study. By developing (1) linguistic  descriptions of
              speech variation and the structural relationship  of Urban Setswana to Standard
              Setswana, and (2) a historical/  ethnographic account of forces shaping the
              communities in which  this variation is found, it becomes possible to (3) reach
              broader  conclusions about language's role in mediating social identities  an d
              political change.
