Title       : Multimedia Communications Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9602375

Award Number: 9602375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309983             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Beyer dbeyer@pilot.njin.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Chamra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlesex County College
	      2600 Woodbridge Avenue
	      Edison, NJ  08818    201/548-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Multimedia Communications Technology     The convergence of computer,
              interactive television systems and telecommunications is creating a new
              employment market in multimedia communications technology. Multimedia refers to
              information that combines more than one medium. Every segment of the industry
              is growing quickly and has the potential for future growth. Networked
              multimedia communications will have a broad impact on business, education, and
              on communications in general Examples of networked multimedia communications
              include videotelephony and videoconferencing, real-time video on demand,
              interactive video and multimedia messaging, remote collaborative work,
              interactive information services and multimedia education and training.  
              Middlesex County College and the Carteret public schools will work, mver a
              two-year period, with representatives from the Siemens Rolm Corporation and
              York Telecom to develop and implement an articulated curriculum to prepare
              multimedia communications technicians for employment and continuing education.
              Building on an established, ABET-accredited electrical engineering technology
              program with a computer electronics option, the College will develop and
              implement a curriculum that provides a sound foundation in core and technical
              skills and knowledge, as well as the foundation interpersonal skills and
              knowledge that respond to industry needs. The overall goal of the project is to
              develop and implement a high school through associate degree program in
              Multimedia Communications Technology to satisfy the needs of business and
              industry for highly-skilled, well-educated technicians, and, at the same time,
              prepare graduates for further education. An existing articulation relationship
              with the New Jersey Institute of Technology will serve as a vehicle to extend
              Multimedia Communications Technology articulation through the baccalaureate
              degree.   The education of technicians, described as the employees who
              "understand how the process operates in its entirety and are ready to 
              intervene if trouble arises," is a critical component in the revitalization of
              American business and industry. Where once an employee was expected to do a job
              without reference to what others were doing, now "teamwork, communication
              skills, breadth of knowledge, initiative, versatility and leadership skills"
              are basic requirements for employees at all levels.   Just as business and
              industry, to remain viable, have moved to a concentration on quality, so too
              must technician education restructure for quality. Key elements in the design
              of the curriculum structure will be the inclusion of methodologies and
              techniques that promote the development of team building and creative
              problem-solving skills. Collaborative learning, project-centered instructional
              activities and authentic assessment derived from the completion of real-life
              projects will form the curricular framework for the Multimedia Communications
              Technology program. The multimedia communications technician must have a
              background rooted in electronics and computer technology, with a strong
              foundation in mathematics, science, and written and oral communications, as
              well as the ability to participate as a team member in a quality-focused work
              environment. This background, coupled with a knowledge of graphic design, will
              prepare multimedia communications program graduates for careers in this new
              field.
