Title       : Multi-User Controlled Environments for Plant Growth in the Division of Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9602942

Award Number: 9602942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albrecht G. von Arnim vonarnim@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Stacey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Otto J. Schwarz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie G. Hickok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Massimo Pigliucci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        This project is designed to build a multi-user facility for       the
              growth of plant material in the Division of Biology at the       University of
              Tennessee in Knoxville. The primary goal is to grow       plants for
              experimentation under tightly controlled environmental       conditions with
              respect to light intensity, light quality,       temperature, and humidity.    
                     Reflecting similar developments in animal systems, a small       number
              of plant species have been selected to represent the plant       kingdom as
              models for research purposes. This group of one       principal investigator
              (PI) and four Co-PIs employs Arabidopsis as       a model angiosperm, Pinus as
              a model for both gymnosperms and       trees, Ceratopteris as a model fern,
              representing lower plants,       and soybean and Lotus japonicus as models for
              the interaction       between higher plants and nitrogen fixing bacteria. To
              take full       advantage of their model characters, optimal but distinct
              growth       conditions need to be established for each species. The five (Co- 
                   )PIs and two additional major users propose that the diverse and      
              expanding requirements for plant growth in the Division of Biology       are
              best accommodated by a cooperatively administered multi-user       facility.   
                      The plant growth facility (PGF) will consist of a core plant      
              growth unit which will comprise two walk-in growth chambers, six       reach-in
              growth chambers, and two tissue culture incubators, all       fitted with
              microprocessor control over light and temperature       conditions.           
              The PGF will optimize the growth conditions for all the model       organisms
              used. The new facility will be centrally located and       within easy reach of
              the major users. A cooperative style of       management will be devised, which
              shall ensure access to part of       the facility for researchers other than
              the five (Co) PIs on a       case by case basis. The PGF will serve as a
              crucial support for        our interdepartmental plant science graduate
              training program.       Apart from drastically improving our research
              infrastructure, the       PGF will allow the (Co-)PIs to enliven their teaching
              programs at       the undergraduate level, for instance by devising an
              experiment       that will bring plant evolution into the classroom. In
              building       the PGF, the (Co) PIs seek to create a multi-purpose environment
                    for the efficient and reproducible culture of plant material,       which
              will satisfy their diverse and multidisciplinary research       approaches and
              teaching obligations.
