Title       : Improvements to El Verde Field Station, Puerto Rico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9602523

Award Number: 9602523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jess K. Zimmerman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,2886,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The El Verde Field Station, Puerto Rico, is a long-established research 
              facility in the only Neotropical rain forest under the jurisdiction of  the
              United States. The field station is located in the Caribbean  National Forest,
              which is an Experimental Forest, a Biosphere Reserve,  a participating
              component of the University of Puerto Rico Minority  Research Center of
              Excellence, and the site of the Luquillo Long-Term  Ecological Research
              Program. For over 30 years, the field station and  adjoining research area have
              been the focus of projects by scientists  from more than 50 institutions in the
              United States and other  countries. Current research projects are funded by the
              National Science  Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space
              Administration, and the  USDA Forest Service.    Research and living facilities
              at the El Verde Field Station date to  the 1930s and their current size
              restricts ongoing research activities.  Living space for researchers consists
              of four dormitory rooms with 28  beds with little space available for personal
              effects. A single  self-service kitchen serves all visitors. Communication from
              the field  station is limited to a radio connection with San Juan, a cellular 
              phone, and a telephone line located three kilometers from the field  station.
              There is no capability for data transfer or Internet  connection.    previous
              NSF grant supported development of,a master plan for  improvements to El Verde
              Field Station. This project will enact the  first of four phases describe in
              the El Verde Field Station Master  Plan. The project will provide the
              construction visitor's cabin and  provide a modern voice and electronic
              communications system. Matching  funds provided by the University of Puerto
              Rico will be used to  construct additional kitchen and dining facilities for
              visitors and  improve the physical plant of the station.
