Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Scanning Acoustic Microscopy Studies of Micromechanical
               Properties of Osteoporotic Bone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9602492

Award Number: 9602492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27411              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Lawrence Katz jlk9@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5983,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9602492  Katz    This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research  between
              Dr. J. Lawrence Katz of the Department of Biomedical  Engineering at Case
              Western Reserve University and Professor  Noriyoshi Chubachi in the Department
              of Electrical  Engineering at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan.  Dr. Katz 
              will be spending six months at Tohoku University undertaking  scanning acoustic
              microscopy studies of micromechanical  properties of osteoporotic bone. The
              researchers will  research ultrasound techniques which measure sound velocity 
              and/or attenuation through specific bones, in vivo, to  assess the level of
              "bone quality" in order to develop more  effective screening techniques for
              osteoporosis as well as  providing an indication of when bone might be at risk
              of  fracture.  This technique  provides an advantage over dual  energy x-ray
              absorptionmetry (DEXA)  which provides information about the material
              properties of  bone, such as stiffness and rigidity, rather than bone  density.
               By developing correlations between elastic  properties and bone strength, it
              then would be possible to  develop a fracture risk index which could become the
              basis  for early intervention of medical procedures to prevent the  occurrence
              of fractures.    The U.S. researcher brings to this collaboration his 
              knowledge of  the scientific relationships between  structure, function and
              properties of  bone tissues.  More  recently he has been involved in research
              into the form  function relationships in bone tissues undergoing material 
              changes (losses) due to the onset of osteoporosis.  This is  complemented by
              expertise of the Japanese researcher in the  area of high frequency scanning
              acoustic microscopy (SAM)  for bone micromechanic studies.  His laboratory is
              equipped  with a state-of-the-art SAM for work at very high  resolution.  The
              project is expected to result in greater  prediction of fracture risk to the
              large number of women,  people in long term bed rest, and astronauts in the 
              microgravity environment o f space who have, or are prone to,  the serious
              condition of osteoporosis.  Both researchers  have expressed their expectation
              to continue research on  their project after the conclusion of  the six month
              visit.
