Title       : Technology Instruction for the 21st Century - Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9602369

Award Number: 9602369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $639625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard E. Mohr bemohr@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan Chao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Naples  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell K. Hotzler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queensboro Cmty Col
	      222-05 56th Avenue
	      Bayside, NY  113641497    718/631-6222

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technology Instruction for the 21st Century - Phase II     Rapid advancements in
              telecommunications--data communications and distributed information systems
              technology--have significantly increased the scope of knowledge and skill
              required of science and technology students. Using telecommunications
              technologies as a vehicle for instructional change, this project integrates
              four components: Curriculum and Instructional Materials Development,
              Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement, Faculty Enhancement and
              Dissemination of instructional materials, and Distance Learning and Remote
              Access Technology. The anticipated outcomes of this project are: improvement of
              marketable skills for science and technology students; development of methods
              to keep curricula in pace with cutting edge technology through development,
              delivery, and dynamic revision of instructional materials; and promotion of
              activities that significantly improve faculty skills. Curriculum and
              Instructional Materials will be developed for courses and laboratories in the
              telecommunications technologies. Courseware will be in the form of on-line
              (networked) laboratory manuals, instructional multimedia presentations, and
              innovative uses of converging technology as instructional tools. Interactive
              multimedia courseware on high speed networks will serve as textbook and
              laboratory manual for the twenty-first century. Revisions will be made
              dynamically keeping all materials current. Products resulting from project
              activities will also support the NYNEX Next-Step AAS degree program in
              telecommunications technology and the consortium of SUNY and CUNY colleges
              developing the program. Because network technology is a core project tool, it
              is anticipated that the dissemination of project materials will occur via local
              and wide area networks and that faculty will utilize telecommunications
              technology to promote ongoing dialogs and exchanges.
