Title       : Racial and Ethnic Classification in Demography and the Census
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9602058

Award Number: 9602058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110637             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Lichtenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Wasserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne Bianchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Wachbroit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates ethical and conceptual issues raised by racial and
              ethnic classifications in demography, particularly in the context of the 2000
              census.  Currently, the Office of Management and Budget's Directive 15 governs
              the collection not only of census data but of all federal data concerning race
              and ethnicity.  Over the last several years that directive has come under
              increasing scrutiny.  Some argue that new categories, such as a `multiracial`
              category, ought to be added; others propose changing the names of certain
              categories; and some suggest scrapping the entire racial/ethnic classification
              scheme.  The considerable research under way focuses on empirical questions,
              such as how various groups understand and use the descriptors.  However, the
              relevance of this research for proposed revisions requires an understanding
              also of the ethical, conceptual, and methodological issues underlying racial
              and ethnic classification.  This project will analyze these issues and consider
              their significance for competing schemes.  One set of issues concerns ethical
              and policy choices, such as whether the harms of past classification schemes
              are best redressed by preserving, refining, or eliminating them.  Answering
              this question requires an examination of the significance of racial and ethnic
              identity and of the legitimacy of the purposes served by racial classification.
               Demographic research needs raise another set of problems, including the
              requirement of comparability between past classification schemes and future
              ones, the issue of measurement effects -- how and to what extent different
              classification schemes may affect what is measured, and the role and
              significance of self reports in data collection.  The research is a
              collaboration between philosophers, a lawyer-social psychologist, and a
              demographer.  Each will lead a different aspect of the research, which will
              employ the methods of moral philosophy, philosophy of science, legal analysis
              and demography.  Among the products of the research will be a memorandum
              submitted to OMB, a series of papers to be published in appropriate journals
              including public policy journals, and an anthology.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
