Title       : Development of User-Friendly Microcomputer-Based Instructional Aids for
               Introductory Courses in Electrical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9602430

Award Number: 9602430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Smolleck hsmollec@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith McNeil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nadipuram R. Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Development of User-Friendly Microcomputer-Based Instructional Aids for
              Introductory Courses in Electrical Engineering    Issues concerning advanced
              technological education relating to quality of learning, retention of at-risk
              students, and the successful availability of such programs to traditionally
              underrepresented groups have received national attention. Such issues are of
              significant concern in New Mexico and other states where a substantial number
              of students come from backgrounds which often include neither role models nor
              incentives to pursue technical careers.    This project is addressing these
              concerns through development, implementation, and evaluation of a program of
              interactive, animated software aids for enhancement of two-year technological
              instruction. Primary areas of attention include vector analysis of AC circuits
              and demonstration of electromagnetic devices and principles, which form the
              basis of many courses taken not only by electrical technology students but also
              by those in mechanical, civil, and other branches of engineering, technology,
              and the sciences.    Based upon extensive experience in successfully applying
              these techniques to upper-division and industrially related instructional
              programs, the developers are extending these ideas to the lower-division
              undergraduate technology curriculum. The project is being conducted in
              partnership with five two-year New Mexico institutions and two national
              laboratories, with New Mexico State University (NMSU) servings as the lead
              partner. NMSU historically attracts many students from these partner schools
              and is the lead university in the NSF-sponsored New Mexico Alliance for
              Minority Participation (AMP) program.
