Title       : Economy and Culture at a Late 11th Millennium Village Site in SE Anatolia: A
               Continuing Investigation into the Origins of Sedentism and Animal Husbandry in
               the Taurus-Zagros Arc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9602167

Award Number: 9602167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rosenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Rosenberg and his
              colleagues will continue archaeological excavation at the site of Hallan Cemi
              which is located in the Zagros mountain region of Southeastern Turkey. The site
              itself consists of a low mound approximately .7 hectares and previous work by
              Dr. Rosenberg has shown that it covers the time period from approximately
              10,600 to 10,000 years before the present. Dr. Rosenberg will conduct one
              season of work in which he will open broad areas and through controlled
              stratigraphic excavation recover large amounts of faunal and floral remains as
              well as a broad range of material objects such as stone tools. These will be
              analyzed by a team of specialists in order to reconstruct subsistence and
              social patterns and to set the site into a broader regional context.  Given the
              date of Hallan Cemi and the materials collected to date, it is apparent that
              this site documents a very early phase of the Neolithic Revolution. The term
              `Revolution` is an appropriate one because it marks perhaps the most
              significant shift in lifestyle over the ca. 2,000,000 years of human existence.
              In the Neolithic plants and animals were domesticated, settled village life
              emerged and a technological explosion which included the development of ceramic
              technology and metallurgy occurred. It is ironic, given great archaeological
              interest in this question that so little is known about the Zagros region since
              it is both known to contain very early Neolithic sites and has been postulated
              as a possible point of origin. The work to date by Dr. Rosenberg has
              demonstrated that Hallan Cemi represents an early stage in this process. While
              it contains domestic plants and animals, ceramics, another hallmark of the
              Neolithic are lacking. The large faunal and floral samples which will be
              collected will shed new light on the subsistence change.  This research is
              important for several reasons. Within two years this entire region will be
              flooded by a newly constructed dam and if work is now done now a unique
              opportunity will be irrevocably lost. The information which Dr. Rosenberg
              collects will increase our understanding of perhaps the most important
              transformation in human history.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
