Title       : Renovation of Research Space in Building C of the Emerson A.Cooper Science
               Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9602836

Award Number: 9602836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth LaiHing   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakwood College
	      Oakwood Road N.W.
	      Huntsville, AL  35896    205/837-1630

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Oakwood College, a private Historically Black College,  located in Huntsville,
              Alabama, is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure
              Program. The mission of the College is to provide access to education
              opportunity, academic excellence and spiritual development for its students who
              come from diverse backgrounds. Funds will be used to renovate and repair
              research and research training space in the Emerson A. Cooper Complex, a 15
              year old structure that houses the Departments of Biology and Chemistry. 
              Specifically space in the -C+ Building of the Science Complex, originally
              designed as instructional laboratories will be renovated to correct problems
              that have resulted from age related deterioration and make space more conducive
              to performing research.  Renovations will consist of:  removal of walls to
              maximize space usage, upgrading of lighting, installation of additional
              electrical outlets, and fiber optic cabling, replacement of HVAC, and the
              installation of fixed equipment.  The renovations will allow the Departments of
              Biology and Chemistry to continue their active research programs that enhance
              science training.  Remodeling inadequate facilities will help utilize space
              more efficiently and provide space for faculty to accommodate additional
              undergraduate students in their laboratories and train more students for
              research careers. This project will be instrumental in the College's mission of
              sustained academic excellence, and the science departments' continuation of
              producing African American scholars that contribute to the scientific
              enterprise of the nation.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
