Title       : Renovation of the Biological Sciences Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9602772

Award Number: 9602772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255219             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Tramontano william.tramontano@manhattan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Mahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter F. Matystik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manhattan College
	      4513 Manhattan College Parkway
	      Bronx, NY  10471    718/862-7268

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The National Science Foundation and Manhattan College will establish a
              partnership to revitalize the institution's research infrastructure by
              renovating the Plant Morphogenesis Laboratory (PML).  Constructed in 1963, the
              PML reflects the importance of student participation in faculty research
              programs, an integral role of the undergraduate curriculum in biology since the
              early fifties.  The facility has served the needs of both faculty and students,
              but signs of age, obsolescence, and an increased difficulty to support
              scientific investigations are evident. Lighting is poor, plumbing is
              problematic, laboratory benches have deteriorated, and fume hoods have reached
              the end of their effectiveness. Funding from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program will correct deficiencies needed to create a
              comprehensive undergraduate research facility capable of supporting
              investigations on a wide array of topics including:  cell biology, molecular
              biology, microbiology, virology, plant physiology and environmental biology.
              Having been recognized as one of the nation's leading research colleges
              educating US scientists, this project will facilitate Manhattan College in its
              endeavor to maintain excellence in undergraduate biological research programs,
              respond to changing priorities of faculty research, and provide research
              opportunities to a growing number of students interested in pursing science as
              a career.  Since the institution is located in an urban environment, completion
              of this project will enable the institution to attract a significant number of
              under-represented minority students in science, thus aiding to create a diverse
              scientific enterprise for the 21st century.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
