Title       : Renovation of Research Laboratories for the Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
               and Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9602644

Award Number: 9602644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice L. Hoersch hoersch@lasalle.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Annette K. O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La Salle University
	      1900 West Olney Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  19141    215/951-1831

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                La Salle University is the recipient of ARI funds to revitalize laboratories
              for research and research training programs in biology and chemistry.  Located
              in Philadelphia, PA, the University serves a large population of urban students
              of diverse ethnicity, and is committed to providing a quality education in all
              disciplines including the sciences.  At present, all science activity occurs in
              the Holroyd Science Center a facility constructed in the early sixties that has
              limited utility to support modern research.  The configuration, size, and
              obsolescence of the structure impairs experimental work conducted in the
              building.  Utility systems are inadequate, shared usage of rooms between
              research and instructional activities results in the duplication of efforts,
              and safety concerns create an environment that is not conducive for research. 
              To rectify the problems that impede the faculty's ability to perform  state of
              the art research and provide students with improved training opportunities,  La
              Salle University, as the part of a larger effort to ameliorate the physical
              infrastructure, will renovate Holroyd in its entirely.  By partnering with the
              National Science Foundation, the institution will reconfigure laboratories,
              install new fume hoods, create a tissue culture facility and equipment room,
              and make space accessible to those individuals who are physically challenged. 
              Upon completion, three modernized research laboratories will be established for
              neurobiology, molecular biology, biochemistry and organic chemistry.  Faculty
              will have controlled environments to conducted experiments requiring the use of
              delicate and precise instrumentation.  Most importantly, the renovation will
              increase research productivity, improve the quality of research, expand
              training opportunities and maximize access to a diverse group of students
              interested in pursuing science as a career.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
