Title       : Pulsed Power Plasma Discharges Used for Materials Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9602544

Award Number: 9602544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Lieberman lieber@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602544  Lieberman    This  project is a collaboration between the University 
              of  California-Berkeley group under  the  direction  of  Professor Michael A.
              Lieberman, and Australian National  University  group under the direction of
              Professor  Rod  Boswell   on  experiments,  analytical  modeling,   and 
              computer  simulations  of  pulsed  power  high  density  plasma  discharges 
              used for materials  processing,  to  obtain a better understanding of the
              dynamics of  these  discharges  and  their utility for  various  processing 
              applications.   The  U.S. and Australian  investigators  will develop
              analytical models and computer simulations  of such discharges and will perform
              experiments on high  density pulsed power helicon discharges.    High   density
               sources,  such  as  electron  cyclotron  resonance   discharges  (ECR's), 
              inductively   coupled  plasmas  (ICP's), and helicons are regarded as powerful 
              tools   that   can  replace  conventional  capacitively  coupled,  parallel 
              plate  plasma  reactors.   A  major  advantage  is that much higher
              manufacturing throughput  can  be  expected because much higher plasma 
              densities  than  those  of parallel plate reactors are obtainable.  Another 
              advantage  is  that  aspect  ratio-independent  anisotropic  etch  processes
              are  possible  because  of  lower gas pressures.  It is also a great advantage
              that  the   ion   bombarding   energy   can   be   controlled  independently 
              of  the  ion flux.   High  density,  low  pressure plasma sources utilizing
              modulated power  have  been attracting much attention recently.  By modulating 
              the  power,  it  is  possible to further  optimize  and  control  the 
              performance  of  processing  plasmas   by  changing the pulse frequency and
              duty ratio.
