Title       : A Microinjection Apparatus and Associated Equipment for Creation of Transgenic
               Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9602951

Award Number: 9602951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin R. Jones krjones@beagle.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Funds are requested for the purchase of an embryo microinjection  apparatus
              and associated equipment to be used in the production of  transgenic mice. This
              apparatus is to be used primarily for production  of transgenic mice using two
              technologies: pronuclear injection of DNA  and blastocyst/morula injection of
              embryonic stem cells. These are now  well-established methods with which all of
              the primary users are quite  familiar. The apparatus will also be used for
              transplantation  experiments (e.g. mitochondrial transplantation). This
              apparatus is to  be housed in a new transgenic facility, the construction of
              which is to  be completed by July 1, 1996. This facility will serve faculty
              members  of the MCD Biology and other departments on the University of Colorado
               Boulder campus including Biochemistry and the Institute for Behavioral 
              Genetics.       As a reflection of the diverse research interests of these
              faculty  in multiple areas of biology, the animals to be created will address a
               wide range of scientific issues. Areas under investigation include the 
              functions of neurotrophic factors in the development and maintenance of  the
              nervous system, the function of Wnt-family genes in the  morphogenesis of the
              limb and nervous system, the molecular basis of  muscle formation and
              contractility, the function of homologues of the  Drosophila mago nashi gene in
              mouse germ-cell development, and the  localization of quantitative trait loci. 
                   This apparatus will be a core piece of equipment and is essential  in the
              production of transgenic mice. The analysis of transgenic mice  makes feasible
              the investigation of gene function in a mammal through  creation of animals
              having a defined genetic perturbation. Creation of  transgenic mice by
              pronuclear injection is the only widely used method  of integration of cloned
              DNA into random sites in the mouse genome.  Production of transgenic mice using
              embryonic stem cells modified by  gene targeting through blastocyst injection
              is presently favored (ove r  morula aggregation) by most practitioners. Thus, a
              microinjection  apparatus is an essential feature of any facility for the
              production of  transgenic mice.
