Title       : Renovation of Wistar Structural Biology Macromolecular Interactions Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9602834

Award Number: 9602834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267084             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Speicher speicher@wista.wistar.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Wistar Institute, founded in 1892, is the oldest independent institution
              in the United States devoted to biological research and training.  Located in
              close proximity to the University of Pennsylvania, the Institute has developed
              collaborative interactions with the university while maintaining its status as
              an independent, nonprofit, basic research organization.  Thirty-eight
              laboratories are housed in the facility, including research laboratories for
              the Structural Biology Program, established in 1991.  An important aim of the
              Program is to develop and apply technologies and methodological approaches to
              investigate biological macromolecules at every level of organization, ranging
              from atomic detail using X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy to complex
              macromolecule assemblies.  Existing conditions of the facility prevent the
              optimal usage of space and specialized equipment contained in laboratories
              designated to accomplish this work.  Problems include: major deficiencies in
              the air condition system, including inadequate cooling, dehumidification, and
              temperature fluctuations;  2) unreliable cold room space; 3) poor layout and
              space design, and 4) inadequate plumbing that periodically floods the lab
              damaging equipment.   The ARI Program will provide funds to rectify
              deficiencies of space dedicated for the Macromolecular Interaction Complex of
              the Structural Biology Program. Specifically, four laboratories will be
              consolidated in contiguous space that can be designed for structure-function
              and biochemical studies and for required instrumentation. The renovated space
              will facilitate interactions with investigators and students, and  will support
              advanced technologies needed to conduct modern molecular biology research. This
              project  also complements the renovation of the Macromolecular Structure
              Facility,  a project  that was partially funded by the ARI Program.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
