Title       : Modernization of the Plant Science Facility at California State University,
               Northridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9602709

Award Number: 9602709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stan Metzenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Corcoran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Matos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula M. Schiffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Biology at California State University Northridge is the
              recipient of funds from the ARI Program to renovate and improve its plant
              sciences facilities.  Because of the antiquated nature of four greenhouses, a
              Head-house, and an Auxiliary building, faculty research projects have been
              severely hampered in recent years, and research training opportunities for
              undergraduates have been curtailed.  This has countermanded the long-standing
              goals of the institution to support faculty research, encourage excellence in
              the plant sciences while bringing expertise and insight to students, and
              encourage minority students for careers in the discipline.  Currently five
              faculty members, 10 graduate, and 11 undergraduate researchers are engaged in
              research at the facility.  Topics range from plant ecology and evolution to
              physiology.  In addition, the facility is used for research training in Plant
              Systematic, Plant Morphology, Field Botany, and Population and Community
              Ecology.  Within the four greenhouses, renovations will consist of updating the
              environmental systems and controls and plant laboratory fixtures. Overhead
              lighting fixtures will be updated to allow more supplemental light for plants. 
              A modern liquid fertilizer mixing and plumbing system will be installed in the
              Head-house and greenhouses, facilitating the upkeep of large collections of
              plant species. Benches and storage cabinets used for experiment set up in the
              Head-house will be updated to improve efficiency, and to allow access by
              physically challenged faculty and students.  The Auxiliary building will be
              renovated to provide a large controlled environmental growth chamber, which
              will allow large experiments to be conducted under precise lighting and
              temperature conditions.  With the environmental control problems resolved by
              the renovations, faculty will be able to conduct research at a level that is
              currently not feasible. It is anticipated that the number of students doing
              research will increase, as a result of improved research training and
              experiences, thus encouraging them to pursue graduate studies.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
