Title       : An Alternative Architectural Configuration to Increase the Seismic Resistance of
               Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9503200

Award Number: 9503200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Villaverde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9503200  Villaverde  To augment the damping of a  structure significantly
              through a  tuned-mass damper one has to use a  damper with a large mass.  A 
              possible way to avoid the use of an  additional mass is to use the  building
              roof as the damper's mass.  For this, one has to isolate the  roof from the
              rest of the building,  connect it to a spring and a  dashpot, and then connect
              these to  the rest of the building.  More  conveniently, however, one can take 
              advantage of the progress made in  base isolation technology and use 
              elastomeric bearings instead of  springs.  The purpose of the  proposed
              research is to conduct a  numerical study with an actual  building and an
              experimental study  with two small-scale five-story  steel building models to 
              demonstrate that such a  configuration is a viable way to  construct a damper,
              to augment the  damping in a building, and to  increase its resistance to 
              earthquake excitations.  The  numerical study will be carried out  to
              investigate the bearing  dimensions needed to attain the  desired effect in a
              real building,  the order of magnitude of the  displacements experienced by its
               bearings, the behavior of the  building-damper system when the  structure is
              stressed beyond its  elastic limit, and the design  difficulties in
              implementing a real  building with such a technique.  The experimental study
              will be  performed by testing on a shaking  table the two building models.  One
               of the models will be built with a  conventional configuration and the  other
              according to the proposed  one.  This study will serve to  verify the findings
              from the  numerical one without the  assumptions and uncertainties  involved in
              the analytical  modelling of the building and its  elastomeric bearings.  The
              results  of the studies are expected to  demonstrate numerically and 
              experimentally the viability and  effectiveness of the proposed  technique,
              will clarify some of the  questions posed by its use, and, if  proven
              effective, will furnish  incentives, the justification,  and  the needed
              information for the  planning of a large-scale  experimental program.  ***
