Title       : Analysis and Optimization of Object-Oriented Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9503741

Award Number: 9503741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig D. Chambers chambers@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Object-oriented languages offer one promising approach to  making programs
              easier to write and easier to modify and  extend. Unfortunately, 
              object-oriented language constructs  often incur a substantial run-time cost.
              To  improve the run-time performance of object-oriented languages, previous 
              research applied intraprocedural class analysis and compile-time class 
              prediction to determine the actual classes of  arguments to a dynamically bound
               call at compile-time,  thereby statically binding the call to the target 
              procedure  and enabling inline expansion to eliminate the overhead of  the
              call.  This work was performed primarily in the context  of purely
              object-oriented  languages. The goal of this project is to extend previous 
              work in three directions. First,   the scope of  analysis will  be expanded to
              the whole application program. This  necessitates  developing and evaluating
              techniques for  constructing call graphs for  object-oriented languages and 
              performing interprocedural class analysis.  Second,  profile information  will
              be incorporated into the analysis and  optimization process. In particular,
              profile information can  provide much more  accurate class prediction
              information than  can static estimation techniques.  Third,  procedure
              specialization will be selectively applied to the optimization of 
              object-oriented languages. The goal will be to investigate the relative
              trade-offs in  cost and benefit among inline expansion, procedure 
              specialization, and  interprocedural analysis for object-oriented languages.
              The  suitability of these  techniques across a range of object-oriented
              programming  languages, both pure and hybrid, will be evaluated in this effort.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
