Title       : On the Abundance, Dynamics and Regulation of Damselfish Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9503305

Award Number: 9503305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Schmitt schmitt@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9503305  Schmitt      The aim of the work is to understand the dynamics and 
              regulation of structured, open populations, which typify  most marine reef
              fishes and invertebrates.  While there is  broad agreement among ecologists
              that attributes of  populations are shared by  more than an single process 
              (e.g., availability of propagules, competition within and  between life stages,
              competition with other species,  predation), there remains considerable
              disagreement  regarding their relative importance.  There also is some 
              confusion about what roles various processes have in  producing dynamics; few
              empirical workers have distinguished  between processes that regulate
              populations (i.e., bound  fluctuations) as opposed to those that cause
              variation  around the mean abundance.  An enormous amount is known  about the
              caused of fluctuations in abundance of reef  organisms, but very little is
              known about what regulates  their populations.  This work will contribute in
              several key  ways to understanding the general issue of dynamics and 
              regulation.  It is one of the first comprehensive,  pluralistic evaluations of
              reef fishes that will distinguish  effects of processes on regulation and on
              variation.  Second, it will use for the first time operational  definitions and
              analytical  protocols for quantitative  assessments of the relative importance
              of various processes.  As such, the research could yield standard approaches
              and  procedures to address relative importance.  Third, the  application of
              infrared video technology enables the  exploration of little studied but
              crucial processes of  settlement and early mortality.
