Title       : An International Symposium on Micelles, Microemulsions and Monolayers: Quarter
               Century Progress and New Horizons; August 1995; Gainesville, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9503607

Award Number: 9503607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dinesh O. Shah shah@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brij M. Moudgil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503607  Shah    In the past twenty-five years (1970-1995), considerable work
              has been done on micelles, microemulsions and monolayers.  This work is not
              only of basic scientific interest, but is also relevant to a broad range of
              technologies including detergency, microelectronics, nanoparticle synthesis,
              food, pharmaceutical and biotechnology.  Dynamic properties of micelles such as
              relaxation time measurements by pressure-jump, temperature-jump, stopped-flow,
              ultrasonic absorption, shock wave, etc.  have produced very valuable
              information about the relaxation processes in micellar solutions as well as for
              the life-time of micelles.  During the past twenty-five years, microemulsions
              have been shown to be relevant to enhanced oil recovery, and preparation of
              nanoparticles of magnetic materials, silver halides, electronic materials and
              superconductops.  Many reactions such as polymerization in microemulsions have
              also been shown to be very promising for the formation of submicron latex
              particles.  In the area of monomolecular films, many novel techniques have been
              designed to study such systems (such as STM, AFM, Brewster Angle Microscopy,
              absorption spectroscopy, etc.)    An International Symposium on this topic will
              be organized with funding from the University of Florida, National Science
              Foundation, industry and participants in the form of registration fees.  About
              thirty graduate students and post doctoral associates from universities in the
              United States will be invited to participate in this symposium.  There will be
              three plenary speakers, and twenty invited speakers as well as many oral and
              poster presentations on these three topics.    At the end of the symposium, a
              half-day workshop will be organized.  This will be attended by a panel of world
              class researchers chosen from among the invited speakers.  The workshop will be
              organized into three groups:  micelles, microemulsions, and monolayers.  Each
              group will summarize the quarter century progress made in that area, and list
              the new ho rizons as presented in the symposium.  These summaries will be
              compiled by the Principal Investigator (Dr. Shah) and will form the basis for
              the final report to be submitted to the National Science Foundation.  This
              report will also include a description of the scientific and technological
              relevance of various  topics discussed in the symposium.    The symposium will
              be held August 28-31,1995, at the University of Florida.  The first three days
              of the symposium will include the invited talks and general papers in all three
              areas.  The fourth half day will be devoted to the workshop.  ***
