Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Electronic Materials,
               Devices, and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9503556

Award Number: 9503556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Fitzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kambiz Alavi  (Principal Investigator former)
              Raghvendra K. Pandey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9165,9178,9231,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9506556  Shieh    This award provides funding for the establishment of a
              multi-  university Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on 
              Electronic Materials, Devices, and Systems between the Center for  Advanced
              Electron Devices and Systems at the University of Texas  - Arlington and the
              Electronic Devices and Materials Group at  Texas A&M University.      The
              research activities of these two sites are complimentary and  this operation
              will enable the Center to expand its research  activities and enrich their
              industrial membership base.  This  consolidated Center has expertise in bulk
              single and thin film  growth, characterization and process modeling of
              electronic  materials, Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), and Pulsed Laser 
              Deposition (PLD) for the production of multi-layer and  heterostructure
              devices, rapid thermal processing, fabrication,  and evaluation of devices
              (fiber-optics sensors, integrated  optics, semiconductor lasers, microwave and
              millimeter wave  circuits and devices, superconductor devices, ferroelectric 
              devices, and optical instrumentation), device modeling and  simulation.    The
              University of Texas - Arlington will coordinate the  activities between these
              two research sites during the first two  years of operation.  The continuation
              of this coordination  responsibility will be reviewed and discussed by the
              Industry  Advisory board at the end of the second year.    The Principal
              Investigators have worked collaboratively in  developing this multi-university
              Center.  They have excellent  background and the experiences necessary to carry
              out the  proposed plan.  The universities have also shown strong  commitment in
              supporting this multi-university Center.    This proposal has been coordinated
              with Dr. Marvin White, Program  Director, Division of Electrical and
              Communications Systems.    The Program Director recommends the University of
              Texas -  Arlington be awarded $40,000 for the first year of a five-year 
              continuing award. ($25,000 for regular support, $10,000 for  the 
              administrative support, and $5,000 for the evaluator).                         
                                                           Page 2    Near the end of each
              12-month period the Program Director and/or  the Division Director of the
              Engineering Education and Centers  Division will review the progress of the
              Center on a number of  renewal criteria, including the following:  1) the
              extent to  which the industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the 
              extent to which a collaborative, robust research program is  developing; and 3)
              the extent to which the support base is  developing.  If the review is
              satisfactory, the Program Director  will recommend support for the next period
              of this continuing  award.     Jay Lee  Program Director, I/UCRC
