Title       : Control of Electrochemical Batch Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9503437

Award Number: 9503437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karlene A. Hoo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9222,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Kosanovich    The manufacturing cost of chemicals can be decreased by
              improving the operating performance of chemical reactors.  One way to
              accomplish this is through timely control of the operating variables.  For
              batch systems, this is important to maintaining the quality of the final
              product.  This research is to develop new robust, feedback control formulations
              for electrochemical batch processes that satisfy multiple performance
              objectives in the face of model uncertainties and disturbances.  The
              formulation is general and can be applied to other batch systems as well. 
              Specifically, this project consists of three studies on new fundamental
              approaches to the modelling and control of batch systems:  (1) development of a
              time-varying state space model of the non-stationery batch process for use in a
              model predictive control strategy; (2) system identification using
              multi-resolution (wavelet) analysis; and (3) formulation of a controller
              strategy for a multi-resolution representation of the process.  The research
              will include and experimental demonstration of the concepts on an
              electrochemical batch system.  Effort will also be devoted to the development
              of effective computational procedures.    The planned career advancement
              activities include six months of rigorous study in the methodologies, two
              summer months in a cooperative industrial program, and four months devoted to
              educational material preparation and experimental demonstration on a laboratory
              scale electrochemical batch process.  The methodologies that are relevant to
              the goals of this study are (1) multi-resolution theory, (2) model predictive
              and optimal control theory; and (3) theory of electrochemical systems.  The
              experimental portimn of the activities include a cooperative program that
              provides hands-on experience in the operations of systems at an industrial site
              and collaboration with department colleagues on electrochemical systems.  Other
              activities include active participation in workshops and seminars, both do
              mestic and international, assistance of a post-doctoral research fellow, and
              development of a graduate control course that combines theory with experiments
              on batch systems.
