Title       : Analyzing Algorithms: Advanced Methods for Recurrence Equations, Probabilistic
               Estimates, and Operator Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9503793

Award Number: 9503793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Siegel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                        The goal of this continuing research project is to  develop more 
              systematic theorems and methods for analyzing difficult  algorithms.  These
              methods are briefly characterized as follows: (1)  Perturbation theory for
              recurrence equations in  computer science.    Perturbation theory is a 
              mathematical technique which was developed   for analyzing difficult
              differential equation problems in mathematical physics.    The research
              objective is to  develop a tool kit of theorems that can apply to  recurrences
              ranging from advanced issues in hashing  to the elementary concerns  of basic
              irregular divide-and-conquer algorithms; (2) Replacing operator   methods in
              performance analysis.  Operator methods also arise  in the analysis of 
              physical methods, and have been used to establish  conservation laws, and
              compute the time evolution of    fundamental quantities such as energy in
              complicated physical processes.    A variation on these methods has  been used
              to analyze several   complicated processes in computer science, including
              coalesced hashing.    However, recently it has been shown that coalesced 
              hashing can be   analyzed more completely and more easily by standard analytic
              methods.    The goal in  this part is to capture  algebraic properties of 
              operator methods, to translate them into analytic  formulations, and to use
              these translated    formulations to analyze difficult algorithms; (3)
              Probabilistic estimates.    A growing number of computer science results use
              large deviation bounds,    including fault tolerance analysis, the analysis of
              throughput   in probabilistic situations, and the analysis of probabilistic
              algorithms.    Many computer  science applications introduce varieties of extra
                 constraints, which render the standard theorems inapplicable.    The final
              goal is to continue research on probabilistic  estimation methods.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
