Title       : Neutron Imaging System for Materials Characterization Research at the University
               of Texas Reactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9503947

Award Number: 9503947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naeem M. Abdurrahman naeem@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503947  Abdurrahman    A neutron imaging system (NIS) will be developed at the
              Nuclear  Engineering Teaching Laboratory (NETL) of The University of  Texas at
              Austin.  The NIS consists of three subsystems:  (1)  Thomson neutron beam image
              intensifier tube sensitive to cold,  thermal, and epithermal neutrons, (2) real
              time image  processing unit consisting of vidicon camera, high resolution 
              monitor, image enhancement and measurement processor, and  printer, and (3)
              high performance workstation for image  storage, computed tomography, and
              system control.  The addition  of the proposed NIS to NETL existing facilities
              will provide a  powerful combination of capabilities to address a wide variety 
              of problems important to materials research.    The NIS is the key element in
              the development of neutron  computed tomography (NCT) for materials
              characterization.  Computed tomography refers to the cross-sectional imaging of
              an  object interior from transmission data collected from many  different
              directions.  The significance of this research  emanates from the growing need
              for nondestructive evaluation  techniques with desirable properties that
              neutron-based methods  provide, including high penetrability through metallic
              and  highly dense materials, and the neutrons inherent sensitivity  to
              elemental and isotopic variations of wide range of  materials, sample sizes,
              and geometries.  The ability of the  NIS to provide 2-D scans will also
              facilitate the investigation  and development of 3-D tomography.  The
              combination of NCT and  real time neutron imaging will open doors for new
              research in  areas of materials characterization and advanced industrial 
              processes, and will help promote and enhance collaboration with  industry and
              researchers in the field.    In addition, the NIS will be used in other
              research projects at  NETL.  A neutron focusing system has been developed for
              use  with the Texas cold neutron source (TCNS).  The NIS will  facilitate the
              alignment of the focusing system and will allow  the  determination of detailed
              system performance.  A prompt  gamma activation analysis (PGAA) facility is
              also being  developed for the TCNS.  PGAA is a nondestructive analytical 
              technique which is useful for major and minor elemental  analysis of materials.
               The NIS will allow optimum positioning  of individual samples for PGAA
              measurements and will permit the  determination of neutron attenuation factors.
               The NIS will  also be used as a spatial neutron detector for the small angle 
              neutron scattering (SANS) instrument and reflectometer being  developed.  SANS
              is used for analysis of polymers, colloids,  and ceramic precursors.  Neutron
              reflectometry is used for  analysis in surface chemistry studies and testing of
              thin  films.
