Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory of p-adic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1995       
File        : a9503140

Award Number: 9503140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew G. Earnest                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Kutzko pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns the classification of the category of smooth
              representations of a p-adic group via restriction to compact, open subgroups.
              This classification is of interest both intrinsically and because of the
              fundamental role that the representation theory of p-adic groups plays in the
              program outlined by R.P. Langlands for tackling certain basic questions in the
              theory of numbers. In a series of papers with C.J. Bushnell, the principal
              investigator has singled out certain pairs, called types, consisting of a
              compact, open subgroup and an irreducible representation of this subgroup. The
              existence of such a type leads to the possibility of analyzing representations
              via Hecke algebra methods; the existence of a complete set of such types in the
              case of the groups GL(N) has already paid substantial dividends. This project
              extends the theory of types to others p-adic groups. The local Langlands
              correspondence is also considered in light of the theory of types, as is the
              possibility of using types to compute local factors.     This research falls
              into the broad category of p-adic algebraic groups. Historically, algebraic
              groups arose in an effort to describe all the transformations or symmetries of
              an n-dimensional space. The spaces under consideration here, however, are not
              the familiar real spaces like the line and the plane, but related objects which
              are important in number theory and pure algebra.
