Title       : Delta Cache Coherence Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9503143

Award Number: 9503143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Reynolds pfr@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Finding a good solution to the cache coherence problem is  critical to the
              effective use of medium and large scale  multiprocessors.  The  high cost of
              remote memory access in  such systems makes it important that  processes be
              able to  access data locally, but allowing processes to hold local  copies of
              shared writable data requires finding a good way  to keep the copies 
              consistent.  This project will  investigate a new family of cache coherence 
              protocols called  delta cache protocols that maintain cache coherence with 
              little or no synchronization.  Delta cache protocols are  directory, as opposed
               to snoopy, protocols. The delta cache protocols are based on isotach  time
              systems,  time systems implemented by a class of networks called  isotach 
              networks.  Isotach networks are characterized not by  topology - they can be
              imp  lemented on arbitrary topologies -  but by the guarantees they provide
              about the  relative order  in which operations appear to be delivered.  Isotach
              systems  require custom switching elements, but can be built with off- 
              the-shelf  processors and in a variety of configurations  ranging from tightly
              -coupled  multiprocessors to clusters of  workstations.  A simulation study of
              isotach  systems shows  that they outperform comparable conventional systems
              under  realistic workloads, in many cases by an order of magnitude  or more. 
              In  extreme cases, they outperform conventional  systems by an arbitrary
              amount.  The project is a three year study of the cache  coherence problem with
               the goals of exploring the design space for cache coherence protocols  opened
              by isotach networks; and           evaluating the performance of delta  cache
              protocols.      The exploratory work includes protocol and cache design; 
              extending the approach to a variety of topologies and to  other levels of the 
              memory hierarchy; and devising ways to  reduce the network bandwidth 
              requirements of the protocols  and to improve the efficiency of the protocols 
              through data  migration.  The  performance study will simulate isotach and 
              conventional  systems with caches and compare their performance under a 
              variety  of workloads.  The simulation will build on the  already completed
              simulation of  isotach systems without  caches.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
