Title       : Software Engineering with a Transformational System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9503319

Award Number: 9503319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gries gries@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Tim Teitelbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The goal of the Polya project is to increase productivity in  the development
              and maintenance of programs, by placing more  emphasis on the  user interface
              within the programming  language itself. This research seeks new  ways to write
               programs, to make programs efficient, and to reuse program  parts. It is
              concerned directly with software engineering  and rapid  prototyping.    The
              programming language Polya incorporates new mechanisms  that  allow a group of
              people to define and use notations of  their problem domain, so  that programs
              can more closely  resemble the algorithms being used. Secondly,  Polya has 
              mechanisms that make  it  easier to describe how variables of high-level types 
              should be implemented,  requiring fewer modifications to the  algorithm than is
              the case with more  traditional languages.  The transform, a new kind of
              program part, can be reused  with relative ease. A prototype implementation of
              Polya uses  the Synthesizer  Generator as the platform.    This research
              focuses on three areas: (1) research  aimed at  a significant extension of the
              pattern matching capabilities  of the  Polya transformational approach and
              exploration of  new ideas on reverse  engineering; (2) experimentation with 
              Polya, in order to develop a library of  useful program  parts; (3) practical
              and theoretical improvements to Polya,  its  implementation, and related tools
              such as a source-level  debugger.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
