Title       : Epitaxial Growth and Properties of New Group IV Semiconductor Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9503210

Award Number: 9503210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283496             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Atwater haa@daedalus.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9503210 Atwater   This research aims at a definitive assessment of the
              synthesis, structure and electronic structure of a class of Group IV
              semiconductor alloys containing tin.  New approaches to alloy synthesis will be
              explored to overcome thermodynamic and kinetic limits to growth of homogeneous,
              single-crystal, Sn-based group IV semiconductor alloys.  Two types of epitaxial
              heterostructures are of interest: Binary alloys with large misfit relative to
              silicon grown either in thick strain-relieved layers or thin, coherently
              strained layers; and alloys where atomic size differences enable local strain
              compensation and low misfit relative to silicon.  First principles electronic
              structure calculations in the local density approximation will be performed to
              enable determination of which structures are stable and to obtain energy band
              structures of strained and unstrained Sn-based alloys. Information from the
              electronic structure calculations will be used to construct force fields for
              molecular dynamics simulations of Sn incorporation using energetic beams. 
              Measurements of electronic and optical properties (e.g. optical energy gap,
              carrier mobilities and carrier concentrations) of single crystal alloy films
              will be compared to calculated electronic and optical properties. %%%  This
              program will be the first comprehensive investigation of a new class of
              materials whose electronic properties may result in the integration of new
              functional heterojunction electronic and optoelectronic materials and devices
              on silicon substrates.  Because of the pervasiveness of silicon integrated
              circuit technology and its enormous economic importance, the technological
              impact of the proposed program is potentially very large.  An important feature
              of the program is the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area of materials research. ***
