Title       : Efficient Algorithms and System Interface for Scientific Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9503650

Award Number: 9503650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Wang pwang@cs.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project focuses on three related areas:  (1) No-missing-term p-adic
              lifting --- Establishing a faster    algorithm for  recovering final results in
              multivariate  polynomial   operations such as GCD  (Greatest Common Divisor) 
              and factoring. The lifting method   is most effective when the  polynomials
              involved are sparse,   containing just a few of  all possible terms.  (2)
              Function Evaluation Optimization and Applications ---  Speeding up the repeated
              evaluation of functions in closed-  form formulas  through the application of
              recurrence  relations.  Nested   recurrences called  ``chain of recurrences'' 
              will be derived by symbolic   computation and applied to increase the
              evaluation speed of   formulas at regular  intervals.  Application in
              interactive   graphical  visualization will be made.  (3) Interfacing
              Distributed Scientific Systems --- Seeking to    establish an efficient and
              standardized protocol to connect    different autonomous systems for scientific
              computation.    Such a protocol is necessary to build distributed ``problem  
              solving environments''.   By exploiting sparseness and solving systems of
              linear   equations, the p-adic lifting procedure of item (1) will be   
              investigated.  Feasibility will be studied. Algorithms will  be specified,  
              implemented and  applied.  For area (2),  automatic generation of chain of  
              recurrences (CR) for  functions of one or more variables will be implemented,
              and    tested for speed  and effectiveness.  The numeric properties  of CRs
              will be   studied.  The  technique will be applied to  speed up interactive
              graphical   visualization of  mathematical  functions.  For area (3), an
              efficient and   protocol(called MP) will be designed.  Libraries in C will   
              support the  protocol.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
