Title       : Suspension and Suspension Noise for LIGO Test Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9503642

Award Number: 9503642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley E. Whitcomb whitcomb_s@ligo.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will initiate a collaborative program of  experimental research, by
              Vladimir Braginsky's Moscow-  University research group, in support of the
              Laser  Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO)  Project, with
              special focus on issues relevant to "advanced"  interferometers that would
              operate in the LIGO vacuum system  after the first interferometers have
              completed their  studies.  Most of the research will focus on suspension
              systems for  the interferometers' test masses.  Several versions of the 
              suspension system will be developed and tested in Moscow.  The key goals of
              this research will be        to achieve the highest possible quality factors Q
              for  the suspensions' pendulum modes and violin modes (Q's  greater than 108
              are expected) with test masses of 1 to 2kg,  and thereby to reduce the thermal
              noise that the suspension  introduces into LIGO's gravity-wave searches;       
              to investigate the level of excess noise (non-Gaussian  noise of nonthermal
              origin) in several versions of the  suspension;        to develop theoretical
              models to explain the observed  excess noise, and compare those models with the
              experimental  measurements.  The Moscow group will transfer to the Caltech/MIT
              LIGO team  the know-how, techniques, and technology for suspension  systems,
              which they develop.  In addition, they will make  recommendations to the LIGO
              team about the design of test-  mass systems for advanced interferometers, and
              will provide  estimates of the thermal noise that the recommended  suspensions
              would introduce into the interferometers.  The  Moscow group will also provide
              ongoing advice to the LIGO  team about various aspects of the team's
              interferometer R&D  program, including the R&D for the first LIGO 
              interferometers.  In parallel with this experimental work, the Moscow group-- 
              in collaboration with members of Kip Thorne's Caltech group  and possibly with
              members of the LIGO team--will analyze  various "Quantum Nondemolition" readout
              systems for very  advanced LIGO interf erometers.  These QND readout systems 
              will have the goal of beating the "standard quantum limit"  for interferometer
              sensitivity.
