Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9503519

Award Number: 9503519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Marcus mbmarcus@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay S. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503519 Marcus  Abstract      The investigators will continue their study of
              continuity properties of additive functionals of Markov processes and their
              limiting behavior. Using an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin and results from the
              theory of probability in Banach spaces and random Fourier series they will
              explore relationships between continuous additive functionals of Markov
              processes and Gaussian processes and chaoses and random Fourier series. In this
              way they expect to be able to use known results about each of the different
              processes to obtain new results about the other ones as they did in their work
              on local times and Gaussian processes. They also plan to use techniques
              developed in their earlier work to study the number of intersections of random
              walks, particularly in the critical and super-critical cases. Motivated by the
              importance of a special class of second order Gaussian chaoses related tm Wick
              squares in the study of positive continuous additive functionals, they will try
              to find necessary and sufficient conditions for the continuity of these
              chaoses. They will also attempt to use self-collision local times of
              superprocesses to construct a self-interacting measure valued diffusion and
              study the large deviations of  additive functionals of super Brownian motion.  
              This research deals with fundamental properties of stochastic processes and has
              potential application in all areas that deal with random phenomena. The
              investigators will consider data that evolves in time in a random fashion, such
              as electrical signals received from distant satellites or dollar values in
              financial transactions. In particular they will consider the amount of time the
              data takes specific values or is in a small, heavily weighted, range of values
              and how this amount of time varies as the set of specific values vary. They
              plan to do this for a wide class of processes called Levy processes. These
              processes have often been thought of as models for many important practical
              applications but, so far, they have b een considered too difficult to analyze
              very deeply. The authors plan to use several new and powerful methods, recently
              developed by themselves and others, to accomplish this deep analysis.
