Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets Based on Several Scaling Functions and Related
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1998  
File        : a9503282

Award Number: 9503282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianzhong Wang mth jxw@shsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wasin So  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Ruch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Massopust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Van Fleet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sam Houston St University
	      P O Box 2026
	      Huntsville, TX  773412026    713/294-1111

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9503282  Wang    This project will involve research in the theory and
              applications of wavelets.    The problems to be considered include:  (1) the
              construction and   characterization of wavelets of Battle-Federbush type and
              their associated   wavelet packets; (2) the general construction of
              multiwavelets from an   orthogonal multiresolution analysis generated by
              scaling vectors; (3)   determining properties of  certain classes of solutions
              of matrix refinement   equations; (4) applications of fractal multiwavelets to
              second order   hyperbolic partial differential equations; and (5) adaptations
              of fast wavelet   transformations by incorporating multiwavelets in order to
              study nonlinear   integral equations.    This project is being supported under
              the Research in Undergraduate   Institutions (RUI) activity.  The RUI activity
              is part of the Foundation's   effort to help assure a broad base for science
              and engineering research, and   thereby enhance the scientific and technical
              training of students in   undergraduate institutions.  The specific objectives
              of the RUI program are   to: (1) support high quality research by faculty with
              active involvement of   undergraduate students, (2) strengthen the research
              environment in   academic departments that are oriented primarily toward
              undergraduate   instruction, and (3) promote the integration of research and
              education at   predominantly undergraduate institutions.  This project will
              involve   research on the theory of multiwavelets.  Multiwavelet theory
              involves   replacing the classical dilation equation of wavelet theory by a
              matrix   dilation equation.  The relationship of the dilation equation and the
              various   features of the wavelet bases generated will be investigated.  The
              use of   wavelets for the numerical solution of partial differential and
              integral   equations will also be studied; these techniques will be compared to
              more   classical algorithms.
