Title       : An Appraisal of Field Station and Marine Laboratory Needs for the Next Decade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9503675

Award Number: 9503675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Lohr slohr@crestedbutte.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Dalgleish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                          9503675  Allen-Lohr, S. E.  The Organization of Biological Field
              Stations (OBFS) and the  National Association of Marine Laboratories (NAML)
              will  conduct an appraisal of field station and marine laboratory  needs for
              the next decade.  Field stations and marine  laboratories are important sites
              for environmental research  and training.  These facilities represent a large
              and  continuing investment by both public and private  institutions, but are
              generally under equipped to respond  rapidly to new research needs.  Ongoing
              projects are field  stations and marine laboratories often suffer from 
              inadequate facilities and equipment.  Field Stations and  marine laboratories
              would benefit greatly by an objective  assessment and analysis of current
              facilities and future  needs, to better facilitate emerging national research 
              agendas.  This project will underwrite that assessment by  conducting an
              analysis of the needs of all field stations  and marine laboratories and will
              provide recommendations in  a published report.  The resulting document should
              serve to  guide potential funding sources, administrators, and others  who have
              oversight of field station and marine laboratory  facilities as they make
              decisions.
