Title       : Hierarchical Exploration and Visualization of Large and Complex
               Multi-Dimensional Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9503829

Award Number: 9503829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Wilhelms wilhelms@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Van Gelder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This project investigates the use of hierarchical methods  for accessing and
              visualizing large and complex multi-  dimensional data sets.  Visualization can
              provide an  efficient and powerful means of exploring such  data  However, most
              visualization methods are developed for  moderately sized  non-hierarchial data
              sets that can be  imaged acceptably fast on graphics  workstations. In 
              practice, there are many data sets that cannot be  effectively  explored using
              these methods.    The project is developing and implementing  visualization 
              approches designed for very large, multi-dimensional data  sets  over a variety
              of grid types.  Such data sets present  significant problems in  the management
              of time and space  resources, which will be addressed by this  research.  The 
              unifying theme will be the use of hierarchical data  structures  to manage both
              resources effectively.    Addressing time efficiency, techniques  are being
              developed  for the selective traversal and rapid interactive imaging  of  the
              data.  For space efficiency, various data models, such  as wavelets, are 
              investigated to achieve compression, while  being directly amendable to 
              visualization.    These hierarchies are being integrated with existing 
              visualization techniques for isosurface extraction, direct  volume rendering, 
              and flow visualization, many of which have  already been developed at UC Santa 
              Cruz and elsewhere for  non-hierarchial data.  Techniques for rectilinear, 
              structured, and unstructured grids are studied.  Parallelization of these 
              methods of SIMD and MIMD machines  is also is being explored.    This research 
              is developing new algorithms for visualization  of large, complex data sets, as
               well as making software  systems available for use by scientists.  Software is
               modular to facilitate integration with existing  visualization packages. 
              While  the main objective is  visualization, the hierarchical methods developed
              will  also  be of use for any data analysis hampered by access problems  in
              dealing  with  very large data sets.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
