Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Logic and Computability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9503503

Award Number: 9503503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Shore shore@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil Nerode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503503  Shore       Shore will investigate a broad range of topics in
              computability  theory (recursion theory) and logic.  Included in the first area
              are   investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by
              different   notions of relative complexity of computation.  Particular emphasis
              will be   placed on the complexity structures of those sets which are
              effectively   enumerable, and on the most general notion of relative
              computability as   defined by unrestricted Turing machine computations. 
              Computation procedures   that place effective bounds on the access to oracle
              information or on the   run-time of the computations will also be investigated.
               The second area   includes the study of structures representable by finite
              automata, decision   procedures, the analysis and development of nonmonotonic
              logic, concurrent   programming models, and applications of linear programming
              ideas and   algorithms to data structures and logic programming.  A study of
              the logical   and mathematical foundations of hybrid (continuous and discrete)
              control   theory will be conducted, as well as of the practical implementation
              of   algorithms.       This research project on computability is primarily
              concerned with  analyzing various ways of measuring the complexity of functions
              on the   natural numbers (0,1,2,...) and other common mathematical structures,
              in   terms of how hard they are to compute.  A primary goal is the study of the
                relations between various notions of complexity of a function, notions  
              which are based on machine models of computation and other notions, such as  
              how hard it is to define or describe the function.  Techniques developed   here
              will also be applied to the study of the difficulty of proving the   existence
              of various mathematical objects, as well as to the relationship   between
              abstract proofs of existence of an object and the possibility or   difficulty
              of actually computing it.  Shore's project also includes   applications to
              logics such as (i) those designed to  model the real life   development of
              knowledge, taking into account the possibility  that what we think we know
              today will seem false tomorrow, and (ii) ones   designed to interact with real
              measuring devices to implement procedures to   control systems that must both
              react to outside stimuli and follow logical   decision procedures.  ***
