Title       : RUI: Specifying and Verifying Delay-Sensitive Distributed Software/Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9503880

Award Number: 9503880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80049              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wuxu Peng wxp@cs.swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This RUI research project studies the issue of specification and  verification
              of computer systems that are both delay-sensitive  and distributed.  The
              behaviors of such a system strongly depend  upon the timing sequences of 
              events, and failure to meet these  timing requirements can either cause severe 
              consequences or  affect the correctness and/or performance of the system. Due
              to  the extra dimension of complexity introduced by the time  components in
              these  systems, specification and verification of  delay-sensitive distributed
              systems  have presented a unique  challenge to software practitioners.  This
              project  studies a broad range of issues related to  specifying and verifying 
              delay-sensitive distributed systems.  A  new specification model, Time 
              Communicating Finite State Machines  (TCFSMs), is proposed. TCFSMs is based on 
              the classical CFSMs  model with capability added to express time constraints
              for  specifying and verifying delay sensitive distributed systems.  A  token 
              passing-based system is studied to demonstrate how to  concisely specify and 
              verify self-stabilizing systems with  TCFSMs. This research examines a broad 
              spectrum of problems  related to TCFSMs:  the semantics and  alternative
              semantics of TCFSMs and their effects on  applications  and efficiencies;
              methodologies for  synthesizing time constraints  in TCFSMs; new  verification 
              techniques for TCFSMs  extending symbolic timing verification techniques;
              methodologies  for modeling self-stabilizing distributed systems  with TCFSMs, 
              suitable formalisms for self-stabilization and special classes of TCFSMs that 
              can be  efficiently self-stabilized; alternative extensions of  TCFSMs  related
              to other popular specification  models; and TCFSMs-based tools for simulations
              and rapid  prototyping. A component of this  RUI project is th e comparison of 
              TCFSMs with other specification models to  identify and evaluate  their
              strengths and weaknesses.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
