Title       : Acquisition of Surface Electron Spectroscopy Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9503304

Award Number: 9503304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232500             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Dickinson jtd@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry W. Hipps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ursula Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford B. Pate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503304  Dickinson    This award is for the acquisition of surface electron 
              spectroscopy instrumentation to serve a number of faculty and  students at
              Washington State University who are working in the  area of advanced materials
              research.  The specific  instrumentation requested is an electron spectrometer
              (ES),  combining an Auger Electron Spectrometer (AES),  X-Ray  Photoelectron
              Spectrometer (XPS), and Ultraviolet Photoelectron  Spectrometer (UPS),
              including the necessary vacuum system,  electronics, and data acquisition/data
              presentation system.  This  facility will  provide new capabilities at
              Washington State  University not presently available.  The research that will 
              benefit from this instrumentation includes efforts in thin film  synthesis and
              processing, surface modification, laser surface  interactions, tribology and
              fracture, and characterization of  materials on an atomic level.  AES/XPS
              allows both qualitative  and semiquantitative analysis of surface composition
              and,  combined with UPS, provides critical information about electronic  and
              chemical structure.  A key requirement at WSU is that the  facility be
              configured for both direct use by experiments and for  routine surface
              analysis.  To achieve this dual purpose, we will  purchase a complete
              spectrometer with two load lock sample  introduction ports and temperature
              controlled sample stage.  Because many of the users require unique vacuum
              experiments  and/or sample preparation and treatment in a controlled 
              environment, we will build a flexible experimental/sample  preparation
              treatment chamber to be attached to the main analysis  chamber.  The use of
              this second chamber will be scheduled in  large time blocks (about 3-5 weeks)
              to allow different users to  clean, configure, and use this system to their
              best advantage.  This combination allows the capability of performing
              experiments,  growth studies, and/or in situ sample preparation with 
              accompanying surface analysis under UHV conditions.  Simultaneously, without
              conflict,  samples can be introduced  into  the analysis chamber from the
              outside for routine analysis.    Acquisition of this capability is essential
              for research  activities in a number of departments within the University, 
              including Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical and Materials  Engineering, Geology,
              Chemical Engineering, and Electrical  Engineering.  This activity is organized
              under two crosscollege  organizations.  The Center for Materials Research and
              the  Materials Science Program have been recently established to  address the
              interdisciplinary nature of Materials Science.  The  Center for Materials
              Research consists of 20 senior participants  from 6 different departments and
              was formed with the purpose of  encouraging collaborative, crossdisciplinary
              projects in the area  of materials science and engineering and applied
              condensed matter  science. The Materials Science Program is the graduate 
              educational arm of the materials science thrust at Washington  State
              University; the Program was initiated in the Fall of 1990  and is the most
              recently created Ph.D. program in the University.    In the projects described
              below there are a total of 21 graduate  and postdoctoral students whose
              research will directly benefit  from the acquisition of this ES system. There
              are an additional  12 students involved in other projects described in this
              proposal  whose research would significantly benefit from these surface 
              analysis techniques.  It is anticipated that other graduate  students and
              faculty will be attracted to use this  instrumentation once it is acquired and
              demonstrated. The AES/XPS  system would also provide substantial benefit as an
              instructional  instrument for both graduate and undergraduate students
              impacting  at least 10 additional students.
