Title       : Japan STA Program: Implementation and Optimization of Massively Parallel Fluid
               Operating Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9503506

Award Number: 9503506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon C. Connelly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9503506  Connelly    This award supports a 24-month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. J. Christopher  Connelly of
              the Department of Computer Science at Duke  University.  During his fellowship,
              Dr. Connelly will be  resident at the Electrotechnical Laboratory (ETL) of the 
              Agency of Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) within  the Ministry of
              International Trade and Industry (MITI) in  Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr. Connelly will
              work with Drs. Satoshi  Hirano and Michiharu Tsukamoto of the Distributed
              Systems  Group at the Electrotechnical Laboratory implementing and  evaluating
              various resource and locality management  techniques under both simulated and
              real environments.    As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Connelly will have the 
              opportunity to become familiar with research techniques and  equipment at the
              ETL while contributing to the overall  research effort.  ETL has a large number
              of research  machines available for systems work.  The Distributed  Systems
              Group also collaborates with Dr. Yuetsu Kodama's  computer architecture group
              and has access to the  experimental dataflow machines under development.  The 
              availability of these machines will provide Dr. Connelly an  opportunity to
              study implementation issues and gain  experience working on real systems.
              Therefore, this proposal  fulfills the objectives of the Program in its
              exchange and  transfer of scientific knowledge through an international 
              collaboration.  ***
