Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Degenerate Stochastic Differential Equations and Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1995       
File        : a9503702

Award Number: 9503702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salah-Eldin A. Mohammed salah@sfde.math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In their previous work, the proposers have used probabilistic  methods to
              establish an optimal extension of Hormander's theorem  for second order
              differential operators. Their extension asserts  hypoellipticity under
              hypotheses that allow the usual Lie algebra  condition to fail at an
              exponential rate on a collection of  hypersurfaces. The proposers use these
              techniques to investigate  a series of further problems in the areas of partial
              and  stochastic differential equations. In particular, they study the 
              Dirichlet problem for exponentially degenerate operators on  smooth domains in
              Euclidean space. They also investigate the  existence of smooth densities for a
              large class of highly  degenerate stochastic functional equations.     The
              research  deals with two important problem areas that arise in physics and 
              engineering. The first area concerns an important class of  mathematical
              models, called partial differential equations, that  play a fundamental role in
              the study of heat conduction, electric  potential and fluid flow.  The second
              area of investigation is  devoted to a class of models that are used in
              physics,  engineering and biology in order to analyze dynamical systems  whose
              evolution is influenced by random fluctuations and past  history. These models
              are very important in a variety of diverse  areas ranging from signal
              processing, stock market fluctuations,  economic and labor models, aircraft
              dynamics, materials with  memory and population dynamics.  The investigators
              use techniques  from the calculus of probability in order to develop a deeper 
              understanding of the above-mentioned models.
