Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Properties of Extremal Trajectories and
               Singularities of the Value Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9503356

Award Number: 9503356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz M. Schaettler hms@cec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503356  Shaettler  Using a field theoretic approach the links between geometric
               properties of extremal trajectories and singularities of the value function
              will  be investigated. Typically singularities in the value-function occur as 
              extremal trajectories need to be terminated because they lose optimality.  The
              relation to conjugate points and cut-loci of competing control strategies  will
              be investigated. The nonuniqueness of optimal controls on the cut-locus is  the
              primary source for nondifferentiability of the value function.  The main tool
              in this analysis will be a geometric theory of conjugate  points and
              corresponding construction of a field of extremals. When the  flow of extremals
              covers the state space 1-1 and smoothly, the value  function and corresponding
              regular synthesis of extremals can be  constructed by the method of
              characteristics analogous to classical  Hamilton-Jacobi theory. This
              construction can be done piecewise and as  such directly applies to broken
              extremals. It also has the advantage that  it can immediately be localized and
              Jacobi type sufficient conditions for  local optimality can be attained for
              broken extremals. It is intended  to develop a theory which applies to
              arbitrary piecewise smooth  extremals unifying existing concepts for
              nonsingular extremals with  those for bang-bang trajectories. For nonsingular 
              extremals (which satisfy the strengthened Legendre condition) the usual 
              Riccati equations for characterizations of the conjugate points are  obtained
              while for bang-bang controls the conjugate points reduce to  certain switching
              points.  Special emphasis will be given to optimal control systems with a 
              compact control set and a Hamiltonian function which is  quadratic, more
              generally strictly convex in the control. Under generic  conditions the Maximum
              principle generates a piecewise defined dynamical system  on the cotangent
              bundle for which still local existence and uniqueness  properties hold, a
              so-called hybrid system.  %%%  Using a field theoretic  approach the links
              between geometric properties  of extremal trajectories and singularities of the
              value function will  be investigated. In particular, the connections between
              singularities in the  value function and  conjugate points/cut-loci of
              competing  control strategies will be investigated. The nonuniqueness of
              optimal controls  on the cut-locus is the primary source for
              nondifferentiability of the value  function.  The main tool in this analysis
              will be a geometric theory of conjugate  points and corresponding construction
              of a field of broken extremals. This has  the advantage that results can
              immediately be localized and Jacobi type  sufficient conditions for local
              optimality can be attained.  It is intended to develop a theory which applies
              to arbitrary piecewise smooth  extremals unifying existing concepts for
              nonsingular extremals with those for  bang-bang trajectories.  Special emphasis
              will be given to optimal control systems with a  compact control set and a
              Hamiltonian function which is  quadratic, more generally strictly convex in the
              control. For this case,  the Maximum principle typically generates a piecewise
              defined dynamical  system on the cotangent bundle for which still local
              existence and uniqueness  properties hold, a so-called hybrid system.  ***
