Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Dynamical Numerical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9503447

Award Number: 9503447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Dieci dieci@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Estep  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dieci       The investigator and his colleagues organize an international 
              conference on numerical methods for dynamical systems.  The  interaction
              between dynamical systems and numerical analysis has  grown in recent years as
              the limitations of classical quantitative  numerical analysis have become
              increasingly apparent.  In practice,  a common goal of computation is to obtain
              information about  solutions over moderate to long time intervals, yet
              classical  error analysis is generally not meaningful past a short initial 
              transient.  It is thus fundamental to the numerical analysis of  differential
              equations to address both the efficacy of existing  computational methods and
              the design of special methods for  computation over long time intervals. 
              Specific topics to be  covered include convergence of integration algorithms
              over long  time intervals (including long-time error bounds and convergence  of
              invariant sets), stability of integration algorithms over long  time intervals
              (including preservation of dynamical structure and  spurious solutions), new
              approaches to error analysis (including  shadowing results and backward error
              analysis), and design of  computational techniques for invariant sets such as
              algorithms to  compute invariant torii, inertial manifolds, heteroclinic
              orbits,  homoclinic orbits, and Lyapunov exponents.       Differential
              equations describe how one position in space of  a physical system at a
              particular time influences neighboring  positions in the immediate future.  It
              is this local nature of a  differential equation that makes it possible to
              model complicated  physical situations, because it means that the entire system
              does  not have to be described simultaneously.  But this also means that 
              obtaining the correct differential equation model of a system is  not the end
              of the story, because it is necessary to solve the  differential equation to
              obtain information about the original  system.  Accordingly, the study of
              solutions of differential  equations has grown int o one of the major areas of
              mathematics  while becoming centrally important in science and engineering. 
              The  introduction of the computer made it possible to approximately  solve
              differential equations on a wide scale for the first time.  Over the last
              thirty years, numerical mathematicians have made  great progress in devising
              methods to approximate a specific  solution of a differential equation and in
              analyzing the accuracy  of the approximate solution.  The classical approach to
              study  numerical methods for differential equations is very good at  describing
              the behavior of the approximation of a particular  solution in a small region
              of space over a short time interval.  But understanding the nature of nonlinear
              equations requires  knowledge about many solutions over relatively long time 
              intervals.  In response to this need, there is increasing interest  in using
              numerical methods to study structures and patterns in  solutions of
              differential equations, which is known as the  dynamical behavior of the
              equation.  This conference gathers  leading experts from the United States and
              from around the world,  representing nearly all aspects of the area, together
              with  interested students and other researchers, to discuss the current  state
              of the art and to stimulate new developments.  The conference  is expected to
              have a long-ranging impact on many applications in  science and engineering.
