Title       : A Theoretical and Practical Basis for Applying Formal Methods to Object-Oriented
               Programming and C++
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9503168

Award Number: 9503168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary T. Leavens leavens@cs.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don Pigozzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This research seeks a theoretical foundation for specifying  and  verifying
              object-oriented programs, and a practical foundation  for the use  of formal
              methods with the programming language, C++.    The project is  extending the
              model theory and proof theory of  abstract data types to help  characterize
              when one abstract data  type is a behavioral subtype of another.  Previous work
              has given  sufficient conditions for behavioral subtyping among  abstract  data
              types with immutable objects.  These conditions are based on  type
              specifications, as reflected in algebraic models of these  specifications. 
              Behavioral subtyping allows modular  specification and verification of
              programs,  using static type  information without using case analysis for each
              subtype.  Separately, one proves that the subtype relationships satisfy the 
              semantic  conditions of behavioral subtyping.    An important problem is to
              find necessary  and sufficient  conditions for behavioral subtyping for
              abstract types whose  objects have time-varying state (i.e., that are mutable),
              since  these types  occur frequently in practice.  Needed are ways to  prove
              behavioral subtype  relationships from type specifications.  This research
              would  extend the work on  modular specification and  verification to languages
              with mutation and  non-determinism.    The practical work is aimed at providing
              the fast-growing  community of C++ programmers with a foundation for the use of
               formal methods  with this language. Essential to systematic  development of
              code, program  verification, code reuse, and other  formal development
              activities, is a formal  specification  language.  This project advances
              Larch/C++, and interface  specification language tailored to specify C++
              modules.  Tools,  including a  type-checker for Larch/C++,  are being
              developed, as  are a suite of teaching  materials, and tutorial and larger
              worked  examples.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
