Title       : U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research: Intramolecular Electron Transfer in the
               Inverted Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9503885

Award Number: 9503885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503885  Meyer    This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports 
              travel expenses for graduate students from the laboratory of  Dr. Thomas Meyer,
              Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill to  the laboratory of Dr. N. Katz,
              Universidad Nacional de  Tucuman, Tucuman, Argentina.  Three visits of two
              month  duration are supported.  The Argentine side, in turn, will  support
              three two month long visits by scientists from Dr.  Katz' lab to the Univ. of
              North Carolina.  Some expendable  research supplies and publication costs are
              also supported  under this award.    The area of investigation is an important
              one, both as it  relates to the basic understanding of photochemistry/physics 
              and to more practical areas, such as solar energy  conversion. The work will
              involve investigations in  intramolecular electron transfer in a series of
              mixed-  valence dimers containing Re(I, II) and Mo(I,0).  These  complexes will
              be designed such that the redox potential of  photoinduced Re to Mo electron
              transfer  can be varied by  ligand modifications.  In all cases the driving
              force will  be greater than the reorganizational energy, so that the  process
              occurs in the Marcus "inverted region".  These  studies will complement and
              extend Meyer's research on metal-  ligand charge transfer in the inverted
              region , which has  centered on monometallic complexes.    Operationally, the
              strengths of the North Carolina and the  Argentine groups will be efficiently
              utilized.  While the  design of the compounds is a joint responsibility, 
              preparative work will be carried out in Tucuman, where the  laboratory and
              personnel have much synthetic expertise.  The  complexes will then be
              transported to Nopth Carolina, where  the photochemical experiments will be
              carried out, using  Meyer's highly specialized laser facilities.  In order to 
              produce a coherent research team that effectively combines  the individual
              talents of the two research groups, the  research plan contains a detailed
              schedule for the  interchange of workers b etween the U.S. and the Argentine 
              laboratories.  ***
