Title       : Designing Fast Parts Feeders Using Acceleration-Based Non-Prehensile
               Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9503648

Award Number: 9503648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Erdmann me@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this research are to design fast, precise parts  feeders  and  to
              improve nonprehensile robotic manipulation.  The  two goals are closely
              related.  A good architecture for  a   parts  feeder  exploits  both 
              parallelism  and  dynamic  contact,  by  pipelining fast-acting low-degree  of 
              freedom  manipulators  along the feeder.  Nonprehensile  manipulation  of 
              objects  by  humans  or animals often  involves  dynamic  contact  in  which
              the object undergoes a series of  partial  grasps,  shuffled  back and forth
              between various  contacts.  The  key  to  fast  nonprehensilemanipulation  of 
              parts  is  controlling  part  motions through moving  and  accelerating 
              contacts.  This research builds a set of analysis tools that  describe how the
              motions of accelerating constraints  affect  the  effective  forces felt by the
              parts being  manipulated.  These analyses take careful account of contact and
              friction,  plus any forces already acting on the part, such as gravity.  The 
              resulting tools will allow a planner to produce control  algorithms  for the
              feeder, and thus dynamically reconfigure  the  feeder  as  part shapes change
              or  errors  appear.   In  traditional feeder design, much of the mechanics of
              the task  has been compiled into hardware, in the form of fixed feeder  gates 
              and orienting shapes.  At the other extreme,  general  purpose  robots  have
              suffered from too much generality  and  too  little  reliable  software.  An
              important  intermediate  architecture  consists of a sequence of simple 
              manipulators  under  software control.  This research will explore feeders 
              using  the   palm  manipulation  paradigm.   As  parts  pass  through  a 
              feeder,  a  sequence of  low-degree  of  freedom  devices  will  orient the
              parts using nonprehensile  dynamic  contacts.   Since  the configurations  and 
              motions  of  the  devices are under software control and since the devices are 
              easy  to program by virtue of having low degrees of freedom,  the  feeder 
              should be able to accomodate  las t-minute  part  changes with relative ease.
