Title       : Future Directions of the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9503035

Award Number: 9503035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Glascock glascockm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector Neff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at the University
              of Missouri and employ the technique of instrumental neutron activation
              analysis (INAA) to analyze the elemental composition of archaeological
              materials. INAA is a multi-elemental technique which allows the major, minor
              and trace elements of a material to be determined simultaneously and with
              considerable accuracy and precision. A sample is not destroyed by INAA and, as
              a result, the analysis can be repeated or different analytical techniques can
              be applied to the same sample. For valuable archaeological objects, this is an
              important consideration. Of particular interest are potential analyses of
              ceramics, lithics, metal and bone.  Through elemental analysis of
              archaeological materials, a number of significant kinds of questions can be
              addressed. INAA provides a taxonomic tool because it allows materials of
              similar composition to be grouped together. In some instances, it also permits
              the proveniencing of artifacts and thus may provide information about
              procurement practices, routes of trade and political boundaries. It may also
              improve understanding of ancient technologies and (through analysis of skeletal
              remains) give insight into prehistoric diet and nutrition.  This project is
              particularly important because the Missouri laboratory is one of the very few
              which provide INAA service to archaeologists. It also plays an important role
              in training students.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
