Title       : Collective Communication in Wormhole-Routed Massively Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9503838

Award Number: 9503838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip K. McKinley mckinley@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The supercomputing industry is now dominated by parallel  architectures.  In
              many such systems, memory is physically  distributed among  processors in order
              to achieve better  scalability, requiring nodes to  communicate through a 
              network. In order to reduce communication latency, many  systems have the
              wormhole-routing switching strategy, in  which messages are  pipelined through 
              and a single  destination, or collective. Communication  operations may be 
              either point-to-point, which involves a single source and a  single
              destination, or collective, in which more than two  processes  participate. 
              Collective communication operations  are particularly important in  scientific
              computing, where  large data arrays are distributed over the local  memories of
               the nodes, but are manipulated through single operations.    This  research
              project addresses the design of collective  communication operations  for
              wormhole-routed networks.  The  research is intended to explore  architectural
              and  algorithmic alternatives in the design of communications  subsystems for
              next generation wormhole-routed networks.    The project can be  divided
              approximately into four subareas.  First, both models will be used to  develop
              new algorithms  for collective operations in addition to those already  under 
              investigation.  Target platforms will include both direct  networks, as  well
              as wormhole-routed switch-based  interconnects. Second, the resulting 
              algorithms will be  applied in order to support higher-level parallel 
              programming constructs, such as virtual process topologies,  parallel I/O 
              operations and distributed shared memory.  Third, the resulting communication 
              services will be used to  improve the performance of parallel applications,  in
              particular parallel numerical algorithms.  Finally, the use of the new  models
              will be investigated in  wormhole-routed systems that  serve purposes other
              than parallel computing, such  as high  speed local area networks.  The methods
              used will be  analysis,  simulation, and experimental studies on commercial 
              wormhole-routed systems.  The significance of this research is that it will
              provide  new solutions to the  communication needs of parallel  applications. 
              Besides providing a better  understanding of  the issues and problems that must
              be addressed in design and  use of collective operations in wormhole-routing
              systems,  this project will  produce tangible results in the form of  new
              protocols, prototype  implementations of new algorithms,  and new applications
              software, all of which  will be made  publicly available for use by other
              researchers.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
