Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models for Reliability of Systems with
               Dependencies Among Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9503104

Award Number: 9503104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Padgett padgett@stat.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Durham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9503104  PIs: W. J. Padgett, J. D. Lynch and S. D. Durham 
              Institution:  University of  South Carolina - Columbia  Title:  STOCHASTIC
              MODELS FOR RELIABILITY OF SYSTEMS             WITH DEPENDENCIES AMONG
              COMPONENTS     Abstract:          The research involves the reliability of
              complex systems.  There are three main thrusts:  (1) modeling component
              reliability, (2)  incorporating component reliability and dependencies into the
              system  reliability which result in tractable data analytic models, and (3) 
              developing a criticality theory for such models.  Regarding (1), some  models
              are studied for the analysis of component reliability, including the 
              conditional Weibull and inverse Gaussian distributions and a  Poisson-Weibull
              flaw model.  The "conditional Weibull" distribution is  studied since it fits
              certain fiber strength data sets well and may be  justified due to "censoring"
              considerations in the fiber manufacturing and  testing processes.  The
              Poisson-Weibull flaw model with finite-state Markov  random intensity has the
              mixed distribution (zero intensity) and the mixed  hazard model (infinite
              intensity) as extremes.  A major objective of this  part of the project is the
              investigation of a unified mixture theory for  this flaw model which subsumes
              the theory of mixtures developed for the  extremes of mixed distributions and
              mixed hazards, respectively.  To  address (2) and (3), a general model is
              investigated which is hierarchical  in nature.  The hierarchy consists of (i)
              the micro (or component) level,  (ii) the subsystem (or "bundle of components")
              level, and (iii) the system  (or "chain of bundles") level.  It has long been
              known that in many  systems, the failure of a component changes the stress
              applied to the  remaining components.  Thus, incorporating component
              dependencies into a  reliability model in a realistic manner is highly
              desirable for accurate  results.  Here, component dependencies/interactions are
              incorporated into  the model by using "load-sharing rules," m ost applicable to
              situations  where "loadings" are due to mechanical or physical considerations. 
              General  monotone load-sharing rules are considered for which a method of 
              calculating the system reliability has been developed.  The present  research
              includes a special class of these rules where the component load  can be
              calculated using absorption probabilities for random walks on a  network.  In
              particular, a number of the popular load-sharing rules can be  reduced to the
              consideration of electrical networks.  Energy considerations  give insight into
              the behavior of stress concentrations induced by these  rules as components
              fail.  Major objectives are to continue the  investigation of these electrical
              network rules, and other network rules  which are  appropriate for mechanical
              load transfer situations, especially  for composite materials, and,
              specifically to study the "effective  distance"  that a load can be transferred
              via matrix material and its  relationship to the "ineffective length" around
              fiber breaks for load  transfer through the matrix.  Criticality issues are
              also considered.  Preliminary work for k-out-of-n systems and systems with a
              small number of  components suggest that an exact theory may be obtainable when
              each  component has a Weibull failure distribution using a mixed transformed 
              gamma model, where the transformation depends on the Weibull distribution. 
              Such a model also lends itself to calculation of extreme value  approximation
              errors and to system identification using the mixing  distribution.    The
              research involves the development  of models for describing  the failure of
              complex systems with dependent components.    The researchers are investigating
              reliability models for complex systems of  components including complex
              materials which allow for component  dependencies and interactions. Such models
              have direct application to   many problems of current importance,  including
              failure of fibrous composite materials and electrical networks.  This has
              important imp lications for the design and large scale manufacture  of  complex
              materials where high reliability.
