Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Special Year in Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9503478

Award Number: 9503478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans G. Othmer othmer@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Keener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron L. Fogelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick R. Adler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Othmer       The investigator and his colleagues conduct a special year in 
              mathematical biology in the Department of Mathematics at the  University of
              Utah.  Cooperating departments include the  Departments of Biology,
              Bioengineering and Human Genetics and the  Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular
              Research and Training  Institute.  The primary objective of the special year is
              to train  graduate students and post-docs in the art and science of modeling 
              applied to biological problems.  Each quarter focuses on a specific  area of
              biology in which mathematics has had a significant impact  and in which there
              are significant new opportunities: Ecology and  Evolution (Fall 1995),
              Physiology and Cell Biology (Winter 1996),  and Cardiovascular Physiology and
              Biological Fluid Dynamics  (Spring 1996).  The educational program includes (i)
              a full year  course entitled `Mathematical Modeling in Biology' given by 
              visiting principal lecturers, who present a case study of applying 
              mathematical modeling to a biological problem in their area of  expertise, (ii)
              a weekly seminar series given by principal  lecturers, other visitors, and
              scientists from the University of  Utah, (iii) a quarterly minisymposium in an
              active research area  within the purview of that quarter, and (iv) a
              student/post-doc  seminar aimed at informal presentation of ideas, new results,
              and  open problems.  The notes from the course will be published.       The
              goal of the Special Year in Mathematical Biology at the  University of Utah is
              to train young scientists in mathematical  modeling of biological problems. 
              Graduate students and post-docs  are immersed in an interdisciplinary
              educational and collaborative  environment that brings them together with
              leading mathematicians  and scientists.  Although mathematics has long provided
              important  insights into biological processes, developments in biology and 
              mathematics have made the link more important.  Basic biological  research has
              increasing relevance to national priorities such as   health care and
              environmental protection, and powerful new  experimental techniques have made
              it possible to observe  previously inaccessible mechanisms in physiology,
              genetics, and  ecology.  Expanded access to powerful computers has enabled 
              researchers to simulate complex and realistic models of ecological  and
              physiological systems, establishing modeling and computation  as a new mode of
              experimentation in the life sciences.  Unfortunately, the training of most
              biologists and mathematicians  fails to prepare them for this type of research.
               The Special Year  in Mathematical Biology prepares young researchers at the
              pre- and  junior post-doctoral level for these new demands.  The speakers and 
              researchers invited to this Special Year have established records  of
              successfully collaborating with both mathematicians and life  scientists.  The
              program focuses on three active areas of research  in the life sciences:
              ecology and evolution, physiology and cell  biology, and cardiovascular
              physiology and biological fluid  dynamics.  These areas have been fertile
              ground for successful  collaboration and modeling in the past.  The Special
              Year  introduces young researchers to these successes, involves them in 
              current research, and illustrates the conceptual connections  between the
              different fields.  These students, and those benefiting  from the book
              developed from the Special Year, will be the  catalysts for further development
              of this vital connection.
