Title       : A Library of Mathematical Models of Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9503872

Award Number: 9503872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meryl E. Wastney wastneym@gunet.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi Broering  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this proposal is to facilitate the use of models of  biological 
              systems by developing a facility  for locating and  retrieving published models
              via the Internet.    Models are used widely to study complex biological
              systems. They  are used to represent hypotheses, (circulation in physiology), 
              test theories (effect of enzyme concentration on reaction rate),  make
              predictions  (pharmacological response to a drug),  design  outcomes (calculate
              intake for optimal growth), and analyze data  (calculate rate of substrate
              movement into cells).  Models  coalesce a large amount of information and form
              valuable tools in  research and education, but their utility resides in being
              able  to use and manipulate them interactively. Currently there is no 
              centralized way to do this. This proposal describes the  establishment of such
              a facility, called a library. Potential  users of the library are researchers,
              educators, and students who  would use the models to analyze data, evaluate
              theories, and  design experiments.    Models  from  the  fields  of 
              metabolism,  pharmacokinetics,  endocrinology, immunology, physiology,
              toxicology, and  biochemistry will  be  entered  and  will  include  linear 
              and  non-linear, compartmental  models.  The  models  will  be  collated, 
              indexed, catalogued, and described mathematically in  formats compatible with
              several (based on cost and demand)  widely-used modeling software packages.
              Users will be able to  access the library via the Internet and, using menus, 
              search and  locate models, view graphical and mathematical  descriptions  of 
              the  models,   perform  limited simulations in the library, or  download models
              to use with their own modeling software.    The library will be developed by an
              interdisciplinary team from  Georgetown University and the University of
              Pennsylvania with  expertise in the fields of informational science, library 
              science, biology,  modeling,  computer  science,  and  networking.  A panel
              representing  users  in  universities,  indust ry,  pharmaceutical companies 
              and Government agencies will  advise on the library structure, contents and
              dissemination. More  than 300 models will be entered into the library over a 3
              year  period.    In view of the resources committed to developing models of 
              biological systems, access to tested, working versions of  published models is
              necessary to allow them to be used for their  intended purpose, i.e., to
              explore and test systems through  simulation. This task will be accomplished by
              scientists in the  biological and informational science fields through the 
              development of a library of mathematical models.
