Title       : Japan JSPS Program: A Flourometric Assay of Inositol-1,4, 5-triphosphate in
               Single Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1995      
File        : a9503513

Award Number: 9503513
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie M. Matheson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9503513  Matheson    This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) postdoctoral fellowship for Dr.  Julie M. Matheson,
              employed at the U.S. Naval Hospital,  Yokusuka, Japan. The fellowship
              opportunity will enable Dr.  Matheson to initiate collaborative research with
              Dr.  Katsuhiko Mikoshiba at the Institute of Physical and  Chemical Research in
              Japan (RIKEN), NHK Science and  Technical Research Laboratories, Tsukuba.  The
              goal of the  proposed research is to develope a fluorescent probe for  inositol
              1,4,5 triphosphate (IP3) that can be used to  investigate signal transduction
              pathways in single cells.  Cloning and expression of IP3 binding proteins will
              be done  in Dr. Mikoshiba's laboratory at RIKEN and microscopic  imaging will
              be done through a collaboration with Dr. Roger  Tsien at the Howard Hughes
              Medical Institute at the  University of California at San Diego (UCSD).  A
              similar  collaboration between Drs. R. Y. Tsien and S. Taylor at UCSD  led to
              the development of a fluorescent indicator for a  different cellular messenger,
              and this proposed project  provides  a logical bridge between the laboratories
              of R. Y.  Tsien and K. Mikoshiba.    The postdoctoral fellowship will allow Dr.
              Matheson  to  become familiar with research practices in Japan as well as  to
              establish professional contacts internationally.  It will  also provide access
              to unique research facilities and will  encourage international cooperation
              between U.S. and  Japanese scientists.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the 
              objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of  scientific knowledge
              through international collaberation.
