Title       : Acquisition of Time-Resolved Near-Field Optical Spectrometer for Semiconductor
               Nanostructure Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1996  
File        : a9503853

Award Number: 9503853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard E. Jackson howard.jackson@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503853  Jackson    This award is for partial support of a time-resolved
              near-field  optical spectrometer (TRNFOS) to be used fop .semiconductor 
              nanostructure research.  By combining two commercially available  instruments,
              we can configure a spectrometer that achieves both  ultrafast (<100 fs)
              time-resolution and spatial-resolution (< 500  A) more than an order of
              magnitude better than previously  achievable using the best far field optics.  
               The unique combination of capabilities of the instrument will  allow us to
              consider experiments that previously were not  possible.  In particular, this
              instrument will allow for the  first time:    (A)  Optical observation of
              spatially local potential       fluctuations no longer masked by the
              inhomegeneously       broadened photoluminescence lines (following Hess et al.)
                 (B)  The study of exciton dynamics in confinement to, and       scattering
              from, these spatially local potential       fluctuations.    (C)    The study
              of exciton dynamics in quantum wires and dots.       Namely spatially resolved
              capture of excitons to wires and       dots, as well as spatial transport of
              excitons along wires.  %%%  The principal aspects of the proposed research are
              the study of III-V  and II-VI nanostructures.  In the III-V multiple quantum
              wells the  availability of the TRNFOS instrument will provide a spatial
              resolution  that will allow optical observation of exciton confinement to lower
               dimensions through both "intrinsic" local potential fluctuations, as  well as
              "extrinsic" potentials fabricated through focused ion beam  mixing.  For the
              case of focused ion beam mixing, the instrument will be  capable of providing
              in a unique manner the lateral potential profile  created by compositional
              intermixing.  This understanding is an  essential step in creating quantum wire
              and quantum dot structures.  For  quantum wire-like structures the TRNFOS
              instrument will provide local  information on exciton lifetimes and exciton
              anisotropic diffusion to  contrast with our p resent far field results. 
              Similarly, in II-VI  diluted magnetic heterostructures this instrument will
              allow us to  observe directly the affect of magnetic ion clustering and alloy 
              fluctuations on exciton dynamics and the magnetization dynamics of the 
              magnetic ion themselves.  In particular, we are interested in the  dynamics of
              exciton self-localization in the formation of lower  dimensional exciton
              magnetic polarons, and in the affect of d-d  superexchange on the magnetization
              dynamics of magnetic ion clusters.  The acquisition of this time-resolved
              near-field optical spectrometer  will significantly advance present NSF
              supported efforts as well as open  new opportunities to explore semiconductor
              material science and physics.  The understanding of confined structures,
              quantum wires, quantum dots,  and arrays will be strongly influenced by the
              acquisition of this  instrument.  ***
