Title       : Improving Requirements Completeness through Inquiry-Based Goal Refinement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9503863

Award Number: 9503863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin Potts potts@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Requirements completeness is the extent to which an  application meets user
              needs. Many applications fail to meet  user needs because their requirements
              incompletely specify  what should happen in non-normative situations. Such 
              applications constrain users' actions, so that "workarounds"  must be invented.
                 This project is to develop and evaluate novel methods for  improving and
              predicting the completeness of requirements  with an emphasis on interactive
              applications for individual  users and small groups. It is assumed that
              requirements can  be derived from user and enterprise goals, and so 
              completeness is defined as the fit between a feature set and  the goals and
              goal-thwarting obstacles that arise in the use  context. There are two research
              challenges: (i) development  of methods for analyzing the use of context to
              uncover goals  and obstacles, and (ii) development of methods for deriving 
              requirements from goals and obstacles. Approaches are to be  developed for
              performing these transformations: identifying  goals, decomposing goals into
              subgoals,clarifying goal  dependencies, transforming goals into operations, 
              establishing the boundary between application and  environment, allocating
              operations to application and users,  identifying obstacles, inventing
              scenarios for analysis of  obstacles, and adding operations or goals to deal
              with  obstacles. The project also seeks to extend and specialize  for goal
              refinement the Inquiry-Based Requirements Analysis  process (in which
              requirements derivation intertwines the  expression of models, discussion of
              their content, and  transformation). Work in design rationale is applicable to 
              guiding recurring patterns of goal refinement.    Candidate feature sets can be
              compared by exploring  scenarios that are derived systematically from the goal 
              structure: Scenarios are generated using a story grammar,  with each
              significant episode representing a goal or an  obstacle. Scenario generation
              heuristics lead to greater  goal/obstacle coverage, and  therefore greater
              requirements  completeness without unnecessary redundancy.    Development and
              evaluation of the goal refinement strategy  are proceeding simultaneously. The
              number and quality of  additional requirements that are identified as a result
              of  applying the strategy to realistic case studies will be  measured.
              Industrial case studies are carried out in  parallel with industrial funding. 
              ***
