Title       : CRISP: Monitoring and Control of the Pouch Fill Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9503021

Award Number: 9503021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suraj M. Alexander   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Usher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1048,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9503021  Alexander   This research will be undertaken as part of the CRISP
              (Combined Research Industry  Scholarship Project) under the 1994-95 GOALI
              (Grants Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry) initiatives.  The aim
              of the GOALI initiatives was to provide some mechanism to encourage and promote
              industry-university partnerships to work on research problems of interests to
              industry.  It is believed that such partnerships can grow and lead to other
              meaningful joint industry-university research projects that can be of benefit
              to both industry and academia.  The industrial partner for this research is
              Liqui-Dri Foods, a Division of Quaker Corporation.  The objective of the
              research is to reduce process variability with an emphasis on improving the
              control systems of fill process lines at Liqui-Dri/Quaker.  The control systems
              were designed to keep four filling lines at Liqui-Dri/Quaker on target. 
              However, the workers tend to shut off these control systems because they feel
              the control systems are slow to react.  This study is aimed at integrating
              monitoring systems with the automatic control systems in order to detect the
              changes in the underlying process models used by the control systems to predict
              system state.   In the research, a diagnostic module will be used to determine
              the form of the disturbances and probable causes of system instability.  The
              design and use of fuzzy controllers for controlling the process will also be
              investigated.   Due to its applied nature, the participants on this project
              stand to draw some significant benefits from it.  For the industrial partner,
              control of process variability will translate to enhanced product quality and
              reduced losses due to potential overfill.  The reliability of the system will
              be enhanced.   From the academic points of view, the researchers will gain some
              practical experiences on a real industrial problem. However, on a more general
              perspective, outcome of this research can be applied to a host of industrial
              problems where close m itering and monitoring are critical to line reliability
              and functionality.
