Title       : Comprehensive, Multiplatform Software for Morphometric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1995    
File        : a9503024

Award Number: 9503024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis E. Slice Dennis.Slice@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. James Rohlf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              21        Mathematics                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the development of a comprehensive,  cross-platform
              software package for morphometric analysis. The  package will provide a
              convenient environment for scientists to  incorporate the many recently
              developed methods for shape  analysis into their own research programs. These
              new methods,  generally termed "geometric morphometrics", pay particular 
              attention to the complete retention of geometric information,  such as is
              archived in sets of point, or landmark, coordinates.  Such information makes
              possible not only an exhaustive analysis  of shape variation, shape
              differences, and the covariation of  shape with external factors, but also
              allows for the  visualization of original and mean forms, group differences,
              and  hypothetical configurations based on the results of more abstract 
              statistical analyses.    The software will provide for the superimposition of 
              configurations of homologous points using edge-matching,  least-squares, and
              robust methods, the construction of  interpolation grids mapping a reference
              configuration onto a  target configuration, and the statistical analysis of
              single and  multiple groups of specimens in linear spaces tangent to  precisely
              defined, but non-Euclidean, shape spaces. Such  capabilities have previously
              been accessible to researchers only  through routines written for matrix
              language packages unable to  easily exploit the full potential of these new
              methods or  individual, idiosyncratic programs designed to illustrate a 
              specific method or concept and performing only a few of the  procedures that
              make up a complete analysis. The proposed package  will not only serve as a
              tool for learning and implementing these  new methods, but will be developed in
              such a way as to facilitate  the addition of new methods currently being
              developed, such as  the incorporation of outline information into the
              landmark-based  methods. It's modular, C++ coding, and use of cross-platform 
              interface tools will make it easy to provide versions for popular  platform s,
              such as the MS-Windows, OS/2, and Mac environments,  powerful Unix/XMotif
              workstations, and future computer systems.    In addition to these new
              geometric methods, the package will also  provide a complete environment for
              all aspects of morphometric  work. This will include data acquisition,
              verification, and  editing capabilities, through modules supporting popular 2-
              and  3-dimensional digitizers, modules for the construction and  analysis of
              "traditional" types of morphometric data such as  distance and angular
              measurements, analysis of outline data via  Fourier, fractal, and eigenshape
              methods, export capabilities to  allow for subsequent analyses using standard
              statistical  packages, and an extensive suite of graphical capabilities for 
              the visualization of the results of the above procedures.
