Title       : Integration of Parameter and Tolerance Design with Off-Line Quality Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9503935

Award Number: 9503935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwun-Ion Ting kting@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9503935 Ting     This project addresses the issue of mechanical system design
              for performance quality and manufacturability by integrating parameter design
              and tolerance allocation at an early stage in the design process.  The project
              includes three main tasks:  (1) characterizing tolerances by geometric
              tolerance representation, modeling of mechanical assemblies with kinematic
              chains, and modeling of form tolerances; (2) developing a robust design
              methodology for mechanical systems that identifies performance characteristics
              and derivation of system sensitivity indices; and (3) synthesizing tolerances
              for performance and manufacturability by determining tolerance allocation for
              performance, manufacturability and cost reduction, and achieving optimal
              decisions for performance, quality and manufacturability.  The approach will be
              demonstrated in a case study.     The results of this research offer an
              effective method to understand the effects of tolerances on performance.  This
              method treats the  tolerance sensitivity of the whole system rather than an
              individual link.  Yet, it allows one to identify unambiguously the relative
              impact of each individual tolerance on the performance quality and to select a
              system less sensitive to the tolerances.  For mechanism synthesis, it is
              applicable to any type of synthesis problems, including function, path, and
              motion generation or finite, infinitesimal and mixed positions.  Its
              effectiveness remains unchanged regardless of the number of desired positions
              or the number of links.  In summary, this research leads to a method which
              enables designers to vigorously pursue the optimal parameter design and
              tolerance allocation concurrently in the early stage of the design process. 
              Thus, manufacturing cost reduction, fast product design and prototyping, and
              off-line quality control is achieved.
