Title       : Algorithmic Scalability in Reconfigurable Bus-Based Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9503882

Award Number: 9503882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Trahan trahan@ece.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramachandran Vaidyanathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9232,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               For a model to be a workable component of a parallel  processing system, it
              must be scalable.  Researchers often  design algorithms so  that the assumed
              machine size for  running the algorithm grows with the problem  size. (This  is
              particularly the case with algorithms for  reconfigurable  busbased models.)  A
              physical machine size  is, of course, fixed.  For a  scalable model, however,
              the  arbitrary sized machine for running the algorithm  can be  mapped to the
              smaller physical machine that actually  solves the problem  without loss of
              efficiency.  A compiler  can perform this mapping, so algorithm  designers and 
              programmers can design algorithms for arbitrary size  machines  and need not
              design different algorithms or write  programs for different sized  problems.  
               No reconfigurable bus-based model is known to be scalable,  however, unless
              its computational power is significantly  reduced. To better  understand the
              extent to which these  models are scalable, the investigator is  less
              restrictive  than traditional scalability.    This research will  investigate
              scalability of two main  types of reconfigurable bus-based models,  namely, the
               Reconfigurable Mesh (R-Mesh) and the Reconfigurable  Multiple Bus  Machine
              (RMBM).  The RMBM comprises four  versions:  the B-RMBM, S-RMBM,F-RMBM,  and
              E-RMBM.  The  investigators have previously established relative  scalability
              results for the S-RMBM and for `separable`  algorithms of the  E-RMBM, the most
              powerful version.  The  research will seek to investigate  scalability of
              general E-  RMBM algorithms and study different scalability  approaches  for
              different ranges in the relationship of simulated to  available  machine sizes.
              Scalability questions for the R-  Mesh will also be investigated.  These will
              include  relative scalability and scalability of certain classes of 
              algorithms, topics not yet examined for the RMesh, and  extensive attempts at 
              complete scalability of the RMesh, a  topic that has received only to narrow 
              attention in the  past.   Scalability questions will also be studied for 
              directional versions of the R-Mesh and RMBM, which have  proven particularly 
              useful for directed graph algorithms.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
