Title       : Acquisition of a Data Analysis System for Droplet Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1995      
File        : a9503727

Award Number: 9503727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique J. Lavernia lavernia@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9503727  Lavernia    This data analysis system will be dedicated to support
              materials  research in engineering at the University of California, Irvine,  in
              the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, and  Department of
              Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering.  The purchase  of this state-of-the-art
              equipment will be used to support  several ongoing research programs of spray
              forming processing and  controlled droplet deposition manufacturing.  This
              equipment will  demonstrate that the advanced studies made possible by the 
              proposed data analysis system are novel and useful for enhancing  our
              understanding of the processing microstructure mechanical  properties synergism
              in spray forming and controlled droplet  deposition processing of materials. 
              This is an important area  for future advances in spray deposition.  %%%  This
              droplet analysis equipment will be used in required junior  level laboratory
              courses for mechanical and civil engineering  students.  This will allow the
              students to visualize the complex  dynamics associated with deforming droplets
              during manufacturing,  and will directly impact the research activities of
              approximately  fifteen graduate students.  Students will utilize the requested 
              data analysis system to study a variety of important fundamental  phenomena
              described as follows.  First, the interactions that  occur between atomized
              droplets and ceramic particles during the  manufacture of metal matrix
              composites using spray atomization  and deposition.  Of particular interest
              will be the study of the  impingement of the composite droplets with the
              substrate.  Also,  the data generated will provide very useful insight into the
               mechanisms of porosity generation in discrete droplet processes,  and will be
              used to conduct parametric studies of droplet  solidification and spreading
              during net form manufacturing using  controlled droplet deposition.    The
              details of droplet deformation and impingement are  experimentally unknown. 
              The experimental data obtained will be   extremely useful il validating
              existing theoretical models.  The  information generated will impact a number
              of discrete droplet  manufacturing processes, including but not limited to: 
              plasma  spraying, spray atomization and deposition, controlled droplet 
              processes arc spraying, and others.  We wil gain insight in to  the mechanisms
              that govern the evolution of porosity during the  manufacturing of structural
              materials using discrete droplet  processes. Porosity represents one of the
              most critical phenomena  hindering the commercial exploitation of manufacturing
              processes  that involve discrete droplets.  ***
