Title       : Automated Deduction in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9503445

Award Number: 9503445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Kunen Kunen@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research addresses problems in in two major areas:    (1) Theorem Proving:
               Automated  deduction  is being used to derive mathematical theorems   whose
              proofs would not  be feasible without computer  assistance. Two facets of this 
               research are:  1a.  Search Strategies.  This is part of a continuing  effort
              to   improve current  theorem proving technology.  Specific investigations
              involve:   generation, model generation, and linked resolution.  1b.   Specific
              Theorems.  New areas of application  are being sought out, and well-  known
              open problems  involving single axioms for groups and the Robbins  algebra  
              problem are being  studied.  These two facets are closely related. 
              Improvements   in theorem  prover  technology can be applied to proving better
              theorems.   Conversely, proving new  theorems gives a  way of demonstrating the
              power of the   technology, and failed  attempts to prove a theorem can suggest 
              ways in which the   technology can be  improved.   (2) Verification:  Here, one
              uses a computer   program to verify  existing mathematical theorems.  One goal
              is to develop   verification systems far  enough so that they could  be used as
              referees for   mathematical papers.  Concentration is on:  (a) The Boyer-Moore
              prover.  This works   finitistic mathematics, and is probably the best known  
              existing  verification  system.  The current system includes the ability to do 
               induction on the ordinal  epsilon_0. Extensions of this prover are being
              examined,  with an eye to allowing induction on larger  ordinals.  (b) A  
              prover for set  theory.  Within axiomatic set theory (ZFC), one can develop  
              all of  mathematics.  A verification system based on ZFC is being designed. 
              This   system will borrow  features  already used in the Boyer-Moore prover and
              other   systems, but major  new problems will be addressed.  One problem is how
              to encode   meta-rules, such  as the scheme for transfinite induction. Another
              is how  to   allow the user to  extend the system by adding type declarations
              (corresponding   to informal  mathematical statements such as ``from now on,
              x,y,z will   represent real  numbers'').                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
