Title       : U.S-Argentina Cooperative Research: Ozone-Related Impact of Solar Ultraviolet
               Radiation on the Marine Food Chain in Argentine Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9503643

Award Number: 9503643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osmund Holm-Hansen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503643  Holm-Hansen      This U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program award 
              supports travel expenses and  some expendable  research supplies related to the
              visits of  Drs. O. Holm-  Hansen, E. Helbling and V. Villafane, Scripps 
              Institute of  Oceanography, La Jolla, CA  to Ushuaia,  Argentina.  The
              objective of the research is to  determine the impact of the UVR on
              sub-Antarctic plankton  and to gain some insight into the possible  ecological
              impact of enhanced UV-B radiation on these  organisms.   The Argentine
              counterpart is Dr. L.  Orce, CIB, CONICET, Argentina    Seasonal ozone
              concentrations in the stratosphere over  Antarctica have been progressively
              decreasing  during September-November of each year for the past decade,  with
              the result  that the fluence of  the shorter UV-B  wavelengths (280-320 nm) is
              greatly enhanced.  The  biological impact of this increased ultraviolet
              radiation  (UVR) has been studied intensively in the Antarctic, but  little
              work has been devoted to this problem at lower  latitudes, such as the southern
              regions of  South America.  Although ozone depletion is greatest at very high
              latitudes,  increased UVR may pose significant problems for plant and  animal
              life in the southern regions of Argentina, due to the  ozone hole actually
              extending over  the South American  continent, and also to the fact that
              low-ozone air flows  from the Antarctic north over South America.    The marine
              environment at Ushuaia represents a prime  locality for studying the biological
              impact of  increased UVR on the marine food chain leading up to  harvestable
              marine resources.  These cooperative  UVR studies incorporate into one
              integrated field program  the biochemical expertise provided by Dr. Orce  and
              his colleagues in Argentina,  with the oceanographic and  experimental
              experience with UVR provided  by the U.S. investigators. The studies are
              specifically  designed to assess the effect of increased UVR on the  viability
              and metabolism of marine phytoplankton, with  emphasis being p laced on rates
              of primary  production, which constitutes the base of the marine food  web. The
              laboratory and field facilities for such  studies are excellent at Ushuaia. An
              essential component of  the work is the availability of recording  UV- 
              spectroradiometers and profiling spectroradiometers which  can be lowered to a
              100m depth, installed by Dr. Orce under  an Interamerican Development  Bank
              (IDB)-CONICET grant.      ***
