Title       : North American Research Fellows Program: Open Problems in Topological Groups
               Involving the Bohr Compactification and Resolvability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1995      
File        : a9503900

Award Number: 9503900
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25308              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. J. Trigos-Arrieta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503900  Trigos-Arrieta            This award is under the North American
              Research Fellows  Program, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from 
              the United States, Canada and Mexico, to visit research  establishments in one
              or both of the other two countries for  periods of three to twelve months. The
              program's awards  provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of 
              unique or complementary facilities, expertise and  experimental conditions
              abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month research visit by Dr.  F.
              Javier Trigos-Arrieta to work with Dr. Salvador Garcia  Ferreira of the
              Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico  (UNAM) in Morelia, Mexico.    This
              award will support research on open problems in  topological groups involving
              Bohr compactification,  particularly as it relates to locally compact Abelian
              groups  and its extension to the maximally almost periodic groups  introduced
              by von Neumann.  The researchers will also focus  on various questions
              concerning the topological definition  of resolvability introduced by Hewitt. 
              The proposed work is  relevant to various subfields of mathematics such as 
              harmonic and functional analysis, set theory, and general  topology.  ***
