Title       : Cooperative Research: Local Tsunami Effects and Their Mitigation Measures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9503604

Award Number: 9503604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Raad praad@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Earthquakes which occur on ocean floors set in motion the  entire water column
              above the region of tectonic plate  motion, generating a tsunami (seismic sea
              wave). Such waves,  when approaching shore, can reach a height of more than 10 
              meters and can cause extensive flooding, property damage,  and the loss of
              human lives. This action is to support a  comprehensive research program to
              understand local tsunami  effects on man-made and natural structures.
              Particular  emphasis is placed on understanding tsunami-structure  interactions
              that can lead to effective damage mitigation  measures.    The program includes
              computational, experimental, and  mitigation components conducted by research
              teams at  Southern Methodist University, the University of Washington,  and
              Urban Regional Research, respectively. The new robust  method for the numerical
              simulation of waves and their  interaction with structures developed at
              Southern Methodist  University is used to simulate transient tsunami flows over
               and around coastal structures. The highly sensitive  capacitance-type wave
              gage, and the optical water-surface  profiler developed at the University of
              Washington is used  to conduct tsunami experiments in a specialized three- 
              dimensional wave basin. The direct field experience of Urban  Regional Research
              in the assessment of tsunami damage and  the identification of vulnerability
              patterns guides the  computational and experimental research. The collaborative
               effort enables the development of tsunami mitigation  measures.    The set of
              laboratory experiments and numerical simulations  are sufficiently simple that
              the basic physics of tsunami  actions on structures can be explored. At the
              same time, the  experimental set-up and choice of problems is realistic, so 
              that the results provide the means for the design and  modification of
              shoreline structures. Throughout the  research, full advantage is taken of the
              multi-disciplinary  nature of the research team. The analyses of actual tsunami
               events guides the  numerical and experimental efforts by  focusing the
              proposed investigations on the most practical  and relevant problems for
              tsunami hazard reduction.    The intended, primary impact of the proposed
              research is the  mitigation of the devastating consequences of tsunami  events,
              including loss of human life, destruction of  property, damage to the
              environment, economic disruption,  and social dislocation.
