Title       : Belief Dynamics and Action Selection in Qualitative Approaches to Reasoning
               about Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1997  
File        : a9503109

Award Number: 9503109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoav Shoham shoham@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Concerning   reasoning   and   decision   making   in   uncertain  environments.
               The  standard  approaches  to  dealing  with  this  uncertainty   are 
              quantitative,  and  typically  make   use   of  probability  theory.   The 
              long-term goal  of  this  project  is  provide more qualitative methods that
              can be used effectively  by  agents  reasoning about uncertainty. The project
              focuses  on  the  interplay between beliefs and actions, and how this can be 
              dealt  with in a qualitative framework.  Of particular interest are  two  uses
              that will be crucial in attaining the long-term goal: belief  dynamics   and  
              action  selection.  Belief   dynamics   involves  understanding  how  an
              agent's beliefs should  change  after  the  agent  makes  an  observation or
              performs an action.  To  capture  belief  dynamics, a formal model for belief
              is used that includes  time  explicitly.   The  ultimate goal of  this 
              research  is  to  provide  a  basis  for  a  general theory of  qualitative 
              belief  dynamics.  Action selection involves understanding how  an  agent 
              should  act,  given  his beliefs.  The usual  decision  theoretic  approach  
              uses  a  utility  function  describing   the   agent's  preferences and a
              probability distribution describing the agent's  beliefs.   But in many
              situations it is infeasible to  completely  quantify uncertainty. An
              alternative approach that dispenses with  preferences describes the agent's
              choice of action by  a  program  directly  specifying the behavior of the agent
              in  terms  of  his  beliefs,   allowing  compilation  of  plans  directly  from
                the  specification that we want it to satisfy.
