Title       : Studies on Entrainment in Froth Flotation of Fine Coal- Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9503191

Award Number: 9503191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13548              (Estimated)
Investigator: T C. Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Regional Research Laborato
	      
	      Bhopal, India, IN      /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503191  Rao    Description:  This project supports  collaboration between Dr.
              S.K. Kawatra of the  Michigan Technological University and Dr. T.C.  Rao of the
              Regional Research Laboratory in  Bhopal, India.  The research aims at 
              understanding the behavior of entrained  particles.  Entrainment is one of the
              important  mechanisms in processing a coal by froth  flotation where particles
              are transported from  the pulp phase to the froth phase.  In that  process
              particles enter the base of a flotation  froth and are transferred up and out
              of the  flotation cell suspended in water between the  bubbles.  The process is
              subject to the  influence of many factors, such as the particle  size, shape
              and surface chemistry, whose  effects are not fully understood.  In this 
              research, experiments will be carried out to  conduct studies in batch and
              continuous  flotation cells.  Experiments will be conducted  using both
              well-characterized coals and  synthetic mixtures of purified components, to 
              compensate for the difficulty of determining  particle characteristics in the
              heterogeneous  mixture of minerals in coal.    Scope:  This project involves
              collaboration by  two scientists with complementary experiences  in testing and
              in mathematical modeling in  dealing with a fundamental science problem.   The
              solution of this problem, leading to better  understanding of the factors
              involved in the  process of particle entrainment, could have  applications in
              the future in various  industries.    ***
