Title       : Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic Problems and Related Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9503408

Award Number: 9503408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olof B. Widlund widlund@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The development of numerical methods for large   systems  is central in the
              development of efficient codes for    fluid dynamics, elasticity, and other
              core problems  of   continuum mechanics.  Many other tasks in such codes 
              parallelize relatively   easily.  The importance  of the algebraic  system
              solvers is therefore increasing with   the appearance of  parallel and
              distributed computing systems, with a   substantial  number of fast 
              processors, each with relatively large memory.  The   development of improved 
              methods will, together with more  powerful computer systems,   make it possible
              to  carry out  simulations in three dimensions, with quite high   resolution, 
              relatively easily.    Work will continue in developing   iterative
              substructuring  and  other domain decomposition methods for increasingly  
              difficult  elliptic  problems.  Domain decomposition algorithms are iterative  
               methods, often of  conjugate gradient type, for the parallel  solution of the 
               large linear, or  nonlinear, systems of algebraic  equations that arise when  
              partial differential  equations are  discretized by finite elements, finite  
              differences, or spectral  methods.  In each iteration step, local problems
              representing   the  restriction  of the original problem to a potentially large
              number  of   subregions are solved  approximately.  The subregions, which  can
              be allocated to   individual processors  of a parallel computer,  form a
              decomposition of the entire   domain of the  problem.  In  addition, the
              inclusion of a coarse subproblem   substantially increases the efficiency of
              the preconditioner.      In this study,  which combines mathematical analysis
              with the  design and   numerical testing  of algorithms, a special emphasis  is
              on the study of   elements and other high  order finite element methods, on  
              nonconforming methods  such as  the mortar finite elements, and on the
              difficulties   which are  related  to distorted subregions or elements.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
