Title       : Japan STA Program: Studying Molecular Dynamics in Supercritical Fluids with
               Transient Absorption and Fluorescence Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9503495

Award Number: 9503495
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Sekreta E51715@JPNKUDPC.BITNET  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             mF  8                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    mF  8  
              mF  8                                                                          
                                                                                 !   "   #  
              $   %   &   '   (   )                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9503495
              Sekreta  This award supports a 24-month Science and Technology Agency of Japan
              Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Ellen Sekreta.  During her fellowship, Dr.
              Sekreta will be resident at the National Institute of Materials and Chemical
              Research (NIMCR) at Tsukuba.  In conjunction with Drs. M. Sato and T. Sako of
              the Department of Chemical Systems at NIMCR, Dr. Sekreta will study innovative
              chemical systems that have practical applications with regard to energy
              conservation and the environment.  The proposed work is part of a more
              extensive project probing aspects of cluster reactions as well as separation
              technologies using supercritical fluids.  As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Sekreta
              will have the opportunity to become familiar with research techniques and
              equipment at the NIMCR while contributing to the overall research effort.
              Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
              and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration.
              ***                                                     Oh     +'  0           
                                         D        h                                     S u m
              m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  @       d                                  
                                      R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                          
                      6   This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the               
              Tonya L. Butler                     Tonya L. Butler             @        8     
                                  @                                   @        8             
                                                                                             
                  @    F #                                    Microsoft Word 6.0             
                                                      2                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        e =       e                                                          
                                  j       j   j       j       j       j       j              
                                                                          1                  
                                                              Q       S       S       S      
              r                           T   M   g                           j              
                                                                                         j   
                 j                                                                       j   
                         j               Q                       ~               j       j   
                 j       j               Q                                                   
                                                                       9503495 Sekreta  This
              award supports a 24-month Science and Technology Agency of Japan Postdoctoral
              Fellowship for Dr. Ellen Sekreta.  During her fellowship, Dr. Sekreta will be
              resident at the National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMCR)
              at Tsukuba.  In conjunction with Drs. M. Sato and T. Sako of the Department of
              Chemical Systems at NIMCR, Dr. Sekreta will study innovative chemical systems
              that have practical applications with regard to energy conservation and the
              environment.  The proposed work is part of a more extensive project probing
              aspects of cluster reactions as well as separation technologies using
              supercritical fluids.  As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Sekreta will have the
              opportunity to become familiar with research techniques and equipment at the
              NIMCR while contributing to the overall research effort. Therefore, this
              proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
              scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***
