Title       : Development and Contruction of an In-situ Processing Extension for Existing
               Molecular Beam Epitaxy System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9503708

Award Number: 9503708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Zaslavsky Alexander_Zaslavsky@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arto V. Nurmikko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J Roderic Beresford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503708  Zaslavsky    The addition of this processing extension equipment will 
              enable new research in nansostructure fabrication by  regrowth and in the
              transport, optical properties, and  device physics of novel nanostructures. 
              This processing  extension will permit regrowth of modulation-doping, 
              contacting and isolating layers on patterned  heterostructures prepared with
              in-situ etched and clearned  regrowth surfaces.  The processing extension will
              have the  following capabilities:  low-damage electron-cyclotron  resonance
              (ECR) plasma reactive ion etching of III-V  semiconductors; ECR hydrogen plasma
              cleaning of etched  substrates; surface cleanliness monitoring by Auger 
              spectroscopy; and invacuum transfer of patterned substrates  into the MBE
              growth chamber.  The properties of strained and  unstained uniform quantum
              wires fabricated by etching  through quantum wells and regrowth with
              modulation-doping  layers on the sidewalls will be studied.  A heavily-doped 
              gate electrode layer in the regrowth sequence will permit  carrier density
              modulation in these wires independent of the  confining potentials determined
              by the original  heterostructure.  Analogously, by pregrowing the appropriate 
              barrier potentials, gated 2-dimensional tunneling structures  and superlattices
              in III-V heterostructures will be  fabricated and their transport and optical
              properties will  be investigated down to the quantum dot limit.    %  This
              equipment will be used by a group of investigators  having complimentary
              expertise ranging from semiconductor  epitaxial growth to nanofabrication and
              fro transport and  optical characterization to device physics and engineering. 
              It represents fundamental materials research important for  understanding
              processing of semiconductor materials, and is  ultimately relevant for
              manufacturing.
