Title       : Use of Enhanced Fluidity Liquid Mixtures in Separation Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9503284

Award Number: 9503284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan V. Olesik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              involves the continued study of the  fundamentals of enhanced fluidity liquid
              chromatography. Enhanced-fluid mobile phases are developed by adding  large
              portions of compressible fluids such as carbon dioxide to typical liquid
              chromatography eluants at elevated  temperatures. The result is the generation
              of higher efficiency and faster separations similar to those exhibited in 
              supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC). Professor Susan Olesik and her
              students at Ohio State University will  characterize the macroscopic and
              microscopic properties of enhanced fluid mixtures at various temperatures and 
              pressures using viscosity, density, diffusion coefficient, solvent strength,
              and solute partial molar volume  measurements. These solvent combinations will
              also be applied in reverse-phase, normal-phase, and size exclusion 
              chromatographies. In addition, this technology will be used in the development
              of a novel chromatographic technique  coined `liquid adsorption critical
              chromatography` (LACC), which is applied to the determination of polymer 
              functional group distribution.  Liquid chromatography (LC) is one the most
              widely used analytical methods in industry and during its advent  supercritical
              fluid chromatography (SFC) was thought capable of incorporating the power and
              applications of LC  and gas chromatography into one technique. However this was
              not found to be so, with the major disadvantage  being the poor ability of
              supercritical fluids to dissolve polar analytes. Prof. Olesik has conceived of
              a new twist  on the use of supercritical fluids to yield mobile phases capable
              of dissolving a much wider range of analytes with  a significant enhancement in
              the efficiency and speed of separations over that exhibited by the traditional
              liquid  chromatographic techniques.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
