Title       : Flexible Automation for Robotic and Flow Injection Colorimetric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9503591

Award Number: 9503591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl D. Sienerth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Settle  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Virginia Military Inst
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    703/463-6311

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program, is a
              continuation of efforts in laboratory automation and  robotics. Professor Frank
              A. Settle and his students at the  Virginia Military Institute have designed a
              fully automated system  for the colorimetric analysis of ortho-phosphate. They
              will expand  this system to incorporate the analysis of transition metal 
              analytes using automated flow injection analysis (FIA). Selected  metal
              analytes will be treated with a chelating reagent to form a  highly colored
              water insoluble dithiozone derivative whose  absorbance is proportional to the
              metal analyte concentration.  Prof. Settle will use surfactant chemistry to
              solubilize the  reaction products and eliminate the need for solvent
              extraction. A  full laboratory information management  system (LIMS) will be 
              developed for this assay, which incorporate the use of a Zymark  BenchMate
              robot for sample handling and reagent preparation.  Professors Settle and
              Sienerth will supervise a 10 week summer  research experience for undergraduate
              students, in addition to  supervising selected research students during the
              academic year.  These students will be trained in quality control and method 
              validation procedures, computer interfacing and programming,  software
              development, and analytical instrumentation and chemical  methods.   An active
              laboratory information management system (LIMS) has been  developed for control
              of two independent automated procedures for  the colorimetric analysis of metal
              analytes. This system  incorporates facilities for control of a Zymark robot
              for reagent  and sample preparation, validation and calibration of the
              equipment  and methods using `Good Automated Laboratory Practice` guidelines, 
              and data storage, manipulation, and final report presentation.  The  research
              program described will provide a rich training ground for  undergraduate
              students and provide them with the laboratory and  computer skills demanded in
              `real world` industrial applications.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
