Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Mathematical Modeling of Neural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9503261

Award Number: 9503261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence F. Abbott abbott@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9263,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abbott       The investigator studies how the dynamic properties of large 
              populations of neurons allow them to represent, store, recall and  process
              information.  A basic theme of the project is the study of  population coding,
              the storage of information in large arrays of  neurons, each responding fairly
              nonselectively to different  aspects of a stimulus.  The transfer of
              information between  neuronal networks is studied using population decoding
              methods.  Questions to be addressed include: How is the information encoded  in
              a sensory network transferred to a motor network in a task like  visually
              guided reaching toward an object?  How do the invariant  representations needed
              to identify and locate an object  independent of translations, rotations, and
              scaling changes arise?  It is widely believed that synaptic modification is the
              basic  neuronal mechanism underlying memory and learning.  Population  decoding
              methods allow for an interpretation of the effects of  synaptic modification
              with direct behavioral relevance.  In  preliminary decoding studies it has been
              found that the temporal  properties of long-term potentiation naturally cause a
              population  of neurons to predict a coded quantity after training.  This 
              suggests a novel mechanism for learning and generating sequences  of motor
              actions that is explored.       Reaching for an object, turning toward a visual
              or auditory  cue, and a variety of other tasks require motor responses that are
               accurately guided by sensory information.  In addition, previous  experience
              can play an important role in shaping these responses.  Experiments have
              provided important information about how sensory  information is represented in
              the brain and how experience can  modify neural circuits.  Mathematical
              decoding techniques allow us  to relate motor responses, such as reaching, to
              the activity of  neurons in the motor cortex of the brain.  The goal of the
              project  is to construct a theoretical framework, based on these data, for 
              understanding sensory-guid ed motor tasks, including mechanisms for  learning
              and generating accurate responses and modifying them on  the basis of
              experience.  This work should provide new insights  into how we generate basic
              motor behaviors and may have  interesting applications to robotics.
