Title       : Thermodynamic and Kinetic Theory of Structural Transformations in Metal and
               Ceramics Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9503595

Award Number: 9503595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armen G. Khachaturyan khach@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503595  Khachaturyan    The objective of this project is to develop a set of 
              numerical methods which can be efficiently used in the  microstructure (and
              thus physical property) control of  multiphase advanced materials, with the
              potential use in  intelligent design and processing of materials with phase 
              transformations.  The theory and the corresponding  simulation models
              incorporating the transformation-induced  strain are expected to be advanced to
              a point where three-  dimensional numerical modeling is able to (i)
              realistically  characterize and predict the microstructure evolution during 
              the processing, (ii) test different models, and (iii) obtain  insight into the
              details of atomic mechanisms of structure  formation.  Emphasis will be placed
              on Ni-based superalloys,  zirconium oxide, and displacive transformations.  %%%
               This project supports the continuing work of one of the  leading materials
              theorists in America.  The Principal  Investigator has adapted his analytic
              theory into  computational codes which model the development of  microstructure
              during phase transformations.  Materials  properties are closely related to the
              structure on the  micrometer scale, so it is desirous to understand how to 
              produce such microstructures so that materials can be  designed with properties
              of interest.  In this project the  Principal Investigator will extend his work
              from two-  dimensional modeling to three dimensions.  He will apply his 
              simulations to a variety of materials of importance which  can, in some
              circumstances, be compared with experimental  microstructures.  ***
