Title       : Solar Wind - Magnetosphere - Ionosphere Coupling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1998   
File        : a9503423

Award Number: 9503423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Siscoe siscoe@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy U. Crooker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  The proposed research program is directed at determining the global 
              geometry of the open magnetosphere and its connection to the  ionosphere.  The
              program will build on much of the proposing team's  prior work as well as
              related work of others.  Four programmatic  elements are:  1.  analyses of IMP
              8 plasma and field data to  specify and document the open geometry of the tail;
              2. comparisons  of these results with global MHD simulations to test simulation
               applicability and to extend the description of the open geometry to  the full
              magnetosphere; 3. comparisons of both observational and  simulation results
              with appropriately constructed, multi-component  superposition models to
              elucidate the magnetic topology of the open  geometry at higher resolution than
              obtainable with the MHD model;  and 4. extend the LLBL-ionosphere coupling
              model of Siscoe, Lotko,  Sonnerup, and Maynard to incorporate the new geometry.
               A focusing  objective for the stated program, to determine the global open 
              geometry of the magnetosphere, is to ascertain explicitly the 3-  dimensional
              geometry of the topological separatrices of the  magnetic field, of which there
              might be several sets of distinct  topological types.  This will be done for
              various orientations of  the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), including
              northward, which  perhaps poses the greatest challenge.  Locating these
              topological  features relative to the geometry of the main structural elements 
              of the magnetosphere will bear directly on answers to the following  questions:
               Where are the sites of magnetic reconnection at the  magnetopause and in the
              tail?  How do they fit within the global  geometry?  What is the geometrical
              distribution of the open and  closed regions on the 3-D magnetospheric
              boundary:  The answer to  this last question bears directly on the question of
              the spatial  relationships between the dayside  cusp, the low-latitude boundary
               layer (LLBL), and the plasma mantle, and on the question of whether  the LLBL
              is open or closed.
