Title       : Postdoc: Parallel Multizone Adaptive Scheme for Multiphase Systems with Free and
               Moving Boundaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9503988

Award Number: 9503988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad vprasad@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuefan Deng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9503988  Prasad  The object of the proposed research is to develop a
              parallelized multizone adaptive scheme for accurate and efficient simulations
              of materials processes of industrial importance.  The final software will be
              able to simulate three-dimensional transient processes involving diffusion and
              convection of heat, mass, and species, and radiation heat transfer together
              with melting/solidification, flows induced by buoyancy and capillary forces,
              and effects of electrical and magnetic fields.  The use of a generalized
              governing equation will allow consideration of many different materials with
              various phases in a single computational domain.  The numerical scheme will
              employ (a) the multizone adaptive grid generation (MAGG) technique for the
              discretization of physical domains of arbitrary shape, and (b) the curvilinear
              finite-volume(CFV) approach for the discretization of the govening partial
              differential equations and development of the finite difference equations. An
              efficient parallel algorithm suitable for multiphase systems will be developed
              based on the massively-parallel distributed-memory MIMD techniques and will
              take advantage of the physics of the problem to develop a domain-decomposition
              strategy.  Load balance, communication, and migration of elements will be given
              special attention in the development.  The immediate implementation of this
              model will be made to the CZ and CCZ growth of silicon single crystals (a
              project sponsored by NSF and Ferrofluidics Corporation) and one-step in-situ
              synthesis and high pressure MLEK growth of indium phosphide crystals (an AFOSR
              project).  The proposed parallel computer model will be able to simulate many
              kinds of complex materials processes involving free and moving boundaries that
              are not possible by the present techniques.
