Title       : Development of a High Resolution Orientation Imaging Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9503548

Award Number: 9503548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent L. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503490  Flynn    The Low Energy Electron Microscope (LEEM) is a recently- 
              available materials characterization technique which allows  low energy
              electrons to probe the outer layers of a solid.  With LEEM it is possible first
              to image surface topography,  second to observe diffraction from the
              periodicities of the  near-surface structure, and third to image using 
              photoelectrons and thus probe the spatial variation of  electronic structure. 
              These instruments are very well  adapted to the examination of samples through
              the range from  high temperature to below room temperature.  In situ  dynamical
              studies offer special opportunities to view in  real time not only bulk but
              also surface phenomena.  As LEEM  instruments operate in the limit of ultrahigh
              vacuum where  surfaces remain uncontaminated for many hours, the dynamics  of
              surface structure and reactions thus become accessible.  A further major asset
              is the availability in the vicinity of  the sample of access ports that can
              house molecular beam  sources for eptiaxial growth conducted before or during 
              observations.  Commercial machines which offer these  powerful combinations of
              capabilities are just now becoming  available.  The time is therefore ripe for
              the dedicated  application of a LEEM instrument to materials research  problems
              of critical interest tot the materials research  community.    This machine
              will be used to study the real time imaging of  kinetic step flow processes
              that occur during growth,  oxidation or other reaction on the surfaces of
              precisely  tailored samples.  Our focus on the materials themselves  promises
              to document and systematize information of this  type for a variety of crystal
              types, in addition to the  discoveries of new processes that typically rewards
              this  type of exploratory research.  This (LEEM) will be placed in  the
              University of Illinois EpiCenter, a central facility  dedicated to the crystal
              growth and surface processes of  metals, ceramics, and semiconductors.
