Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Nodal Problems and Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9503483

Award Number: 9503483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ole H. Hald hald@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hald       The investigator undertakes studies il inverse problems and  fluid
              mechanics.  McLaughlin and the investigator have shown that  the potential in a
              Schroedinger equation on a rectangular domain  can be uniquely determined (up
              to an additive constant) by the  nodal lines, i.e. the set of points where the
              eigenfunctions  vanish.  The present proof assumes that the potential is
              constant  near the boundaries of the rectangle.  This assumption excludes a 
              large class of potentials and one goal is to remove this  restrictive
              assumption.  In the field of Fluid Mechanics Buttke has  recently proposed a
              very interesting method for solving Euler's  equations for two and three
              dimensional flows.  Using a new  interpretation of the computed velocity
              kernels, the investigator  aims to establish the convergence of the method.    
                The properties of elastic materials (such as beams or plates)  can be
              described by elastic parameters.  In many problems the  elastic parameters are
              not available for direct observation.  For  example, one cannot see on the
              surface of the earth that the  density changes at the depth of two miles due to
              the presence of  oil.  Similarly, a crack deep inside a piece of metal may not
              be  observable on the outside.  In such cases one may probe the  material by
              sending waves through it, and study either the  reflections of the waves or the
              vibrations of the material.  One  important goal of the theory of inverse
              problems is to show that  the property of the elastic material can be inferred
              from the data  thus observed, and to develop efficient algorithms for
              estimating  the material properties.  In engineering, meteorology, and medicine
               it is important to be able to compute the movement of a fluid  accurately. 
              Examples are: (1) water running through pipes, (2) the  movement of air in
              weather prediction, and (3) the flow of blood  through an artificial heart.  At
              present calculations of  two-dimensional flows are done routinely, but it is
              still a  challenge to calculate the mo vement of water in three dimensions, 
              especially when the water is turbulent.  It is a question of having 
              sufficiently powerful computers, and a very efficient way of  describing the
              flows.  The work of the investigator is focused on  numerical methods that are
              specially suited for studying the  movements of very complicated flows.
