Title       : Development of a Cryogenic Scanning Tunneling Microscope for the Study of
               Atomically-Fabricated Structures in a Variable Magnetic Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9503837

Award Number: 9503837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Crommie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9503837  Crommie    The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) has  recently grown
              from being a tool of surface  characterization to a tool of surface 
              modification.  The same abilities that allow one  to image single atoms can now
              be used to  position them.  Little work has been done,  however, involving the
              controllable manipulation  of single atoms.  The fabrication and 
              characterization of atomic scale structures thus  remain a largely untouched
              scientific frontier.    We intend to develop the next generation atomic 
              manipulation device.  This will be accomplished  through the construction of an
              ultra-high vacuum  (UHV) cryogenic STM.  The STM system will be  integrated
              with a UHV surface preparatory  facility capable of growing epitaxial metal 
              films.  Magnetic fields up to 3 Tesla will be  applied to the low temperature
              sample region  using a superconducting magnet.  The STM will be  used to build
              nanometer scale structures one  atom at a time.  These structures will then be 
              studied under ambient conditions, in the  presence of a magnetic field, and
              under the  influence of a background transport current.  The main objective of
              this work is to gain a  better understandine of the properties of  artificial
              atomic scale structures and the  surfaces that support them.    The proposed
              instrument will allow a new type of  interactive research in condensed matter 
              physics.  Rather than remain passive observers,  researchers will be able to
              take an active role  in the microscopic events unfolding before them.  The STM
              will become a new pair of hands with  which to shape the atomic landscape.  For
               instance, if it is desired to know the effect of  a defect at a particular
              site on the surface,  then the researcher will put a defect at that  site.  If
              it is desired to know the property of  a particular array of atoms, then the
              researcher  will simply assemble such an array.  If the  effect of proximity
              between two chemical species  is desired, then the researcher will push the 
              individual reactants clos er together and observe  the results.  The ability to
              manipulate matter  at so fundamental a level is a significant new  capability
              whose effects are only beginning to  be felt.  All fields of science concerned
              with  phenomena at the atomic scale should eventually  be impacted by these
              developments.
