Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Group Theory and 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9503034

Award Number: 9503034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Stallings stall@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9503034  Stallings       The project is to study hyperbolic groups, automatic
              groups,  non-positively curved triangles of groups, and related matters 
              involving geometric questions about group-theory.  The problem of 
              distinguishing non-hyperbolic automatic groups has several  interesting
              aspects.  There is a notion of angle between pairs of  subgroups  A,B  of a
              group G,  which involves the smallest length  of an expression  aba'b'a"b"...
              which is reduced and gives the  identity element of G.  This leads to
              interesting algorithmic  questions; in the case of free groups this relates to
              the Loop  Theorem.  Another algorithmic question about "inner rank" is  related
              to questions about surfaces in 3-manifolds.       Groups arise in all branches
              of mathematics, as sets of  symmetries, i.e. transformations which preserve
              structure.  The  investigator hopes to understand various properties of groups,
              the  classification of types of groups, and the use of group theory to  connect
              mathematical areas.  In geometry and topology, groups  naturally arise as
              subgroups of matrix groups and the fundamental  groups of spaces.  The
              fundamental group as defined by Poincare is  the basic ingredient in the
              classification of three-dimensional  manifolds, and major problems are
              group-theoretic.  This is  especially true in dimension three.  There is also
              an intrinsic  large-scale geometry inherent in an abstract group, which has led
               to the recent interest in what are known as hyperbolic groups.   This leads in
              turn to algorithmic problems and to formal language  theory and will some day
              be of interest and use to computer  scientists.  The project has identified
              some problem areas as  described above, "angle," "inner rank," and so on, which
              are of  interest in the interaction of algebra and geometry; some progress  in
              these areas has been made; they are becoming active areas of  research, in
              particular, by the investigator and his Ph.D.  students.  ***
