Title       : Systematics of the Early Oligocene Bridge Creek Flora, Oregon, and Implications
               for the Derivation and Expansion ofBroadleaved Deciduous Forests in the
               Northern Hemisphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9007495

Award Number: 9007495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Manchester steven@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The John Day Formation of Oregon contains ancient lake                    
              sediments (30 to 35 million years old) in which plant remains are              
              well preserved.  Leaves, fruits, seeds, pollen, and even flowers               
              have been recovered by paleobotanists, and these have been                     
              interpreted as one of the earliest cool temperate forests in the               
              mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere.  This marks a shift                  
              toward cooler climates, and for this reason Dr. Steven Manchester              
              proposes careful taxonomic revision of the plant remains                       
              collectively known as the Bridge Creek Flora.  Detailed study of               
              their anatomy will form the basis of accurate identifications.                 
              This taxonomic revision will be followed by comparisons with                   
              European floras of similar age, and analysis of evolutionary                   
              relationships with earlier species from different altitudinal                  
              habitats.                                                                      
                   The proposed research will find an eager audience among                   
              paleocologists, paleoclimatologists, stratigraphers,                           
              phytogeographers, and evolutionary biologists in general.  The                 
              ways in which organisms respond to global climate change is                    
              particularly timely, and the fossil plants that are targeted for               
              study represent a "natural experiment" that occurred tens of                   
              millions of years ago.  A detailed and accurate recognition of                 
              different plant species is essential for a correct interpretation              
              of this experiment's results.
