Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Cyclin Destruction in Meiotic and Early Mitotic
               Cell Cycles of Xenopus Laevis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1990 
File        : a9007777

Award Number: 9007777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4780               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jolinda A. Traugh jolinda.traugh@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Mandley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Cyclin Destruction in Meiotic and                 
              Early Mitotic Cell Cycles of Xenopus Laevis                                    
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jolinda A. Traugh,                  
              will support a 12-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr.                     
              Elizabeth Mandley to the United Kingdom to work with Dr.                       
              Michael Whitaker of the Department of Physiology of the                        
              University of the City of London, on "Cyclin Destruction in                    
              Meiotic and Early Mitotic Cell Cycles of Sea Urchins                           
              (Xenopus)."  The investigators propose to investigate the                      
              mechanism of cyclin destruction during the M-phase of the                      
              rapid cell cycles of early sea urchin development.  Cyclin is                  
              only unstable during M-phase, and preliminary evidence                         
              implicates a regulatory cascade of protein phosphorylation and                 
              desphosphorylation in the process.  Some evidence suggests                     
              calcium may be involved in the destruction process.  Cyclin                    
              destruction can be triggered in a cell-free system prepared                    
              from Xenopus eggs by addition of active cyclin/p34-cdc2                        
              complex.  Destruction requires ATP and the participation of                    
              both soluble and particulate material.  This suggests that                     
              the high molecular weight multifunctional protease and hence                   
              ubiquitin may be involved.  The investigators will investigate                 
              whether cylcin degradation involves ubiquitin by searching                     
              for ubiquitinated intermediates of cyclin, and by fractiona-                   
              tion.  They will also investigate the role that calcium plays                  
              in the destruction process.  More generally, they will                         
              attempt to purify and identify as far as possible the                          
              components of the destruction system.                                          
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
