Title       : Formal Protection Modeling of Computer Security in Parallel and Distributed
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9007816

Award Number: 9007816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian F. Akyildiz ian@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              This project involves continued research in security of distributed            
              systems and development of a formal protection model called the                
              Distributed Model (D-Model).  The D-Model defines concurrency                  
              conditions which guarantee that a  concurrent system cannot reach a            
              state in which privileges are configured in a non-secure manner.               
              This work will extend the D-Model to include the security correctness          
              criteria of trusted subjects.  So far the D-Model conditions have been         
              used to construct a distributed version of the Bell-LaPadula security          
              model.  There are more applications of the D-Model within this                 
              project, such as the Clark-Wilson Model,  Minsky's transfer of                 
              privilege model, and the Military Message System Model (MMS) of                
              Landwehr.                                                                      
                   The second phase of the formal modeling part of this project will         
              develop a so-called General Purpose Distributed Security Model                 
              (GPDSM).  The result of this model will be a set of security models            
              that can be used to depict all computer systems within the state-of-           
              the-art.  The GPDSM must be formalized in the first step.  After the           
              formalization, any model (e.g. the D-Model, MMS and Non-interference           
              models) can be implemented in GPDSM.  Since synchronization is an              
              important issue for constraining concurrency in distributed and                
              parallel systems, the D-Model will be ported to a non-interference             
              model framework (which is the GPDSM) in order to find a solution for           
              non-interference synchronization problem.  The D-Model has currently           
              no associated covert channel analysis tool.  The proposed GPDSM will           
              also serve as both a model and a covert channel analysis tool.
