Title       : ROW: Timing of Nutrient Mineralization from Leaf Litter: Internal Cycling by
               Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9007897

Award Number: 9007897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17908              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Jean Lodge djlodge@coqui.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research project is to test whether leaf-                
              decomposing fungi short-circuit phosphorus mineralization in a                 
              phosphorus-depauperate tropical rainforest.  A microcosm                       
              experiment is planned to determine if fungi can export 32P from                
              partially decomposed leaves into fresh litter.  Fungal transport               
              from old litter could explain previously observed increased in P               
              above 100% of the initial amount during early stages of leaf                   
              decomposition.  If mineralization of phosphorus from litter is                 
              bypassed because of internal recycling by decomposer fungi the                 
              availability of P to plant roots may be restricted.  In some                   
              phosphorus and nitrogen depauperate ecosystems, nutrients                      
              sequestered in fungal biomass may become available to higher                   
              plants when fungal populations crash.  Future objectives will                  
              include the determination of timing of nutrient mineralization                 
              from fungal biomass as it may be controlled by wetting and drying              
              cycles and fungivorous microarthropods.                                        
                                                                                             
              Results of this research should have implications for the                      
              management of tropical forest ecosystems as well as for the                    
              fundamental ecological understanding of those systems.  The                    
              principal investigator is well motivated and supported by                      
              knowledgeable colleagues.  Institutional facilities and                        
              accommodation are adequate to the research.
