Title       : Evidence Marshalling and Argument Structuring by Investigators and Advocates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1991       
File        : a9007693

Award Number: 9007693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94977              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Schum dschum@osfl.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Study of a wide array of the evidential and inferential issues                 
              encountered in our system of law occupies researchers from many                
              different disciplines.  Much attention has focused on the behavior             
              of jurors, attorneys, and judges.  Of equal importance, though not             
              so frequently studied, are the various inferential and decisional              
              tasks required of others such as investigators and advocates.  The             
              manner in which investigators and advocates play their roles has               
              a direct bearing upon subsequent inferences and choices made by                
              other actors in the legal system.                                              
                                                                                             
              This research concerns the inferential and decisional roles played             
              by investigators and advocates during fact investigation and other             
              activities before a matter comes to trial or is settled by other               
              means.  The objectives of the project are to study ways of                     
              marshalling or organizing evidence that will enhance reasoning,                
              structuring complex arguments, and assisting in decisionmaking at              
              various points during the preparation of criminal or civil cases.              
              The study involves computer-assisted simulations of complex cases              
              that will result in the structuring of "inferential networks" of               
              evidence marshalling methods.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research is not only of theoretical and practical significance            
              in a legal context, but also bears on inferential and decisional               
              behavior in many other important contexts such as medicine,                    
              science, business, and intelligence analysis.  The results promise             
              to introduce new levels of rigor, clarity, and fairness into the               
              technology of proof and persuasion.  The linked networks of                    
              prototype computer-based evidence marshalling systems will be                  
              useful in illustrating theoretical issues in the practice and                  
              teaching of fact investigation and may provide the sound                       
              inferential basis now lacking in many current efforts to develop               
              computer-based litigation and other inference-related systems.
