Title       : Epigeous and Hypogeous Pezizales of Western North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9007186

Award Number: 9007186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Weber webern@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Trappe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Denison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   True and false morels and allied cup-fungi, which generally               
              form spore-producing structures aboveground, and truffles, which               
              sporulate belowground, are Ascomycete fungi placed in the class                
              Pezizales.  They are only distantly related evolutionarily to                  
              true mushrooms of the order Agaricales, class Basidiomycetes.                  
              True morels and truffles are among the most avidly sought, and                 
              expensive, edible wild "mushrooms."  Dr. Nancy Weber and her                   
              colleagues at Oregon State University are studying the patterns                
              of morphological variation and geographical distribution in this               
              group of fungi throughout the western United States, an area of                
              high diversity in the group.  Studies of freshly collected                     
              specimens will complement studies of museum-preserved samples, in              
              order to determine species circumscriptions and describe reliable              
              morphological features for identification.  At present there is                
              no comprehensive taxonomic treatment of this important group of                
              fungi for North America.                                                       
                   In addition to their importance as gourmet foods, members of              
              the order Pezizales play key roles in forest ecosystems.  Some                 
              are important as food for squirrels, deer, and other animals.                  
              Some are mycorrhizal symbionts of forest trees.  In the absence                
              of appropriate mycorrhizal fungi, trees take up soil nutrients                 
              inefficiently and rarely survive for more than a year or so.                   
              Some Pezizales are saprobes, recycling forest debris.  And some                
              are among the first fungi to sporulate following a fire or other               
              disturbance.  Understanding of the ecological dynamics of western              
              forests depends in part on accurate identification of these                    
              mycorrhizal partners of forest trees, to be facilitated by this                
              basic taxonomic study.
