Title       : On the Political Economy of Income Taxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1990    
File        : a9007800

Award Number: 9007800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus Berliant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project examines two important aspects of the theory of                   
              income taxation that are likely to have empirical or policy                    
              implications: voting over income taxes and equity in optimal                   
              income taxes. First, the project develops a model of income                    
              taxation in which a finite samples of consumers is drawn from a                
              continuum population that differs in abilities. Work                           
              disincentives are present as are adverse selection and moral                   
              hazard problems. Income taxes can be non-linear. The project                   
              explores existence, uniqueness and characterizations of the                    
              majority rule equilibrium, as well as multi-stage voting games in              
              this framework. Comparative statics are also studied. Second,                  
              the project examines optimal income taxes when a publicly                      
              available equity index of post-tax income enters each of a                     
              continuum of consumers' utility function. The first order                      
              necessary conditions and the shape of the optimal schedules are                
              examined and compared with those resulting from the standard                   
              model of income taxation.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The theory of taxation is an important area of study in                        
              economics. There is a large normative literature on tax policy                 
              prescriptions. Most of this research abstracts from political                  
              considerations. Past work also is either restricted to                         
              considerations of only linear taxes, or does not consider                      
              problems due to information such as adverse selection and moral                
              hazard. The contribution of this project comes from developing a               
              theory with both political and economic content. The new theory                
              is not restricted to linear taxes, explicitly treats imperfect                 
              information and incorporates political theory into models of                   
              optimal income taxes. This is important because it permits the                 
              derivation of testable hypotheses and eventually the use of this               
              theory to explain the types of income taxes adopted by voters in               
              the real political world.
