Title       : Molecular Evolution of Talaromyces/Penicillium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9007141

Award Number: 9007141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Taylor jtaylor@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Classification schemes for living organisms have predictive               
              value when they reflect evolutionary relatedness based on genetic              
              or genomic features of the organisms' DNA.  Dr. John Taylor of                 
              the University of California at Berkeley is studying the                       
              evolutionary or phylogenetic relationships of select groups of                 
              fungi, using DNA analyses to measure mutational differences among              
              species and to compare these results against morphological data.               
              The work employs the new method of polymerase chain reaction DNA               
              amplification, which permits analysis of DNA from as little as a               
              single fungal spore.  The information obtained about fungal DNA                
              allows inference about genealogical relationships, and also                    
              provides the foundation for extremely rapid and accurate                       
              identification of fungal samples.                                              
                   Dr. Taylor is focusing this work on the fungal genus                      
              Penicillium, important both biologically and economically.  Some               
              species manufacture food and some make the beneficial mycotoxin,               
              penicillin.  Penicillium species also rot food and feed.                       
              Identification of these fungi and predictions about their                      
              metabolic activities are important to the food, pharmaceutical,                
              agricultural, and medical industries.  Penicillium and its                     
              associated sexual forms classified in the genus Talaromyces                    
              present fundamental problems in classification and phylogeny                   
              because persistent morphs in nature may reproduce only asexually.              
              Morphological features are usually inadequate for associating                  
              closely related sexual and asexual forms into a coherent and                   
              natural scheme of lineages.  The DNA methods are powerful tools                
              for resolving this difficulty, because both forms contain similar              
              genomes amenable to amplification and phylogenetic analysis.
