Title       : Structured Authoring in a Unified Net-based Hypertext Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9007746

Award Number: 9007746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lou L. Rosenberg                        
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Furuta   (Principal Investigator current)
              P. David Stotts, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The authors have previously developed a model of hypertext,                    
              called Trellis, based on the formalism of Petri nets.  As in                   
              other hypertext models, Trellis represents information fragments and           
              the relationships that tie the fragments together.  An important               
              premise underlying Trellis is the claim that the actions of browsing           
              a hypertext should be formally represented.  A formal description              
              of browsing not only permits analysis and verification of the                  
              dynamic properties of a document, but also standardizes the                    
              semantics of browsing by providing a succinct, unambiguous, and                
              implementation-independent definition of behavior.  Within its                 
              notational framework, Trellis provides the ability to synchronize              
              simultaneous traversals of separate paths through the hypertext and            
              the ability to incorporate access considerations into the hypertext,           
              specifyingnodes that can be proven to be visible only to certain               
              classes of browsers.  Trellis is a timed model, permitting                     
              specification of event delays and durations as well as                         
              system-generated invocations.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The investigators conduct two main projects under this research.               
              Both are based on the Trellis hypertext work already accomplished.             
              The first is the development of abstract representation methods that           
              permit the mapping of a single unified hypertext specification into            
              documents suitable for each of many different hypertext systems.               
              This, in turn, can reesult in interchange methods for different                
              hypertext systems based on translation into and out of the unified             
              model.  The second is an authoring language "laboratory" to allow              
              the rapid specification and evaluation of hypertext authoring                  
              languages.  The projects will produce results of both theoretical              
              and practical interest.
