Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigation of Shear-Band FormationUsing High
               Activation Energy Asymptotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1990 
File        : a9007642

Award Number: 9007642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Izenman                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Lasseigne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will demonstrate the plausibility              
              of an approach to investigating the formation of shear bands in                
              stressed materials that involves the construction of a model of                
              pure shear using the Arrhenius Law for plasticity and the method               
              of high energy asymptotics.  Previous mathematical analysis of                 
              shear-band formation has included a complete numerical                         
              investigation of the growth of perturbations into shear bands and              
              a stability analysis of the homogeneous-shear solution.  The                   
              results of this work have shown reasonably good agreement with                 
              experimental data, but an understanding of this underlying                     
              mechanism of band formation has been missing.  The principal                   
              investigator will seek to provide such an understanding by means               
              of the proposed modelling approach.                                            
                   Many physical processes are at work during the formation of               
              shear bands in stressed materials.  Up to now applied                          
              mathematicians and engineers have relied largely on two                        
              approaches to understanding these processes.  The first approach               
              involves performing experiments on actual stressed materials,                  
              while the second approach involves solving numerically the                     
              systems of partial differential equations that govern the                      
              material.  Each approach has advantages and disadvantages, but                 
              neither one is able to give a satisfactory explanation of the                  
              basic physical mechanisms that govern band formation.  The                     
              principal investigator will employ a different approach based                  
              upon modelling the materials with a simpler set of equations and               
              extracting more useful information with the aid of certain                     
              asymptotic methods.
