Title       : Dissertation Research: Development of Chiefdom Society: Settlement Patterns and
               Social Organization of Kangjia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1990     
File        : a9007592

Award Number: 9007592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang-chih Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the guidance of Dr. Kwang-Chi Chang, Ms. Li Liu will                     
              combine archaeological research in China with laboratory analysis              
              at Harvard University.  The results will form the basis for Ms.                
              Liu's doctoral dissertation.  Ms. Liu will collaborate with                    
              Chinese archaeologists and participate in the ongoing excavation               
              of the site of Kangjia which is located in North China and dates               
              to the third millennium B.C.  This large site - the remains of a               
              village - covers an area of ca. 190,000 square meters.  Ms. Liu                
              will first conduct a surface survey and map the distribution of                
              features and other material.  She will follow this with                        
              excavation in selected areas.  Special attention will be focussed              
              on ceramics and she will conduct stylistic and mineralogical                   
              analyses.  Stone tools will be examined to determine function and              
              faunal remains will be studied.  Carbon isotope analysis will be               
              conducted on skeletal remains to provide information on                        
              prehistoric diet.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The Neolithic period in China provided the base from which                     
              Chinese civilization emerged.  As such, it is interesting both in              
              its own right and in a comparative context.  Working in other                  
              parts of the world, archaeologists have attempted to define the                
              stages and processes which led to increasing cultural complexity.              
              Because so little of the archaeological work conducted in China                
              is accessible to non-Chinese, it has not been possible to fit                  
              this important part of the world into the broader pattern.  Ms.                
              Liu's research will help to remedy this defect.                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              provide Western archaeologists with a body of data of great                    
              general interest.  Secondly, it will help to build ties with                   
              Chinese archaeologists and introduce them to a variety of                      
              valuable methods and techniques used in the West.  Finally, this               
              grant will aid in the training of an extremely promising                       
              scientist.
