Title       : US-UK Cooperative Research: Collision Induced and TransportProperties in Atomic
               and Molecular Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9007201

Award Number: 9007201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn T. Evans EVANSGL@CCMAIL.ORST.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1913,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in physical                     
              chemistry between Dr. Glenn Evans, Oregon State University                     
              and two British scientists:  Dr. Paul Madden, Oxford University                
              and Dr. Michael Allen, University of Bristol.                                  
                                                                                             
              Dr. Evans will carry out research in two closely related                       
              areas involving the theory of structural and dynamic properties                
              of molecular liquids.  Molecules in a liquid phase undergo                     
              extremely frequent encounters and collision induced phenomena                  
              arise directly as a consequence of these encounters.  In the                   
              first part of this collaborative study, Dr. Evans and Dr.                      
              Madden will address what type of molecular information is                      
              learned from the study of collision induced depolarized light                  
              scattering, vibrational energy transfer and infrared spectra.                  
              The second part of the collaborative study with Dr. Allen                      
              will deal with the way in which we envision the collisions to                  
              take place in liquids comprised of nonspherical molecules.                     
              The investigators will examine the question of whether the                     
              collisions are correlated or uncorrelated.  That is, does a                    
              specific pair of molecules undergo frequent recollisions or                    
              does this pair once having collided never recollide?  The                      
              answer to and the consequences of this question, which is                      
              also reflected in collision induced scattering, will be                        
              determined by the analysis of liquid properties, such as the                   
              viscosity, thermal conductivity, and rates of molecular                        
              rotation and translation.  Analytical theory and computer                      
              simulation, together with experimental data, will be employed                  
              to interpret the findings.  The project will benefit from the                  
              complementary expertise of the three investigators.  Dr.                       
              Evans is one of a few world class theoreticians in the                         
              statistical mechanical treatment of fluids.  Dr. Madden is an                  
              international leader in the interpretation of collision                        
              induced phenomena.  Dr. Allen is an acknowledged expert in the                 
              simulation of properties of fluids of nonspherical bodies.
