Title       : Mammalian Community Organization and Paleoenvironmental Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9007570

Award Number: 9007570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Badgley cbadgley@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will attempt to demonstrate that                    
              information from modern mammalian communities and those                        
              preserved in the recent fossil record is pertinent to                          
              understanding mammalian community organization past and present.               
              A model of community organization in relation to one of its                    
              important causes -- climatic conditions -- based on both modern                
              and late Quaternary communities should be more powerful than a                 
              model based on modern communities and climates alone.  The                     
              inclusion of late Quaternary mammalian faunas and climates                     
              broadens the information base and also adds communities and                    
              environments more similar to those of the Tertiary than any                    
              extant ones are.                                                               
                   Previous studies of size distributions in mammalian                       
              communities as well as a pilot study presented here suggest that               
              regularities are present in community structure under similar                  
              environmental conditions despite differences in location and                   
              taxonomic composition, but these regularities remain to be                     
              quantified.  Quantification of the relationship between                        
              environmental parameters and the distribution of species' sizes                
              and feeding habits will serve to clarify and measure the strength              
              of this relationship.  If this relationship is strong, then it                 
              can serve as the basis for a quantitative method for estimating                
              paleoenvironmental conditions in older mammalian communities.                  
              In addition, this study will provide hypotheses of the adaptive                
              significance of size-change during the Cenozoic record of                      
              changing mammalian faunas and environments..  These specific goal              
              can also be generalized to allow analyses of environmental                     
              changes through time .
