Title       : Do Cytoskeleton-bound Polysomes Exist in Plants?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9007729

Award Number: 9007729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Davies   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The broad goals of Dr. Davies' research program are to                         
              understand the plant response to wounding all the way from the                 
              initial chemical (or electrophysiological) signal produced by the              
              wound, through intracellular regulatory mechanisms, to                         
              alterations in the expression of specific genes responsible for                
              the plant's adaptive response.  He has observed that within a few              
              minutes after a wound, a number of specific messenger RNAs can be              
              detected, and there is an increase in polysome formation.                      
              Unexpectedly, however, even though new messages can be detected                
              within a few minutes of the wound, overall protein synthesis                   
              drops by 75%.  Dr. Davies has formulated several alternative                   
              hypotheses as to mechanisms that might account for this.  One of               
              the hypotheses is that there is a regulated translocation of                   
              polysomes from one subcellular site at which they are active, to               
              another site where they are inactive.  Consistent with this                    
              possibility is his observation of a shift in the way polysomes                 
              from wounded and unwounded plants sediment.  After wounding, a                 
              large fraction of polysomes pellet with larger cellular                        
              structures.  The short-term goals of this project are to identify              
              and localize the proteins that are encoded by the wound-                       
              responsive genes and the polysomes that appear after wounding.                 
              In particular he will attempt to                                               
              determine whether the shift in sedimentation properties of the                 
              polysomes is caused by association with the cytoskeleton.                      
                                                                                             
              The question of whether polysome association with the                          
              cytoskelton is a biologically significant phenomenon has been                  
              controversial for a long time.  The results of this project will               
              make a two-fold contribution.  First, they may resolve the long-               
              standing controversy over whether association of polysomes with                
              the cytoskeleton in plant cells occurs under physiological                     
              conditions (but this is high risk).   Second, the results should               
              establish the location of polysomes involved in translation of                 
              wound inducible gene products and so enhance knowledge of the                  
              translation stage of the wound response.
