Title       : Waste Minimization, Treatment, and Disposal Program for McMurdo Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9007371

Award Number: 9007371
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2235310            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Canete   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Argonne National Lab
	      9700 South Cass Avenue
	      Argonne, IL  60439    630/252-6797

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed work effort is to provide the unique               
              capabilities of Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) to assist the                
              National Science Foundation in the implementation of a                         
              comprehensive  and well integrated program for reducing and                    
              managing wastes generated by U. S. Antarctic Program activities                
              centered at McMurdo Station.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The project is to be structured into phases and conducted over a               
              period of five years.  The initial phase is designed to provide                
              for data collection, experimental research, and assessment of                  
              pollution prevention and waste minimization opportunities and                  
              waste disposal requirement.  The results of the first phase of                 
              the project will provide for identification of waste minimization              
              opportunities and quantify and qualify the types of waste                      
              requiring retrograding back to the Continental U. S. or to be                  
              incinerated.  Emphasis will be placed on approaches for                        
              elimination and minimization of the quantity and toxicity of                   
              wastes.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Based on the results of the initial phase, wastes that cannot be               
              eliminated will be identified for further handling and treatment,              
              probably via incineration.  As such, the likely second phase of                
              the project entails design of the pollution prevention and                     
              incineration facilities for sitting in the Antarctic.  A                       
              significant portion of this effort is expected to be dedicated                 
              towards required research in materials and equipment designs                   
              capable of handling severe operational conditions and problems                 
              concerning various waste handling requirements, emissions                      
              control, and fuel conservation.  This portion of the program will              
              also include provisions to design a disposal system for ash                    
              residue generated by the incinerator, if deemed appropriate.                   
                                                                                             
              The third phase, procurement, entails selection of an engineering              
              and manufacturing firm to construct the pollution prevention,                  
              incineration and/or disposal systems that can be shipped as                    
              modules via containerized cargo to McMurdo.  The system must be                
              designed to take full advantage of the capabilities of on-site                 
              personnel at McMurdo, thus minimizing the influx of personnel to               
              the station.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The fourth phase concerns system start-up.  It includes shipment               
              of the systems to McMurdo, final assembly, start-up.  and testing              
              of the system.  The system is to be a "turn-key" operation and                 
              include any training required for operation of the system.
