Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Foraging and Sex Allocation Behavior of an
               Autoparasitoid in a Spatially-Structured Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1990 
File        : a9007993

Award Number: 9007993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23757              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pimentel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha S. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Foraging and Sex Allocation                       
              Behavior of An Autoparasitoid in A Spatially-Structured                        
              Environment.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple.                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. David Pimentel                      
              will support a six-and-one-half month-post-doctoral research                   
              visit to the United Kingdom by Dr. Martha S. Hunter to work                    
              with Dr. H.C.J. Godfray at the Imperial College at Silwood                     
              Park, on "Foraging and Sex Allocation Behavior of An                           
              Autoparasitoid in A Spatially-Structured Host Environment."                    
              Parasitic wasps called "autoparasitoids" offer a unique                        
              opportunity to test Fisher's (1930) theory on the evolution                    
              of the sex ratio.  Fisher's principle that organisms should                    
              invest equally in each sex generally leads to a 1:1 sex                        
              ratio.  In autoparasitoids, however, males and females are                     
              laid in different hosts; thus the "cost" of each sex and the                   
              predicted sex ratio varies with the changing host environment.                 
              At high total host densities, wasps should be egg-limited,                     
              and prefer to oviposit in the less abundant host type, thus                    
              producing a sex ratio which is close to 1:1.  At low host                      
              densities, wasps should be host-limited and simply oviposit                    
              in hosts as they encounter them, thus producing a sex ratio                    
              which reflects the relative abundance of the two host types.                   
              The investigator proposes to test this extension of Fisher's                   
              theory with the autoparasitoid Encarsia tricolor in a                          
              spatially structured host environment.  In particular, she                     
              will evaluate the effects of the relative availability of the                  
              two host types, total host density, and spatial structure of                   
              the host population on sex ratio.  Since sex allocation is                     
              central in determining the population dynamics of autoparasi-                  
              toids, this research will help bridge the gap between sex                      
              ratio theory and population dynamics, and will contribute to                   
              evaluating autoparasitoid species as biological control agents.                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
