Title       : FAUVE: Specification and Implementation of Delayed Consistency for Replicated
               Data in Federated Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9007753

Award Number: 9007753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Ullman ullman@db.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Practical distributed database systems operate without rigid                   
              centralized control.  Such systems are considered to be federated              
              distributed systems, and attractive for involving many sites,                  
              dispersed authority, and differences in requirements of level of               
              data abstraction and of all data being-up-to-date.  The                        
              interaction via communication networks, the partial limited                    
              availability of network nodes, delays in local data acquisition,               
              and the actual delay and cost of computations to derive data for               
              remote sites all conspire to defeat simple approaches to network-              
              wide data consistency. The problems of lack of synchrony among                 
              the nodes have been recognized piecemeal and many methods and                  
              heuristics to manage data in this environment have been proposed.              
              We have a simple model to permit designers and users to specify                
              the extent to which consistency can be temporarily relaxed.  The               
              FAUVE research  classifies existing algorithms and heuristics,                 
              identifies conflicts in assumptions made, and recognizes                       
              complementary approaches.  It provides a framework to focus on                 
              situations now not adequately dealt with. This framework provides              
              the users with specifications, and provides database operations                
              on federated databases with a measure of success or failure.                   
              Such a measure is essential for the scientific progress in this                
              subtopic of modern computer systems research.
