Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Paleobotanical Patterns in theEvolution of
               Angiosperm Secondary Xylem & Their PhylogeneticSignificance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1990  
File        : a9007619

Award Number: 9007619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Herendeen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Paleobotanical Patterns in the                    
              Evolution of Angiosperm Secondary Xylem and Their Phylogenetic                 
              Significance.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Patrick                    
              S. Herendeen to Stockholm, Sweden, to work with Professor                      
              Else Marie Friis at the Swedish Museum of Natural History on                   
              "Patterns in the Evolution of Angiosperm Secondary Xylem and                   
              Their Phylogenetic Significance," an investigation of well-                    
              preserved fusainized (charcoalified) fossil angiosperm wood                    
              from the Cretaceous (Barremian-Cenomanian) of North America and                
              Europe to assess patterns of structural evolution in the                       
              secondary xylem of early angiosperms.  Through the mid-                        
              Cretaceous, angiosperms underwent their initial major                          
              diversification, so data from this study will provide a                        
              historical perspective against which to compare hypotheses of                  
              wood evolution based on extant taxa.  The researchers will                     
              use abundant material collected from eastern USA and central                   
              Portugal as part of an international cooperative project                       
              already underway to study fossil flowers and other reproductive                
              structures of early angiosperms, much of which the Swedish                     
              Museum has sieved, cleaned, and made ready for study.                          
              Because preliminary results indicate that these collections                    
              readily provide detailed anatomical data, the proposed                         
              project can be completed within one year.  The principal                       
              investigator will examine with the SEM and quantify numerous                   
              anatomical features thought to be of evolutionary or ecological                
              importance.  A computerized multiple entry key will facilitate                 
              determining of systematic affinities for these fossils.                        
              Attachments of reproductive structures to branches or                          
              infructescence axes may also assist in identifying some wood                   
              types.  The principal investigator will assess the significance                
              of mosaic evolution among early angiosperms by comparing                       
              patterns of evolutionary change observed in angiosperm wood                    
              with those observed in fossil leaves, pollen and reproductive                  
              structures at the same localities.  He will distinguish                        
              patterns of evolutionary change from changes due to ecological                 
              factors by comparing data on angiosperm wood with that for                     
              co-occurring gymnosperm wood and other angiosperm remains.
