Title       : Chaotic Process Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9007854

Award Number: 9007854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelo Lucia   (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. McLaughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The first step in chemical process design is simulation of the                 
              systems, whether they be individual units (such as reactors,                   
              heat exchangers, distillation columns, etc.), groups of units,                 
              or sometimes the whole plant.  These simulations yield                         
              equations which are usually nonlinear, and numerical methods                   
              of varying complexity have been devised to solve them.  Such                   
              methods usually begin with some initial educated guess of the                  
              unknown parameters and then some iterative method using the                    
              equations of the physical system is used to improve these                      
              values, such as direct substitution, accelerated direct                        
              substitution, various Newton-like methods, etc.  These are                     
              called fixed-point methods.  This research is concerned with                   
              building an understanding of:  (1) the fundamentals of the                     
              chaotic (such as period doubling, period tripling, strange                     
              attractors, etc.) behavior of fixed-point methods for steady-                  
              state process simulation, and (2) the relationship between the                 
              chaotic behavior of fixed-point methods for the steady-state                   
              simulation of processes and the chaotic behavior of processes                  
              as nonlinear, dynamical systems.                                               
                                                                                             
              Specific tasks under these two areas of work are as follows.                   
              To build a better understanding of chaos the PIs will: (a)                     
              conduct a numerical investigation and study of the practical                   
              implication of the geometric (or topological) structure (i.e.,                 
                                                                                             
              basins of attraction, basin boundaries, Julia sets,  the                       
              Mandelbrot set, etc.) in the complex domain, (b) study the                     
              qualitative effects of stabilization procedures (i.e., step                    
              bounding, trust regions, continuation) on geometric structure,                 
                                                                                             
              and auxiliary implications regarding automatic initialization                  
                                                                                             
              procedures, and (c) use established and/or develop new                         
              analysis tools (from differential topology and geometry) to                    
              build a fundamental theoretical understanding and                              
              classification of routes to chaos that are relevant to process                 
                                                                                             
              simulation.  To determine if there is an observable                            
              signature(s) of the chaotic evolution of unsteady-state                        
              processes that manifests itself in the steady-state equation                   
              solving task they will:  (a) conduct parallel steady- and                      
              unsteady-state numerical experiments in the complex domain to                  
                                                                                             
              determine if signatures of chaotic process dynamics are                        
              present in the associated steady-state equation-solving task,                  
                                                                                             
              and if so, determine the intrinsic properties of those                         
              signatures, (b) study the relationship between the geometric                   
              structure (i.e., basins of attraction, basin boundaries, Julia                 
                                                                                             
              sets, etc.) associated with the chaotic behavior of fixed-                     
              point methods for steady-state simulation and the geometric                    
              structure associated with the chaotic evolution of unsteady-                   
              state chemical processes, and (c) build a fundamental                          
              theoretical understanding of the signature process in an                       
              effort to characterize the chaotic time evolution of chemical                  
              processes directly from steady-state models.  All of their                     
              calculations will be in the complex domain.
