Title       : The Evolutionary Genetics of a Mate Recognition Cue: Male Song in Hawiian
               Crickets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1991     
File        : a9007117

Award Number: 9007117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Templeton temple_a@biology.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   The origin of species has been a central question in                      
              evolutionary biology ever since Darwin.  Despite our great                     
              advances in knowledge about natural selection and adaptation                   
              within a species, there still remains much controversy  over the               
              meaning of species, the mechanisms by which new species                        
              originate, and the genetic  basis of the traits responsible for                
              defining a new species.  The investigators propose to study these              
              issues with male calling song in the Hawaiian cricket genus                    
              Laupala.  There are currently 37 recognized species in this                    
              genus.  The species tend to look alike, but they differ greatly                
              in the time interval between sounds in the male calling song.  It              
              has been proposed that male song is used by females to identify                
              potential mates.  If true, male song would be important in                     
              defining the species boundaries of these crickets.  They will                  
              test this hypothesis by using molecular genetic survey techniques              
              to define populations of crickets that share similar genes.  They              
              will then see if genetically similar populations also share a                  
              common song.  With the same molecular data they will also                      
              reconstruct an evolutionary tree of all the species.  This                     
              evolutionary tree will allow them to estimate how the songs have               
              evolved between species.                                                       
                                                                                             
                   These molecular data  will also be used to test the                       
              hypothesis that the rate of DNA evolution is accelerated when a                
              new species arises on a different island than its ancestor, as                 
              has been found for Hawaiian fruit flies (Drosophila).  These data              
              will also be used to test the hypothesis that differences in song              
              among local populations within a species promote genetic                       
              differentiation.  Finally, because they can successfully cross                 
              species in the laboratory, they will study the genetic basis of                
              the song differences between species using traditional breeding                
              analysis as well as modern molecular techniques to map and                     
              identify genes.  This last study will not only allow them to                   
              address the evolutionary question of the types of genetic                      
              differences that arise among a species, but it will also a direct              
              comparison of the traditional versus molecular approaches to                   
              genetic analysis:  a comparison  that is relevant to many                      
              applications in the health sciences.
