Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Acquisition of a Pore Structure
               Characterization System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9007468

Award Number: 9007468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stratis V. Sotirchos svs2@che.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Funkenbusch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Gas-solid reactions with solid product are encountered in a                    
              number of chemical process industries with applications                        
              ranging from ceramic material manufacture to gas scrubbing for                 
              pollution control.  Because of the formation of the solid                      
              product, a number of  other  processes must be considered in                   
              the study of this type of reactions in addition to mass and                    
              heat transport and chemical reaction.  Most of these processes                 
              are related to the evolution of the morphology of the solid                    
              because of the formation of the solid product and the                          
              diffusion of the reactive species through the formed layer of                  
              solid product.  If the solid product occupies                                  
              stoichiometrically more volume than the solid reactant from                    
              which it results, phenomena of pore plugging and, as a result,                 
              incomplete conversion may arise.  Since pores of different                     
              size are expected to be plugged at different times - the                       
              smaller the pores, the earlier they will be plugged - the                      
              transient behavior of the reacting particles should in general                 
              depend not only on the average structural properties of the                    
              porous calcined solid (i.e, internal surface area and                          
              porosity) but on the form of the pore size distribution as                     
              well, even under reaction conditions characterized by                          
              negligible intraparticle concentration gradients.  In the                      
              presence of significant intraparticle diffusion limitations,                   
              the overall picture of a gas-solid reaction with pore closure                  
              behavior becomes considerably more complex.  If the reaction                   
              rate at the external surface of the particles is much higher                   
              than that in the interior, complete pore closure may take                      
              place at the external surface while there is still open space                  
              left in the interior.  Such an event can lead to ultimate                      
              conversions much lower than those predicted by the                             
              stoichiometry of the reaction for complete plugging of the                     
              internal space.  Based on these observations,  the PIs are                     
              experimentally studying gas-solid reactions with solid                         
              product.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This equipment grant is for an automated laboratory system                     
              capable of determining the physical microstructure of any                      
              solid material.  It is to be used to elucidate the effects of                  
              processing conditions on the microstructural properties of                     
              solid products and reactants and their effects on the behavior                 
              of  gas-solid reaction systems.  Specifically the equipment is                 
              an automated mercury porosimeter with appropriate hardware and                 
              software for data acquisition and analysis.  The system will                   
              be used to analyze solid samples for a number of experimental                  
              projects involving powders and porous media including:  (1)                    
              reactions of metal oxides with hydrogen sulfide and sulfur                     
              dioxide employed to control pollutant emissions from coal                      
              utilization systems, (2) densification of porous preforms in                   
              manufacturing ceramic matrix composites by chemical vapor                      
              infiltration, and (3) characterization of powders and powder                   
              compacts (fresh or partially sintered) involved in the                         
              fabrication of metal and ceramic composites using powdered                     
              material techniques.
