Title       : Equipment Grant: Superconducting Magnet System for Characterization of New
               Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1990       
File        : a9007487

Award Number: 9007487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS               
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58835              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Y. Chou   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marshall I. Nathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Magneto-transport measurement has been proven as one of the most               
              powerful methods in charactering advanced semiconductor materials and          
              devices.  The measurement can provide vast information about a                 
              material and a device, such as carrier mobility, carrier density,              
              effective mass of electrons and holes, elastic and inelastic                   
              scattering lengths, phonon emissions, gate capacitance, layer                  
              thicknesses, etc.  To establish this important characterization                
              capability in Department of Electrical Engineering at University of            
              Minnesota, we propose to purchase a superconducting magnet system              
              (SMS), which consists of a superconducting magnet of the maximum               
              fields of 9 Tesla and a cryostat of the lowest cooling temperature of          
              1.5K.  Such SMS is not only necessary, but also very crucial to our            
              current vigorous ongoing research program on artificially structured           
              new semiconductor materials and devices for future electronics.                
              Currently, our department has total 10 faculty members in the area of          
              semiconductor materials and devices; and at least five of them have            
              great need of using magneto-transport characterization for their               
              research.  With a magnet system requested in the proposal, we will             
              measure the effective mass of electrons and holes in artificially              
              structured crystals grown by MBE; we will study the transport in               
              various new quantum-effect-based semiconductor devices fabricated by           
              MBE and ultra-high resolution e-beam lithography; we will investigate          
              the effect of strain in the artificially structured materials on the           
              transport properties of electrons and holes, and on the performance of         
              semiconductor devices; and we will characterize the delta doped MBE            
              grown films.  Undoubtedly, not only the listed research but also many          
              other related research in Department of Electrical Engineering at              
              University of Minnesota can benefit greatly from getting this magnet           
              system.
