Title       : Paleosol Evidence of Fluctuations in Climate of the Central Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1990       
File        : a9007029

Award Number: 9007029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wakefield Dort   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Sampling will begin well down in what is believed to be the Peoria             
              Loess and continue all the way to the present land surface.  We                
              should thereby include the Late Pleistocene-Holocene transition,               
              the interval of post-glacial high temperature (the Altithermal or              
              Climatic Optimum), and the period of temperatures lower than                   
              present (the Neoglaciation, including the Little Ice Age).  We will            
              routinely collect samples from the lower, middle, and upper                    
              portions of each visually detectable geological or pedological                 
              unit, and take samples at intermediate levels of thick, apparently             
              massive units.  In this way data will be obtained for all                      
              variations of material, yet form a basis for statistical                       
              manipulation of analyses with depth if that becomes desirable.  All            
              samples will be subjected to routine soil characterization                     
              procedures such as determination of grain size, organic matter                 
              content, pH, carbonate content, bulk density, and cation exchange              
              capacity.  Carbon-nitrogen ratio, base saturation, and clay                    
              mineralogy may also prove useful for elucidation of variations in              
              climatic parameters.  The modern surface soil and all buried                   
              paleosols will be described according to standard soil survey                  
              criteria.  At least one monolith will be prepared and removed from             
              the face in order to preserve the stratigraphy for possible restudy            
              after the exposure has been eroded away.  Carbon from the organic-             
              rich horizons in the paleosols will yield a sequence of radiocarbon            
              dates to develop a firm chronologic framework for the proxy                    
              climatic data.  At least two radiocarbon dates will be obtained                
              for each of the paleosols.
