Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Gas Chromatograph andHeadspace Sampler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1990       
File        : a9007810

Award Number: 9007810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Morse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jamil A. Khan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Steve McAnally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A variety of projects will use the requested gas                               
              chromatograph.  First, a project to determine fundamental mass                 
              transport parameters under very high heat flux rates will use                  
              the equipment.  This project is designed to provide                            
              fundamental insight into the problem of puff formation in                      
              batch-fed rotary kiln incinerators.  The second project                        
              involves the development of a flow-through bioreactor for                      
              degrading short chain chlorinated hydrocarbon pollutants.  A                   
              third project involves soil gas surveys of contaminated                        
              regions to assess their suitability for in situ biodegration.                  
              Fundamental field work in this critical environmental area is                  
              extremely limited at present.  Two minor projects will also                    
              utilize the equipment.  The first will attempt the prediction                  
              of upsets in anaerobic digesters well in advance of                            
              conventional techniques.  The second project will involve the                  
              isolation of bacterial strains capable of degrading compounds                  
              currently regarded as non-biodegradable, specifically several                  
              short chain chlorinated hydrocarbons.                                          
                                                                                             
              This equipment will significantly improve the research group's                 
              ability to make a variety of basic measurements, and it is                     
              expected to make a strong positive impact on the university's                  
              contributions to environmental research.
