Title       : The Population Genetics of Energy Storage in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1994  
File        : a9007436

Award Number: 9007436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark c92@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is an experimental and theoretical study of the                      
              evolution of biochemical characters which are the end results of               
              metabolic pathways.  The experimental system focuses on the                    
              maintenance of lipid glycogen stores in the fat body of                        
              Drosophila melanogaster.  Dr. Clark has devised means of                       
              quantifying lipid and glycogen storage, along with the activities              
              of other enzymes.  Large-scale quantitative genetic studies of                 
              these traits has shown extensive genetic variation in both lipid               
              and glycogen storage, and that the variation is in part                        
              explainable by the variation in activities of associated enzymes.              
                   Two experiments will be performed.  The first experiment                  
              examines the rate at which spontaneous mutations affecting                     
              storage and enzyme kinetic characters accumulate.  Mutations that              
              accumulate on a single chromosome can be isolated and retained.                
              Over a 50 generation period (each generation takes about two                   
              weeks) series of characters, including lipid and glycogen                      
              storage, will be assayed.  Rates of mutation for these complex                 
              traits, and for the correlated effects of these mutations will be              
              estimated.  Only a few studies have estimated mutation rates for               
              quantitative characters, and none of them have an underlying                   
              mechanism to be tested.  In order to understand how quantitative               
              traits evolve, good estimates of this sort are necessary.  The                 
              proposed research will provide such estimates.                                 
                   Results of these studies may also find application in the                 
              field of pest management, because positive selection acting on a               
              trait like lipid storage is not too unlike selection imposed by                
              application of a pesticide.  Response can either be by a specific              
              detoxification, or by complex pathways involving absorption and                
              excretion.  As described in one of Dr. Clark's papers, it is also              
              relevant to artificial selection regimes that are imposed on                   
              growth and fat contents of a number of agriculturally important                
              animals.  The correlated responses to selection can only be                    
              understood in light of the allometric relations among traits,                  
              which are to a large part genetically determined.
