Title       : Long & Medium Term Research: Activation and Functionaliza- tion of Chlorocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1990  
File        : a9007698

Award Number: 9007698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Barron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Derk A. Wierda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1910,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Activation and Functionalization                  
              of Chlorocarbons                                                               
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long                   
              & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.  The                  
              program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to                       
              conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of                  
              proven excellence.  Awards provide opportunities for the                       
              conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli-                    
              mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in                   
              foreign countries.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. David A. Hoffman                    
              of Harvard University will support a twelve-month visit to                     
              France by Dr. Derk A. Wierda to work with Professeur John A.                   
              Osborn of the Institut Le Bel of the Universit Louis Pasteur                  
              in Strasbourg on "Activation and Functionalization of                          
              Chlorocarbons."  Chlorocarbons form a relatively inert class                   
              of compounds with properties which can be useful, such as                      
              solvent, or noxious, such as chlorinated aromatics (PCBs).                     
              It has recently been discovered that a series of complexes of                  
              Pd(0) will activate C-Cl bonds under mild conditions.  Such                    
              complexes also serve as catalysts for the carbonylation of                     
              CH2Cl2 and C6H5Cl.  The original work into chlorocarbon                        
              activation will be extended to other chloro- and polychloro-                   
              containing compounds.  The researchers will conduct mechanistic                
              studies to better understand how the process of chlorocarbon                   
              activation occurs.  The will perform further research into                     
              potential catalytics reactions involving these systems.  One                   
              possible reaction of interest is hydrodechlorination, a                        
              process by which chlorocarbons would be transformed into                       
              hydrocarbons.  Reaction of CH2Cl2 in the presence of CO, H2,                   
              base and palladium complex catalytically generates ketene, a                   
              very reactive organic molecule.  The researchers will                          
              investigate this process in the presence of various ketene                     
              traps.  They will examine generation of other ketenes in                       
              situ.  They shall perform investigations into the possibility                  
              of breaking the much stronger C-F bonds by similar methods.                    
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as                           
              appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,                        
              stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat                       
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
