Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Development and Applications of Iterative Methods for
               Solving Nonlinear Elliptic Eigenvalue Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1990      
File        : a9007905

Award Number: 9007905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard R. McDonald                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley B. Pomeranz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   With this award the principal investigator will continue to               
              develop numerical methods based upon iterative techniques for the              
              approximate solution of a class of nonlinear elliptic eigenvalue               
              problems that arises in physics and engineering.  What sets this               
              class of problems apart and makes it interesting is the                        
              requirement that the solutions to be approximated must satisfy an              
              additional integral constraint.  Most numerical schemes in                     
              current use approximate solutions of elliptic equations that                   
              satisfy conditions on the boundary of the domain, while in this                
              grant the principal investigator has to modify existing schemes                
              or invent new ones in order to assure satisfaction of the                      
              integral constraint.  Such eigenvalue problems arise in the                    
              theory of nonlinear waves and there is a genuine need for                      
              reliable numerical methods to generate accurate approximate                    
              solutions.                                                                     
                   In many mathematical models of physical phenomena the                     
              process under consideration is realized as the solution of a                   
              differential equation that satisfies certain additional                        
              conditions.  For example, one may know the state of the process                
              at some initial time or along the boundary of the domain.  In                  
              these cases there exist reliable numerical methods that provide                
              accurate approximate solutions with the aid of a computer.  In                 
              this grant the principal investigator will study processes that                
              satisfy an integral constraint, instead of the more familiar                   
              initial or boundary conditions alluded to above, and so she will               
              have to develop new numerical methods to find the solution.
