Title       : REU: Belowground Processes and Nitrogen Availability Across a Dynamic, Nutrient
               Poor, Barrier Island Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9007899

Award Number: 9007899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank P. Day   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Past studies have suggested that nutrient.poor sites have                    
              greater nutrient immobilization in the litter, greater                         
              belowground allocation of biomass, and slower decay; all                       
              resulting in more conservative nutrient cycles.  Most of these                 
              studies focused on forested ecosystems with minimal emphasis                   
              on belowground dynamics.  The primary objectives of this new                   
              research project are (1) to quantify the relationships between                 
              C and N availability and belowground dynamics across a                         
              nutrient-poor, dynamic, barrier island landscape; (2) to                       
              quantify the influences of microtopography, successional age                   
              and microenvironmental interfaces (caused by fluctuating                       
              groundwater levels) on belowground processes; and (3) to                       
              refine and extend the application of newer techniques for                      
              belowground research. The research will be conducted along an                  
              established transect incommunities 65, 35, 25 and 5 years old                  
              on the accreting end of Hog Island on NSF's Virginia Coast                     
              Reserve Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site.  Nitrogen                   
              amended and unamended plots will be used to test the effects                   
              of nitrogen availability on belowground processes.  Root                       
              production, root decomposition, nitrogen immobilization rates                  
              in root litter, mineralization rates, and root and soil                        
              nitrogen content will be measured in the treatment and control                 
              plots. Reciprocal litter bag transplants will test the degree                  
              of control of root decomposition by external nitrogen supply                   
              versus litter quality.  All processes will be evaluated in                     
              relation to microenvironmental conditions and successional age                 
              along the transect and vertically within the soil profile.                     
              The application of minirhizotrons in barrier island ecosystems                 
              will also be tested.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Results from the project will be of fundamental importance to                  
              the basic ecological resolution of the governance of nutrient                  
              dynamics and plant community composition in nutrient-poor                      
              ecosystems.  Additionally, the work should produce insights to                 
              assist in better management of barrier islands and                             
              beachfronts, areas where the interests of conservation,                        
              recreation and commercial development often collide.                           
                                                                                             
              The principal investigator is well qualified, and                              
              institutional facilities are adequate to the task. Integration                 
              of this new project with the ongoing research program of the                   
              Virginia Coast Reserve LTER project will result in productive                  
              augmentation of both efforts.
