Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Embryo Maturation in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9007481

Award Number: 9007481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Rivin rivinc@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Developing plant embryos have the capacity to germinate or to                  
              mature. Dr. Rivin is investigating how embryo abscisic acid                    
              level, hormone sensitivity and changing water relations modulate               
              the expression of these two developmental potentials. Her goals                
              are to define, at the molecular level, the developmental pathways              
              that are modulated by these physiological cues during maize                    
              embryo maturation, and to identify the genetic mechanisms that                 
              regulate their expression. To address this problem she will                    
              follow a three part program that involves both molecular and                   
              genetic approaches, focussing on mutants that fail to develop                  
              successfully through maturation phase. The specific objectives                 
              are the following: 1) Identify cDNA clones of mRNAs that are                   
              specific to embryo maturation, using her previous observations                 
              about the synthesis of maturation phase polypeptides in wild type              
              and viviparous mutants as a basis for selection of co-regulated                
              message sets. 2) Measure the expression of maturation mRNAs                    
              during normal maize embryogenesis and examine how this program is              
              altered when development is disrupted genetically in viviparous                
              and defective kernel mutants, or by manipulation of physiological              
              factors in tissue culture. 3) Search for new transposon tagged                 
              embryo lethal mutants to collect additional loci for genetic                   
              dissection of embryo maturation, and to provide a means of                     
              cloning genes essential to embryo development.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              In flowering plants the developing seed creates a morphologically              
              complete embryo which goes on eventually to germinate. Embryo                  
              development takes place in two stages, the second of which is                  
              termed maturation. This project is aimed at an understanding of                
              the factors that control this maturation process.
