Title       : Workshop Support: Workshop on Optoelectronics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1990      
File        : a9007812

Award Number: 9007812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Thomas Cathey cathey@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1493,9235,9270,
Abstract    :
              The proposal is that a small workshop be held with approximately 40            
              participants from universities, colleges, and industry who are                 
              interested in optoelectronics education.  The purpose will be to               
              discuss the goals, curricula, and courses in optoelectronics programs.         
              The objectives are to produce suggestions concerning the contents of           
              undergraduate and graduate curricula, and suggestions as to what the           
              general engineering or physics students would need.  There are several         
              related questions.  What should be included in an optoelectronics              
              option within electrical engineering or physics, what should be in an          
              undergraduate degree program in optoelectronics, what should all               
              electrical engineering and physics students know about                         
              optoelectronics, and what are the essentials in a graduate program in          
              optoelectronics?  Perhaps the most important question is, what optics-         
              related material should be introduced into the existing undergraduate          
              courses?  For example, photodetectors should go into the existing              
              solid state or electronics courses.  Other questions to be addressed           
              are:  how much lens design, physical optics, quantum effects, sources,         
              detectors, receivers, fibers, atmospheric properties, and optical              
              system design should be included in the curricula?  Recommendations            
              concerning these questions will not have an impact unless we also have         
              means of implementing the suggestions.  One of the main goals of the           
              workshop will be to devise means of implementation, such as providing          
              modules, ideas of demonstrations, video presentations that could be            
              used in other courses, and solved homework problems to encourage               
              instructors to assign optoelectronics problems in appropriate courses.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The logical next step would be to organize a symposium on                      
              optoelectronics education that would have much broader attendance with         
              the goal of disseminating and discussing the proposals that result             
              from our workshop.  One of the tasks of the workshop will be to                
              assemble an organizing committee for that symposium.
