Title       : Mineral-Water Geochemistry and Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (1HNMR) in
               Porous Sandstones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9119034

Award Number: 9119034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl O. Moses   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The need to understand the physicochemical environment of                 
              solution-filled pores in rocks has geochemical implications for                
              solute transport and mass transfer between solid and solution                  
              phases and petrophysical implications for formation evaluation and             
              magnetic resonance imagining.  The proposed project will help build            
              that understanding through an investigation of proton nuclear                  
              magnetic resonance relaxation in sandstone pore-filling solutions.             
              The overall goal of the project is to quantify the effect of                   
              solution composition on relaxation rates.  Both intact rock cores              
              and disaggregated grain packs will be used.  The mineral surfaces              
              will be consistently pre-conditioned, and the materials will be                
              well-characterized, with determinations of rock physical properties            
              (porosity, pore-size distribution, surface area: volume ratio,                 
              permeability, paramagnetic susceptibility, and BET surface area)               
              and geochemical properties (mineralogy, extractable paramagnetic               
              species, and cation exchange capacity).  Experimental controls on              
              permeability and relaxation rate include solution composition,                 
              surface pre-treatment, temperature, and for the grain packs, grain             
              size and mineralogy.  The data will be interpreted to provide three            
              types of quantitative information:  (1) the influence of different             
              surfaces on relaxation, (2) the influence of solution composition              
              on relaxation, and (3) relaxation mechanisms (with activation                  
              energies for bulk-solution and surface-induced relaxation                      
              processes.
