Title       : A Non-Hydrostatic Semi-Implicit Semi-Lagrangian Global Circulation Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9119315

Award Number: 9119315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredrick Semazzi fred_semazzi@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Scroggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Anticipated increases in computing power and in the resolution            
              of data collected through the global observational networks will               
              allow the use of higher resolution and more precise representation             
              of physical processes in models of the global general circulation.             
              With the greater resolution, it may no longer be necessary or                  
              reasonable to employ the hydrostatic approximation;  indeed, for               
              many purposes, explicit representation of small scale vertical                 
              accelerations of the flow will be required.  Experience with                   
              limited-area nonhydrostatic models indicates that the added                    
              computational load goes well beyond the increase in the number of              
              model grid points.                                                             
                   Drs. Semazzi and Scroggs will incorporate a suite of recently             
              developed numerical techniques, which provide greater computational            
              efficiency and accuracy, into a  proof-of-concept global model.                
              They will assess the feasibility of using high-resolution                      
              nonhydrostatic computation in global forecast models.  They also               
              hope to learn more about the role of nonhydrostatic processes in               
              the global atmospheric circulation.                                            
                Operational numerical prediction systems of the early 20th                   
              century as well as various research models are likely to be quite              
              similar to those developed under this project.  The development of             
              efficient, accurate computational methods is critical.  This                   
              results of this project will make it possible to exploit advances              
              in computing and observing technology and in model development in              
              the future.
