Title       : Paleomagnetic and Rock Magnetic Stratigraphy of the Mid- Cretaceous
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1991   
File        : a9119087

Award Number: 9119087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61613              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tarduno   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Paleomagnetic study of the Albian Contessa section (Umbria,               
              Italy) has defined several intervals of reversed characteristic                
              remanent magnetizations (ChRM) carried by high unblocking-                     
              temperature hematite within the Cretaceous Normal Polarity                     
              Superchron.  The reversed intervals correspond with 2 reddish zones            
              (pigmentary hematite) found throughout Umbria which may reflect the            
              oxidation state of the seafloor during deposition.  The reversed               
              ChRM may represent a remagnetization acquired 18 m.y. after                    
              deposition in reversed polarity chron 33R (or later).  If a                    
              remagnetization, the process is of great interest since it can                 
              produce remagnetization patterns which resemble polarity intervals.            
              Alternatively, the reversed ChRM may record intervals of reversed              
              geomagnetic field polarity acquired during intense seafloor                    
              oxidation episodes during the mid-Albian (107-104 Ma).  If correct,            
              several of the intervals are of sufficient duration (>100 kyr) to              
              be of use in magnetostratigraphic studies and might provide markers            
              on oceanic crust of the Cretaceous Quiet Zone.  If primary, the                
              intervals also suggest a modification of models of geomagnetic                 
              reversal frequency.                                                            
                   Recently, 2 zones of reddish, hematite-bearing sediments were             
              also identified in the Albian Breggia section (Switzerland).  The              
              reddish zones may have more than a regional significance; they may             
              mark rapid changes in paleoceanographic conditions analogous to                
              (but opposite in oxidation) to the Cretaceous global anoxic events.            
              Paleomagnetic data suggest the presence of reversed ChRMs from the             
              Breggia sediments from which we can exclude a remagnetization                  
              scenario calling upon circulating fluids affecting only a portion              
              of the measured sections.  Reactivation of a preexisting mineral               
              phase, however, is another remagnetization mechanism which is                  
              presently being considered.  Nevertheless, the funding of reversed             
              ChRMs in a stratigraphically narrow interval at well-separated                 
              sites gives further support to a primary magnetization model.                  
                   We propose an extension of our studies to a reference section             
              in Italy and the deep sea (ODP) aimed at characterizing the                    
              paleoclimate signature of the mid-Albian sediments through rock-               
              magnetic and cyclostratigraphic (bedding and geochemical)                      
              measurements.  First, we hope to determine the nature, duration and            
              extent of the oxidized intervals.  Second, we hope to use these                
              data as a means to examine critically the lock-in mechanism of the             
              remanent components of magnetization observed in the Albian (and               
              other) pelagic sediments.
