Title       : Human Impacts on Water Use by Deep-Rooted Amazonian Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9119835

Award Number: 9119835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford N. Dahm                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Nepstad dnepstad@whrc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Research Ctr
	      P.O. Box 296
	      Woods Hole, MA  025430296    508/540-9900

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Humans are transforming the upland landscapes of Amazonia from                 
              nearly continuous expanses of high forest to mosaics of pasture,               
              secondary forests, logged forests and primary forest remnants.                 
              The large-scale ecological changes that accompany this radical                 
              alteration of Earth's biosphere are poorly understood, but                     
              probably very important.  For example, the best predictions of                 
              regional climatic impacts of this transformation suggest that                  
              Amazonia will be drier and warmer in the years to come and that                
              climatic shifts may follow in the grain belt of south-central                  
              Brazil.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Our poor ability to predict the consequences of Amazonian                      
              deforestation can be traced to a surprising dearth of comparative              
              information for primary forests and the anthropogenic ecosystems               
              that are replacing them, particularly in the major zone of forest              
              conversion extending from Belem south to Goiania and west to                   
              Acre.  For example, there are no published studies comparing the               
              hydrology of primary and secondary ecosystems of this 1.2 M km2                
              region.  The only estimates of evapotranspiration and water                    
              balance for Amazonian ecosystems based on empirical measurements               
              were conducted on primary forests in central and northern                      
              Amazonia, far from the advancing agricultural frontier.                        
                                                                                             
              It is hypothesized that the deep soils and pronounced seasonal                 
              drought that characterize the "arc of forest conversion" support               
              deep-rooted primary forests that use water and mineral nutrients               
              in ways that are not predicted by the existing literature on                   
              moist tropical forest ecology.  Deep-soil functions of these                   
              forests, including carbon storage, dry season water uptake, wet                
              season water storage, fine root production, and nutrient uptake                
              are the least studied aspects of moist tropical forest and yet                 
              must be understood to predict the ecological changes that will                 
              accompany forest conversion.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research on water use by deep-rooted, Amazon forests and the              
              ecosystems that are replacing these forests will assist in                     
              testing the hypothesis above.  Results from initial studies                    
              suggest that the new ecosystems of Amazonia are relatively                     
              shallow-rooted and functionally distinct.  This study will                     
              provide the basis for development of a model relating seasonal                 
              patterns of rainfall to root and canopy dynamics in deep-rooted,               
              moist tropical forests.
