Title       : Continuing Support for Linnaean Plant Name Typification Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9119673

Award Number: 9119673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117406             (Estimated)
Investigator: Porter P. Lowry lowry@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Barrie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Reveal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   The scientific "types" of species names are the actual plant              
              or animal specimens, housed typically in natural history                       
              museums, that were used by biologists when describing and naming               
              a new species.  Unfortunately, natural historians of the 18th and              
              19th centuries rarely designated a single specimen as type, and                
              consequently there can be confusion over the correct application               
              of a scientific species name.  The Linnean Plant Name                          
              Typification project is designed to provide a thorough and                     
              scholarly assessment of the types for each of the approximately                
              9800 species names published by the great Swedish naturalist Carl              
              Linneaus in the 18th century.  Many of these names pertain to                  
              economically or commercially important plants including numerous               
              crops, spices, medicinals, and horticultural items.  Hence, the                
              use of correct and stable names is paramount both for scientific               
              and practical reasons.                                                         
                   Drs. Porter Lowry and Fred Barrie of the Missouri Botanical               
              Garden, working with Dr. Charles Jarvis of the British Natural                 
              History Museum, are continuing their careful studies of type                   
              specimens housed in herbaria in Europe and elsewhere, pertinent                
              to the application of Linnaeus's names.  These names have                      
              priority as the first correct scientific names of plants, under                
              conventions established at international botanical congresses,                 
              and ratified every five to six years at regular meetings of these              
              organizations.  A computerized database of names and specimens                 
              and associated information is being developed in conjunction with              
              this work, and will be available through the Missouri Botanical                
              Garden to all researchers on plants.
