Title       : FASEB Summer Conference Transcription Regulation: Differentiation, Development
               and Disease, June 14-19, 1992, Copper Mountain, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9119275

Award Number: 9119275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Green   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Spiegelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the major challenges facing molecular geneticists and                   
              developmental biologists is understanding the mechanisms which                 
              control tissue specific gene expression in higher animals.  During             
              the past few years, there has been extensive progress in this                  
              direction.  A variety of novel in vivo and in vitro systems have               
              been developed, a number of transcription factors involved in cell-            
              type specific gene expression were identified and the genes                    
              encoding such factors were isolated.  The hormonal and                         
              developmental mechanisms controlling the activity of these                     
              regulatory genes are subject to extensive investigation.  This                 
              proposal requests funds to finance a summer FASEB conference on the            
              topic of Transcription Regulation:  Differentiation, Development,              
              and Disease.  This meeting will congregate researchers actively                
              engaged in studying various aspects of tissue specific gene                    
              expression.  In addition to discussing the basic mechanism of gene             
              regulation, special emphasis will be placed on discussion of both              
              normal and aberrant gene regulation in the following organ systems:            
              liver and pancreas, muscle, blood and the nervous system.  We will             
              also have special sessions dealing with the regulation of                      
              development and embryogenesis.  The emphasis will be on gene                   
              regulation in vertebrates and expecially in mammals.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The conference will be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from June             
              14-19, 1992.  The meeting is designed to have formal slide                     
              presentations, informal poster sessions, a workshop, periods of                
              group discussions, and plenty of opportunity for individual                    
              interaction.  The conference will summarize the current                        
              understandings of tissue specific gene expression and should lead              
              to dissemination of new information, concepts, and methodologies.
