Title       : Growth and Paleoecology of an Early Cretaceous Ornithopod Dinosaur
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1992  
File        : a9119470

Award Number: 9119470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale A. Winkler winkler@lust.isem.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   At the Proctor Lake site in Texas, skeletons of hundreds of               
              young and adult dinosaurs, all of the same species, are found in               
              rocks over 110 million years old.  Good skeletons of adult                     
              dinosaurs are rare, especially for this geological period, and                 
              juveniles are even rarer.  Dr. Dale Winkler of Southern Methodist              
              University is excavating and studying this assemblage to gain                  
              insight into the changes in behavior, feeding, and locomotion                  
              that occurred in these animals during their growth.  These                     
              bipedal plant eaters (ornithopods) from Texas are small for                    
              dinosaurs (about 3-4 meters long), but related kinds found in                  
              Texas and many that evolved afterward are much larger.                         
              Determining how and why these evolutionary changes took place is               
              important for understanding the relationships between groups of                
              dinosaurs.  Recent technical advances allow images of specimens                
              to be entered into a computer by video camera for precise and                  
              rapid measurement and for storage and exchange of data.  This new              
              method along with statistical techniques will be used to                       
              determine if the process of evolving to larger size (over                      
              millions of years) follows the same pathway as the growth of an                
              individual during its life.  To learn more about dinosaur                      
              behavior and life history, computer methods will also be used to               
              help demonstrate subtle differences in shape between male and                  
              female skeletons.  Knowing the sex of the dinosaur specimens will              
              reveal much about their nesting habits and social structure.                   
                   Dinosaurs, like other reptiles, probably grew throughout                  
              their lives, so there have been many difficulties in recognizing               
              the age of dinosaur specimens (hatchlings, juveniles, adults).                 
              Because body shape usually changes during growth, young and adult              
              dinosaurs of the same species may look different and may                       
              mistakenly be called different species.  Studies of changes in                 
              species diversity through time and other evolutionary topics are               
              clouded by this problem.  To help solve this dilemma, the                      
              excellently preserved Proctor Lake samples will be used to map                 
              the shape changes that can be expected during an individual                    
              dinosaur's development.  Also, changes in internal bone structure              
              that occur during growth can be correlated with the changes in                 
              body form.  Quantifying both of these changes as a percent of the              
              largest adult size may provide a system for determining the                    
              growth rate and age of other dinosaur specimens for which a                    
              growth series is not available.  The results of this research                  
              will provide tools to understand how dinosaurs lived and                       
              diversified, ultimately dominating land faunas for over 150                    
              million years.
