Title       : Dissertation Research: Patterns of Genetic Variation in Natural Populations:
               Chromosomal, Single Gene, and Polygenic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1992   
File        : a9119270

Award Number: 9119270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5330               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Lord LORD@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Understanding the population genetic structure of organisms                    
              distributed in discrete populations is essential to understanding              
              the subsequent evolution of such populations.  Most studies examine            
              the pattern of genetic variation within and among populations using            
              allozymes, neglecting sources such as chromosomal and morphological            
              variation.  These additional sources of variation are expected to              
              contrast with allozyme variation.  Random processes such as drift              
              should be important in the spread and/or fixation of chromosomal               
              variants since individuals heterozygous for chromosome arrangements            
              are often observed to have reduced fertility.  Selection acting on             
              morphological traits, however, can counteract such random                      
              processes.  Allozymes, assumed to be neutral genetic markers, will             
              be affected by random processes potentially important in fixation              
              of chromosomal variants.  Considering all three sources of                     
              variation together, chromosomal variation should coincide more                 
              closely with allozyme than with morphological variation.  The coPI             
              will examine the within and among population patterns of                       
              chromosomal variation in relation to both single gene (allozymes               
              and discrete morphological traits) and polygenic (quantitative                 
              genetic) variation in Clarkia dudleyana, a species known to contain            
              chromosomal polymorphism between populations.  The coPI will                   
              examine the chromosomal relationship, estimate gene frequencies of             
              both allozymes and morphological traits, and examine the pattern of            
              polygenic variation for eight natural populations.  The coPI will              
              also study selection to determine whether current selection regimes            
              are consistent with differences in the pattern of morphological                
              variation as compared to allozyme and chromosomal variation.  The              
              general significance of the study is that it will improve our                  
              understanding of the survival and spread of natural plant                      
              populations.
