Title       : Science and Technology Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9119999

Award Number: 9119999
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15729208           (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Souvaine  (Principal Investigator former)
              Andras P. Hajnal  (Principal Investigator former)
              Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9171      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Rutgers University, in cooperation with Princeton University, AT&T           
              Bell Laboratories (Bell Labs), and Bell Communications Research                
              (Bellcore) has established a Science and Technology Center for                 
              Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science.  The Director           
              of the Center is Professor Daniel Gorenstein of Rutgers University.            
                The Center in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science          
              strengthens the development of these two overlapping areas by                  
              focussing research activity in a continuing series of year-long                
              research programs, workshops and conferences.  Approximately on                
              hundred researchers from the four collaborating conferences.                   
              Approximately one hundred researchers from the four collaborating              
              institutions provide the background coherence and direction for this           
              activity.  The core of the research activity is carried out by a               
              vigorous program of visitors (both senior and junior) from other               
              institutions (academic, industrial, government laboratory).                    
              Postdoctoral fellows and graduate students are affiliated with the             
              Center for varying lengths of time.                                            
                Each year, the Center designates specific areas for special                  
              attention, inviting leading experts in the designated fields to                
              organize a research program in those areas of concentration.  These            
              areas are chosen to take advantage of the expertise of the                     
              participating personnel from the collaborating institutions while              
              addressing questions of demonstrable interest to researchers in both           
              the discrete mathematics and theoretical computer science communities.         
                Within these general guidelines, there are several avenues of                
              potential emphasis that involve both serious theoretical inquiry and           
              relevant application.  For example, our modern "information society"           
              depends on clear, efficiently designed and reliable telecommunications         
              and communications systems.  These are easily described by network             
              theory and can be modeled using linear programming techniques.                 
              Transportation problems require similar techniques; and optimization           
              and linear programming, possibly enhanced by parallel computations,            
              are critical in VLSI design and manufacture.                                   
                Discrete and computational geometry are foundational disciplines for         
              computer graphics and robotics.  As the geometries required for the            
              applications become increasingly more complex, research in                     
              computational geometry becomes ever more important.  Yet there are             
              fundamental questions in discrete and computational geometry that must         
              be addressed before the applications can be realized.
