Title       : Life History Evolution in Guppies (Pecilia reticulata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9119432

Award Number: 9119432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Reznick gupy@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1123,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The theory of life history evolution, which began to develop              
              in the 1930's and matured through the 1980's, represents a                     
              generalization of the concept of fitness.  Fitness is now defined              
              with complete variables, such as the ability of a genotype to                  
              increase in population size.  Under this theory, natural                       
              selection can do seemingly counter-intuitive things.  For                      
              example, it is possible for natural selection to favor a                       
              reduction in lifespan or a reduction in the number of offspring                
              produced, provided that there are other compensations.  The goal               
              of this resolves is to test life history theory in natural                     
              populations of guppies from the island of Trinidad.                            
                   "Life history" refers to features of animals that directly                
              influence the production of offspring, such as when animals begin              
              to reproduce, how often they reproduce, how many offspring they                
              have, and the resources devoted to each offspring.  Most natural               
              populations are exposed to different patterns of mortality, such               
              as different rates of mortality in adults versus juveniles.                    
              Theoreticians have considered how this aspect of natural                       
              selection will select for changes in features of the life                      
              history.                                                                       
                     Different populations of guppies in Trinidad appear to                  
              experience such differences in age-specific mortality because of               
              their predators.  Some populations have predators that prey                    
              predominantly on large, sexually mature size classes of guppies                
              while others have predators that feed primarily on small,                      
              immature size classes.  Size-specific predation appears to cause               
              differences in age-specific mortality rates.  One prediction is                
              that higher adult mortality rates will favor those individuals                 
              that begin to reproduce earlier and devote more of their                       
              resources to reproduction and less to their own growth and                     
              maintenance.  These predictions are being evaluated by; 1)                     
              quantifying the differences in life history patterns of guppies                
              from these two types of localities, 2) quantifying the mortality               
              rates of guppies in natural populations, and 3) changing the                   
              distribution of guppies and their predators in natural streams to              
              drive the evolution of life history patterns.  This project has                
              already revealed the process of evolutionary change in natural                 
              populations and will ultimately make it possible to evaluate the               
              mechanism of this change.  At the same time, it evaluates a                    
              branch of evolutionary theory which incorporates a more general                
              definition of fitness.
