Title       : Parallel Algorithms and Methods for Solving Macromolecular Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9119388

Award Number: 9119388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Lynch   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dan C. Marinescu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Rossmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The X-ray Crystollography Group in the Department of Biological                
              Sciences at Purdue has pioneered a variety of methods, techniques              
              and computer software for the determination of the structures of               
              the macromolecules.  It has achieved major advances in the study               
              of virus structures and, over the years has developed a                        
              foundation of computer programs for film processing, phase                     
              determination, model building, structure refinement, and so on,                
              leading to the solution and investigation of macromolecular                    
              structures.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Computing is currently one of the bottlenecks in this research.                
              The gap between the computing resources needed and the ones                    
              available increases as new radiation sources for X-rays become                 
              available.  This group can maintain its position as the leader in              
              the field by migrating their work to parallel supercomputers such              
              as Touchstone Delta machine.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The principal research issues we plan to address are:                          
                                                                                             
              1. Development and analysis of parallel algorithms for film                    
              processing, multiple small least squares problem, and huge                     
              (one million plus variables) sparse least squares problems.                    
              2. Development of data structures suitable for macromolecular                  
              computations and which can be partitioned for parallel                         
              methods.                                                                       
              3. Development of geometric based methods for problem partition                
              and mapping computations onto MIMD (Multiple Instruction                       
              Multiple Data) computers.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This work will not only advance the understanding of parallel                  
              computing but it will also provide a practical tool to enable an               
              order of magnitude increase in power for the computational                     
              biology.  We expect this will lead to a qualitative improvement                
              in the computational macromolecular biology.
