Title       : Theoretical Population and Quantitative Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9119463

Award Number: 9119463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Gillespie jhgillespie@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Turelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is a mathematical investigation into two                 
              broad areas of evolutionary theory:  molecular evolution and the               
              evolution of quantitative traits.                                              
                                                                                             
              The primary goal of the work on molecular evolution is to                      
              understand why there is so much variation in the genetic                       
              material, DNA, between species and between individuals within a                
              species.  One theory regards most of this variation as                         
              meaningless, having no functional consequences whatsoever.  The                
              theory that we are investigating argues that most of this                      
              variation does have biological consequences.  Our approach to the              
              problem involves a comparison of the predictions of each theory                
              to the patterns observed in actual DNA sequences. This work is                 
              of potential value for our understanding of genetic variation                  
              susceptibility be viewed as due to many small mutations in DNA or              
              to a few large ones?  Our work is relevant to the former                       
              possibility.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The primary goal of the work on quantitative genetics is to                    
              understand the genetic basis of variation in measurable traits,                
              such as size or weight, both within and between species.  The                  
              great conceptual problem in this work is to formalize the                      
              combined effects of many genes to interact with one another                    
              (through dominance and epistasis) in a way that adds biological                
              relevance that was missing from previous models.  Once the theory              
              is in place, it will be used to investigate several problems of                
              evolutionary interest.  This work will be very important for                   
              agriculture, where practitioners require better theories of the                
              genetic basis of traits, such as milk yield in cattle, that are                
              of economic importance.
