Title       : Interactions and Flexibility in the Orientation System of Migratory Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9119508

Award Number: 9119508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Able kpa@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The orientation and navigation behavior of vertebrate animals is               
              remarkable in its complexity and reliance on multiple,                         
              interacting cues.  The system enables animals to respond flexibly              
              to the variety of environmental conditions that may be                         
              encountered during a migratory journey.  This flexibility in                   
              behavior enables the animal to perform accurately in the face of               
              variability and changing availability of the cues upon which it                
              relies.  Only in birds have the relationships among orientation                
              cues been explored in detail.                                                  
                                                                                             
              How does a young bird come to possess a suite of compasses                     
              sufficient, on its first migration, to successfully determine in               
              which direction to fly?  Dr. Able will employ a developmental                  
              approach to this problem, hand-raising birds under controlled                  
              conditions in which their experiences with relevant orientation                
              cues (earth's magnetic field, sun, stars, polarized-light                      
              patterns in the sky) can be manipulated.  In this way Dr. Able                 
              can delineate the interactions and calibrations that occur during              
              the development of compass-orientation abilities in the young                  
              animal.  As in most complex behavior, this development involves a              
              rich interplay of genetically-based predispositions and templates              
              with experience and learning.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The research will contribute importantly both to improved                      
              understanding of the development of complex behavior, and to a                 
              greater understanding of bird migration that will be crucial in                
              efforts to conserve neotropical migratory birds.
