Title       : Support for Conference of U.S. Embassy Environment, Science and Technology
               Officers; Washington, D.C.; Fall 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9119321

Award Number: 9119321
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Marion Flores                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Prochnik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Department of State
	      
	      Washington, DC  20520    /   -

NSF Program : 5951      COOPERATIVE SCIENCE,OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides partial support for a week-long conference            
              of U.S. Embassy Environment Science and Technology Officers in                 
              Washington in late September or early October this year.                       
                   The Environment, Science and Technology Counselors/Attaches               
              are key parts of Embassy country teams.  They work in support of               
              USG interests as the focal points in Embassies on topics including             
              environmental, space, health, energy, nuclear non-proliferation,               
              economic competitiveness, oceans, population and other issues.                 
              They advise Ambassadors and report and make representations on                 
              these issues.  These officers also conduct and manage bilateral                
              science and technology agreements.  OES has held such conferences              
              annually in recent years.  They have proven to be highly successful            
              not only in updating the Embassy representatives on current                    
              developments, but in providing Washington officers an opportunity              
              to debrief them directly.  The conferences have also enlisted                  
              much attention and participation from the Congress and technical               
              agencies.  During the last conference in 1989, the House Science,              
              Space and Technology Committee held a well-attended session with               
              the Embassy officers.  The conference presents an important                    
              opportunity both for NSF staff to consult directly with many of                
              the officers with whom they deal and for the Science Officers to               
              improve their understanding of NSF concerns and priorities.
