Title       : Clovis-Folsom-Plainview Geochronology, Climate Change, and the
               Pleistocene-Holocene Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9119834

Award Number: 9119834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Vance Haynes jovers@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1577,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. C. Vance Haynes and collaborators will examine geological                  
              sections in 16 U.S. archaeological sites which bracket the                     
              Pleistocene-Holocene transition which occurred from ca. 11,500 to              
              10,500 years ago.  During three seasons of fieldwork they will                 
              conduct geologic mapping and microstratigraphic recording in                   
              sufficient detail to understand the processes and origins, and to              
              provide a precise stratigraphic framework for sampled sediments,               
              fauna, pollen, diatoms, artifacts and radiocarbon samples.                     
              Pollen and diatom analyses will be conducted by appropriate                    
              specialists and a large number of samples will be dated to a                   
              precision of +- 80 years by radiocarbon accelerator mass                       
              spectrometry.  This research will provide increased insight into               
              the climatic and environmental changes which marked the end of                 
              the last Ice Age and the response of humans as well as other                   
              species.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Archaeological evidence clearly indicates that humans were                     
              present in North America prior to the end of the last Ice Age.                 
              These groups, known as "Folsom", which is the name of a                        
              specialized stone point type they employed, were widely                        
              distributed and hunted species such as mastodon.  However, within              
              what appears to be an extremely limited interval a transition                  
              occurs and "Clovis" peoples first appear in the archaeological                 
              record.  At about the same time, several other changes seem to                 
              take place as well.  Preliminary evidence indicates climatic                   
              drying and the rapid extinction of many species.  While a number               
              of archeological sites exist which span this interval, it is                   
              difficult to compare across them because of varying analytic                   
              techniques employed.  The work by Dr. Haynes and his colleagues                
              will provide the basis for synthesizing large amounts of data                  
              from these individual sites.  It will also allow him to test his               
              hypothesis that a rapid and marked reduction in rainfall was                   
              responsible for associated environmental and cultural changes.                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will shed light on a poorly              
              understood aspect of U.S. prehistory.  It will also increase our               
              understand of climate change and human and other animal response               
              to it.
