Title       : Electron Transfer in Structurally Engineered Metalloproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9119992

Award Number: 9119992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $641350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry B. Gray hbgray@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay R. Winkler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9107,9236,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                     
              Organometallic Program, is for continuation of studies of the                  
              factors that affect long-range electron transfer in biological                 
              systems.  Genetically engineered mutants of yeast                              
              iso-1-cytochrome c, which  have histidine residues substituted                 
              for the native amino acid at various sites on the periphery of                 
              the protein, will be used for these studies.  Introduction of                  
              redox active, luminescent ruthenium complexes, by complexation                 
              at these histidine sites, allows for the spectroscopic                         
              monitoring of electron-transfer to, or from, the metalloenzyme                 
              over well-known, fixed distances.  A recently developed laser                  
              flash-quench technique will be used to determine the                           
              electron-transfer rates.  This technique has two major                         
              advantages for these studies over previous methods.  First, it                 
              allows for study of the protein with the native iron, rather                   
              than a metal substituted version, and second, it permits the                   
              study of a much wider range of transfer rates.  In a second                    
              phase of the research, similarly modified human myoglobins will                
              be used for the study of the coupling of single electron                       
              transfers to multielectron events such as generation of a                      
              ferryl (Fe=O) species.  The overall objective of these studies                 
              is to determine the mechanism by which the electron moves from                 
              the donor to the acceptor over distances of 10 angstroms and                   
              greater.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Electron transfer is one of the most important processes in                    
              biological systems.  An intriguing aspects of these electron                   
              transfers is that the electron donor and acceptor are                          
              frequently separated by large distances.  Whereas theories of                  
              electron transfer over short distances, where overlap of donor                 
              and acceptor orbitals can occur, is well developed, the                        
              mechanism by which the electron moves over long distances is                   
              not well understood.  Studies such as these may ultimately                     
              result in better treatment of certain physiological disorders                  
              and in new methods of solar energy conversion.
