Title       : Examination of Characteristics of Atmosphere Fluctuations of Importance to
               Ground-Based Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9119317

Award Number: 9119317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Townes cht@ssl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports measurement and analysis of the nature of                  
              fluctuations in optical paths through the atmosphere.  The results             
              should be of importance for optimizing designs for adaptive optics,            
              for large telescopes, and for spatial interferometers operating                
              from the ground.  Measurements will be made with the Infrared                  
              Spatial Interferometer (ISI) now installed on Mount Wilson, which              
              has already been useful in initiating such measurements.  The                  
              initial measurements appear to show that for conditions encountered            
              in ground-based astronomy, pathlength fluctuation often differ                 
              significantly from those expected on the basis of the standard                 
              model of Kolmogorov turbulence and Taylor's approximation.                     
              Furthermore, these deviations can have a significant bearing on                
              the design of future large aperture instruments and their extension            
              into the infrared region.  The program will measure fluctuations               
              in pathlength differences from a stellar object to the two                     
              telescopes and also fluctuations near the ground at the position               
              of the two telescopes.  These will be correlated with such                     
              parameters as wind speed, time of day, astronomical seeing, and                
              cloud cover.  The measurements will yield the structure function               
              of time, Allan variances, and power spectra.  In addition,                     
              examination of correlations between the laser interferometers and              
              the IR interference fringe signals with various telescope                      
              separations will provide direct information on the structure                   
              function of distance.  Observations over a period of time and under            
              various conditions applicable to astronomical observations from                
              the ground are needed in order to obtain an adequate statistical               
              sample.
