Title       : Accretion Events in the Northern Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9119523

Award Number: 9119523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16470              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. MacDonald wdmacdon@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1550,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries award will                                
              support the dissertation research of Juan Jose                                 
              Estrada, A Colombian graduate student in geology at                            
              the State University of New York, Binghamton, under                            
              the supervision of Professor William MacDonald.  The                           
              project aims to evaluate hypotheses of major                                   
              accretionary events in the Colombian Andes Mountains.                          
                                                                                             
              The researchers will collect paleomagnetic evidence                            
              from three major suspect terranes; make structural                             
              measurements on sense of shear on intervening suture                           
              zones; and integrate the results into computer models                          
              of tectonic trajectories and plate motions.  Field                             
              emphasis will be on three main geographic regions of                           
              suspect terranes in the Colombian Andes.  The                                  
              investigators will identify latitudes of origin of                             
              these terranes.  Outcrops in a mapped region will                              
              receive primary focus.  Sense of shear and sequential                          
              changes will be sought along several fault zones.  A                           
              major goal will be to verify ages of these zones'                              
              initial appearance.  These new data will permit new                            
              computer-generated maps of collision events in                                 
              relation to plate motions.  With this award, the                               
              Colombian collaborator will acquire training in modern                         
              techniques of paleomagnetic field-oriented research,                           
              which will help train the next generation of Colombian                         
              geologists.  The U.S. side will gain from the                                  
              opportunity to obtain new insights into plate                                  
              processes.
