Title       : Consequences of Adaptive Individual Behavior, Higher Order Interactions, and
               Food Web Structure in a Larval Anuran Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9119948

Award Number: 9119948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Auerbach                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl E. Werner eewerner@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The manner in which food web structure regulates the size of               
                                                                                            
              animal populations is currently receiving much theoretical and                 
              empirical attention..  This proposal seeks to develop a                        
              mechanistic understanding of the strength of interactions in a                 
              food web consisting of fish, invertebrate predators, and two                   
              anuran larvae.  Indirect effects mediated through this food web                
              are central to changes in relative success of the two anurans                  
              along the environmental gradient from permanent to temporary                   
              ponds.  The food web interactions are approached at several                    
              levels ranging from individual behavior to large scale food web                
              manipulations to build from mechanisms to an understanding of                  
              community phenomena.  A focus of the proposal is an experimental               
                                                                                             
              evaluation of the importance of higher order interactions                      
              generated by behavioral responses of prey to the presence of                   
              their predators.  These higher order interactions alter the                    
              nature of competitive interactions among prey in the absence of                
              any direct mortality effects of predators on prey.  Because of                 
              the widespread occurrence of behavioral responses of prey to                   
              predators, such higher order interactions are likely important in              
                                                                                             
              many ecological systems.  The behavioral responses of the anurans              
                                                                                             
              in turn are mediated by growth (competitive ability)-risk                      
              tradeoffs, one through activity levels and the other through                   
              habitat choice.  Theory at the individual behavioral level will                
              be developed, tested and used to provide a theoretical basis for               
                                                                                             
              understanding the community consequences of adaptive individual                
              behavior.  Both of these tradeoffs are relevant to interactions                
              in many taxa.  Finally, because behavioral responses are often                 
              functions of individual size, the work will explore ontogenetic                
              constraints on behavioral expression and the consequences to                   
              species interactions.
