Title       : Population Biology of the Anther Smut Fungus, Ustilago violacea: Genetic
               Processes Revealed by Molecular Markers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1993       
File        : a9119409

Award Number: 9119409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Alexander   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter V. Oudemans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              Micro-organisms such as bacteria and fungi are the cause of many               
              diseases of plants and animals.  The implement successful disease              
              control, one needs to understand the population biology of the                 
              infectious organisms.  Knowledge of the extent and patterns of                 
              genetic variation in the pathogen population is particularly                   
              significant since disease control practices may not be equally                 
              effective against all genetic forms of the pathogen.  However,                 
              studies of the population genetics and ecology of micro-organisms              
              under natural conditions are often lacking simply because the                  
              organisms are small, have little morphological variation, and                  
              individual organisms are hard to distinguish.                                  
                   Studies will be undertaken on the population biology of a                 
              naturally occurring fungus which infects plants in the Pink                    
              family.  Past studies of the plant revealed that host populations              
              can be genetically variable in their resistance to the anther-                 
              smut disease.  To investigate the extent of fungal genetic                     
              variation, a new-molecular technique called RAPD (Random                       
              Amplification of Polymorphic DNA) which can detect genetic                     
              differences among individuals will be used.  This will allow                   
              determination of the biology of the fungus, such as the degree to              
              which host plants are multiply infected and whether different                  
              strains of the fungus are more successful at infection than                    
              others.   This technique will also be used characterize patterns               
              of genetic variation among fungal populations, for instance the                
              degree to which spatially separated populations are genetically                
              distinct.                                                                      
                   The anther-smut disease is a model system to study                        
              evolutionary and ecological interactions between hosts and                     
              pathogens.  In particular, this research will evaluate the                     
              usefulness of the RAPD technique for investigating aspects of                  
              pathogen population biology that have been previously ignored                  
              because of the lack of a method for distinguishing fungal                      
              individuals.  RAPD techniques have numerous potential                          
              applications in applied studies of host/pathogen interactions.                 
              For instance, it will be important to track the spatial dispersal              
              of micro-organisms to evaluate the spread of human-designed                    
              organisms (such as biocontrol agents) in the environment.  The                 
              RAPD technique has considerable promise in this regard because of              
              the high resolution it offers in distinguishing organisms.                     
              Further, since our model system makes use of naturally occurring               
              genetic variation, there are no problems in our study of                       
              introducing unknown new genetic variants into the environment.
