Title       : Analysis of the Inverse Effect in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1993  
File        : a9119248

Award Number: 9119248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Birchler birchlerj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The long range goal of the proposed work is to understand the                  
              nature and mechanism of regulatory genes that inversely affect the             
              expression of the white eye color gene.  It is believed that this              
              type of regulatory effect is involved in the expression of most                
              types of structural genes.  The four currently known inverse                   
              regulators of white will be precisely localized, genetically and               
              cytologically, via x-ray and P element mutagenesis as a prelude to             
              molecular cloning.  Cloning of two of these genes will reveal their            
              nature and provide the means to address the molecular mechanism of             
              action on white by sequence analysis, in vitro binding tests and               
              genetic dosage studies with transformed copies.  Each of the four              
              inverse regulators, individually as well as in combinations, will              
              be tested for an effect upon white mRNA levels in developmental                
              profiles, as well as for a coordinate response from scarlet and                
              brown, which cooperate with white in pigment deposition.  Each will            
              be tested for an effect on a white promoter-reporter construct to              
              examine the requirement of the w promoter.  A refined functional               
              analysis of the white promoter will be conducted to better localize            
              the sites required for interaction with the four regulators.  This             
              analysis will be conducted by deletion and site directed                       
              mutagenesis of the promoter, which will then be placed driving the             
              alcohol dehydrogenase structural gene.  These constructs will be               
              tested to determine the four inverse regulators and examine the                
              context within which these regions work.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed experiments will contribute to an understanding of the            
              inverse regulation phenomenon and address whether there is a                   
              connection between such regulatory genes and the biological                    
              phenomena associated with chromosomal dosage such as compensation,             
              the inverse effect, aneuploid syndromes, and position effect                   
              variegation.***                                                                
                                                //
