Title       : Expansion Rates and Defenses in Young Leaves of Tropical Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9119619

Award Number: 9119619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis D. Coley coley@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Kursar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plants have evolved a battery of physical and chemical defenses                
              which protect them against grazing damage (herbivory).  Most of                
              our understanding of herbivory and plant defenses derives from                 
              research on mature leaves.  However, young expanding leaves are                
              the most vulnerable stage during the life of a leaf.  Eighty                   
              percent of the lifetime damage occurs during this short window,                
              because expanding leaves suffer 10-100 times the rates of damage               
              from fungi and herbivores as mature leaves.  We are interested in              
              understanding the effectiveness of young leaf defenses, and the                
              interactions among defenses.  In particular, we hypothesize that               
              rapid leaf expansion, which reduces the vulnerable period, is                  
              incompatible with other defenses such as toughness, chemical                   
              defenses and greening.  Although chemical defense and rapid                    
              expansion are the two most effective defenses for young leaves,                
              synthesis of chemicals during leaf expansion may cause auto-                   
              toxicity as well as compete for resources used in rapid leaf                   
              construction.  Species which have slowly expanding young leaves                
              may therefore rely more extensively on effective chemical                      
              defense.  We will characterize the chemical defense profiles of                
              fast- and slow-expanding young leaves in rainforest plants, and                
              quantify the effectiveness of these chemicals as defenses against              
              insect herbivores and fungal pathogens.                                        
                                                                                             
              In addition to giving us insight into the ecology of this                      
              important interaction, the research will provide data on novel                 
              and effective chemical compounds.  Out of convenience, most                    
              screening for biologically active compounds has used mature                    
              leaves, even though this age-class is primarily defended by                    
              toughness and tannins.  Since young leaves are tender, they rely               
              primarily on defensive chemicals to protect them from herbivores.              
              We predict that the types of chemicals found in young leaves will              
              be mobile, effective in small concentrations and of small                      
              molecular weight, all attributes that make them much more                      
              tractable for medicinal and agricultural development.
