Title       : Dynamical Evolution of Globular Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9119965

Award Number: 9119965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haldan N. Cohn cohn@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis M. Lugger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Understanding the dynamical evolution of dense stellar systems,                
              such as globular clusters and galactic nuclei, is one of the most              
              fundamental problems of gravitational astrophysics.  Substantial               
              progress towards this goal has been made in recent years as a                  
              result of both theoretical and observational advances.  Frequent               
              star-star gravitational interactions cause a profound evolution of             
              the overall structure of these systems on astrophysically                      
              interesting time scales.  Powerful computer simulation methods have            
              firmly established the inevitable evolution of globular clusters               
              of stars toward the collapse of the core of the cluster.  The                  
              advent of new observing instrumentation and the ability to achieve             
              high angular resolution from ground based observatories have both              
              led to significant advances in the observational study of globular             
              clusters and galactic nuclei.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Drs. Cohn and Lugger at the University of Indiana will continue                
              their research program of theoretical and observational                        
              investigations of the dynamical evolution of globular clusters.                
              The principal goals are: to develop realistic, evolving, dynamical             
              models for globular clusters; to carry out large scale optical                 
              observational studies of globular cluster structure, kinematics,               
              and stellar content, using both ground-based telescopes and the                
              Hubble Space Telescope; and to fit observational data for globular             
              clusters with numerical models.
