Title       : Sondrestrom Radar Observations of Plasma Processes on Polar Cusp and Discrete
               ARC Field Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1996   
File        : a9119516

Award Number: 9119516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Schulz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Vondrak  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald R. Schropp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lockheed Miss-Palto Alto
	      3251 Hanover Street
	      Palo Alto, CA  943041121    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Experiments are proposed using the incoherent scatter radar                    
              facility at Sondre Stromfjord, Greenland, and to study plasma                  
              processes on magnetic field lines connected to the dayside auroral             
              oval and discrete arcs in the evening sector.  Recent upgrades to              
              the radar have made several new operating modes possible that will             
              enable measurements of ionospheric properties such as vertical and             
              horizontal ion drift, electron densities, and ion and electron                 
              temperatures with greatly improved temporal and spatial resolution.            
              A carefully planned experimental program will be conducted that                
              takes advantage of these new capabilities as well as additional                
              data from other ground-based instruments and satellites.  The                  
              objectives are (1) to study the spatial and temporal variations of             
              ionospheric properties in the dayside auroral oval, (2) to                     
              characterize the source region for ions that are transported from              
              the dayside oval to populate the magnetosphere, and (3) to develop             
              radar methods for observing plasma properties at high altitudes on             
              field lines connected to auroral arcs.  The dayside observations               
              will be used to define the initial conditions for theoretical                  
              modeling of upward ion fluxes and their effects on magnetospheric              
              pressure balance in the near-Earth plasma sheet.  The high altitude            
              measurements on auroral field lines will be used to determine the              
              presence of coherent echoes from plasma turbulence associated with             
              the auroral acceleration region.  The results of these experiments             
              will establish a firm observational framework for ground-based                 
              studies of auroral precipitation and will have important                       
              implications for our understanding of magnetosphere/ionosphere                 
              coupling on the dayside and how it relates to auroral substorm                 
              processes.
