Title       : Spectroscopic Probes of Transition Metal Ions in a Microsolution Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9119553

Award Number: 9119553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynmarie A. Posey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award is made as the starter grant increment of Dr.                       
              Lynmarie A. Posey's Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in                        
              Chemistry Award in support of her research at Vanderbilt                       
              University. The research is concerned with the behavior of                     
              solvated transition metal ions in a microsolution environment.                 
              Investigating the details of the local microscopic forces                      
              between an ion and its nearest neighbors presents an                           
              experimental challenge because the influence of the bulk                       
              solvent on measurable properties often overshadows local                       
              effects. In this research, an electrospray ion source coupled                  
              with mass spectrometry will allow divalent transition metal                    
              cations to be isolated in a controlled solvent environment as                  
              gas phase clusters, which can then be probed using laser                       
              spectroscopy. Restriction of the local environment should                      
              reveal vibrationally resolved electronic absorption spectra,                   
              providing structural information as well as the strength of the                
              metal-ligand bond and perturbation of the ligand by the strong                 
              field of the ion.                                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The enhanced understanding of ion-solvent interactions will                    
              challenge theoreticians to develop more accurate potential                     
              energy surfaces and ultimately provide a foundation for                        
              learning how to manipulate the chemical reactivity of solvated                 
              ions.
