Title       : Deoxyribonucleotide Pool Asymmetry and Genome Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9119854

Award Number: 9119854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Mathews mathewsc@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Indira Rajagopal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                   Analysis of homologous gene sequences among closely related               
              mammalian species reveals that different genes within a genome                 
              evolve at different rates.  The rate of gene variation is related              
              to the nucleotide composition of the gene, specifically, to the                
              guanine+cytosine content.  In mammalian cells dGTP is almost                   
              invariably the least abundant deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate                 
              (dNTP) in the proximal DNA precursor pool.  If dGTP levels are                 
              subsaturating for replicative DNA polymerases, replication fidelity            
              can be affected, both by competition with more abundant nucleotides            
              for insertion opposite template cytosines, and by increased                    
              proofreading upstream from dGMP in newly synthesized DNA.  We will             
              analyze replication fidelity in vitro in a forward mutation assay              
              system developed by Roberts and Kunkel (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA             
              85, 7064 (1988).  This system uses a modified M13 phage template               
              that contains an SV40 viral replication origin and a portion of the            
              E. coli lacZ gene and control region.  Mutations in the lac                    
              sequence target, arising during replication by a HeLa cell extract,            
              are scored by a plaque assay in the presence of a chromogenic                  
              substrate.  First we will ask whether this system, when provided               
              with dNTP mixtures that approximate the intranuclear environment,              
              yields mutation frequencies significantly different from those seen            
              with an equimolar dNTP mixture.  The critical test, however, will              
              be to systematically vary the GC content of the target DNA sequence            
              without changing its coding properties, and to ask whether mutation            
              frequencies vary as a function of GC content when replicated in the            
              presence of asymmetric dNTP mixtures.  The GC content variation                
              will involve substitution of chemically synthesized                            
              oligonucleotides for portions of the natural lacZ sequence.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              It is important to know the parameters which are associated with               
              mutations in mammalian cells in order to better control them.  The             
              information from this study will advance our ability to do so.
