Title       : Chemical Control of Materials Synthesis Through Molecular Precursor Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1993        
File        : a9119067

Award Number: 9119067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Baxter baxterd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Caulton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm H. Chisholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9239,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports the work of Dr. David V. Baxter, Physics                      
              Department, and Drs. Kenneth G. Caulton and Malcolm H.                         
              Chisholm, Chemistry Department, Indiana University.  They will                 
              develop precursors for chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of thin                 
              films of tungsten carbide, early transition metal nitrides, and                
              some metal oxides and carbides.  Metal oxides, nitrides, and                   
              carbides will be formed from metal alkoxides, amides, and                      
              organometallics, respectively.  Specifically targeted for study                
              are the barium alkoxides, whose substituents will be modifed to                
              test the "steric pressure" on thin film properties;                            
              fluoroalkoxides of thallium, barium and calcium; metal                         
              alkoxides of Mo, W, Al, and alkali metals; and mixed alkoxides                 
              containing sodium and tungsten or potassium and zirconium.                     
              Emphasis will be placed on optimizing the volatility and                       
              hydrolytic insensitivity of precursors, continuing studies of                  
              the mechanism of transformation of precursors into solid state                 
              materials, and studying the role of precursor design in the                    
              properties of the final product.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The development of new electronic materials depends on the                     
              ability to control the composition of the material, its purity,                
              and its effective and economic deposition.  In this study, the                 
              influence of the starting material prior to deposition will be                 
              investigated for a variety of materials, as well as the                        
              mechanism of deposition.  Emphasis will be placed on the                       
              chemical synthesis and modification of new precursors in order                 
              to produce high quality thin films.
