Title       : Competitive Differentiation in Plants and Limits to Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9119544

Award Number: 9119544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott K. Gleeson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   The precise nature of controls on species distributions and               
              abundances is the central question in ecology.  Our understanding              
              of these controls is essential for managing natural and                        
              artificial systems for both diversity and yield, and for                       
              predicting and ameliorating the consequences of human impacts,                 
              including global climate changes.  Biological diversity has                    
              traditionally been understood as the expression of ecological                  
              differentiation between species.  More recent interest in the                  
              adaptive flexibility, or "plasticity", of many important species               
              characteristics has raised a fundamental problem; the more                     
              plastic a character is, the less it is likely to control species               
              distributions.  As a result, a major task for ecologists is to                 
              understand the relative plasticity of species characteristics.                 
              Previous work suggested that morphology (root--shoot allocation)               
              might be a key inflexible character in understanding the                       
              structure and dynamics of vegetation, but a crucial experiment                 
              failed to confirm this for a well-studied old-field successional               
              system.  This study will test a new hypothesis that physiology                 
              (tissue nitrogen concentration) is relatively less plastic than                
              morphology and may then be a key characteristic controlling plant              
              distributions and interactions in this system, and will determine              
              the range of applicability of this hypothesis.
