Title       : Analysis and Interpretation of Coordinated Solar Eclipse Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1992   
File        : a9119514

Award Number: 9119514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Golub INTERNET: lgolub@cfa200.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Principal Investigator, Dr. Leon Golub of the                         
              Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, has coordinated a campaign              
              to study the three-dimensional structure of the solar corona at                
              the 11 July 1991 total eclipse.  In addition to utilizing a                    
              series of ground-based observations, his campaign included a                   
              flight of the NIXT high resolution x-ray telescope sounding                    
              rocket payload, which coincided with totality as observed from                 
              the solar telescope in Hawaii.  Their goal is to study the                     
              structure of the inner corona with arcsecond spatial resolution,               
              and to determine both the connections made by the coronal                      
              structure to the Solar surface and the manner in which the inner               
              coronal structure determines that of the outer corona normally                 
              seen at eclipse.  They now will combine datasets which see the                 
              outer Solar atmosphere from the photospheric level, throught the               
              inner corona and out to 6 Rsol.                                                
              The campaign included a large number of ground-based observing                 
              teams, some of whom are mounting campaigns specifically for this               
              eclipse while others are providing more routine data, but are                  
              making a special point of observing in conjunction with the                    
              eclipse.  These teams include, among others, the 2.2m U. of                    
              Hawaii and the 3.6m Canada-France-Hawaii telescopes at Mauna Kea               
              for spectrally-resolved high spatial resolution data, the Multi-               
              station experiment for similar data spread out over several hours              
              of observing, spectroscopic data from Sac Peak, spectroheliograms              
              from Sac Peak and Kitt Peak, vector magnetic field data from the               
              Marshall Space Flight Center and from Big Bear Solar Observatory,              
              observation of Fe XIV by HAO located in Hawaii for the eclipse,                
              as well as many other more routine datasets.  In this proposal                 
              they are requesting only support for activities related to the                 
              massive task of coordinating the ground-based data reduction and               
              analysis effort related specifically to the above work.
