Title       : A Study of Thymic Nurse Cell Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9218859

Award Number: 9218859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry C. Guyden jerry@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9218859  Guyden    Thymic nurse cells (TNCs) are specialized epithelial
              components  that contain T cells completely enclosed in intra-cytoplasmic 
              vacuoles.  Very little information about their function has been  reported
              because of the lack of pure TNC populations in quantities  necessary for their
              thorough analyses.  Recently, this laboratory  has been able to immortalize
              TNCs with SV40 virus.  Cells from  these TNC lines have been shown to maintain
              the ability to   internalize thymocytes in vitro.  Further, it has been shown
              that  the only cells bound by an internalized into TNCs are CD4-  positive,
              CD8-positive thymocytes.  These cell lines will be used  to study TNC function.
               The goals of this research are to determine  the molecular components involved
              in TNC binding and  internalization of thymocytes, and to determine the
              specific  function of TNC internalization of double positive thymocytes in T 
              cell development.  Two strategies will be employed:  (1) TNC-  specific
              monoclonal antibodies (mAb) will be generated in an  attempt to identify the
              receptor/ligand involved in binding and  internalization.  (2) Antibody
              preparations shown to block binding  of thymocytes to TNCs will be used to
              clone the gene(s) expressing  the protein(s) involved.  These studies are
              designed to determine  the function of thymocyte binding and internalization by
              TNCs.    %%%  Thymic nurse cells are specialized epithelial cells of the thymus
               in which T-lymphocytes are regularly found completely enclosed in 
              intra-cytoplasmic vacuoles.  This is a very unusual phenomenon in  physiology. 
              Very little information about the function of thymic  nurse cells is known
              because of the lack of pure TNC populations in  quantities necessary for their
              thorough analyses.  However, they  are believed to play an important role in
              the development of T-  lymphocytes of the immune system.  With prior NSF
              support, this  laboratory has been able to grow pure populations of thymic
              nurse  cells in culture.  The goals of this project a re to study the 
              interaction of thymic nurse cells with T-lymphocytes at the  molecular level. 
              The results of this research should provide  unique new information on how
              thymic nurse cells function.  ***
