Title       : A Pore-Scale Computational Model for the Simulation of Mass Transfer From
               Nonaqueous Phase Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1995        
File        : a9218803

Award Number: 9218803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Celia celia@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study will provide a physically-based description of the mass             
              transfer process in multi-fluid porous media.  By developing a                 
              pore-scale miscible transport model and coupling it with existing              
              pore-scale models for fluid-fluid displacement, a complete and                 
              self-consistent mathematical description of capillary displacement,            
              fluid motion, interphase mass transfer, and miscible contaminant               
              transport will be obtained.  With this model, mass transfer                    
              coefficients will be predicted as  functions of interfacial areas,             
              which will be directly related to fluid saturations.  comparison               
              of model results to a number of reported laboratory experiments                
              involving non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) dissolution will be used             
              to validate the model.  Correlations between predicted mass                    
              transfer coefficients and capillary pressure-saturation-relative               
              permeability relations will be explored.  The model will be used               
              to investigate the functional dependence between dispersivities and            
              fluid saturations, including examination of possible hysteresis.               
              Finally, the influence of material heterogeneity will be explored,             
              with an emphasis on determination of effective mass transfer                   
              coefficients and macrodispersivities.  The practical utility of the            
              results will be demonstrated by coupling the continuum-scale                   
              transport properties predicted by the pore-scale models to more                
              traditional continuum-scale multi-phase simulators.
