Title       : Institute for Mechanics and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9218300

Award Number: 9218300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel C. Davis                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5400367            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Andre Meyers mameyers@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Skalak  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sia Nemat-Nasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Asaro  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Gilbert A. Hegemier  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An Institute of Mechanics and Materials (IMM) is being                         
              established at the University of California at San Diego to                    
              integrate research and industrial applications in mechanics and                
              materials.  The Institute will foster interdisciplinary                        
              communication and liaison between academia, industry and                       
              governmental organizations.  The principal activities will                     
              include short courses on frontier, interdisciplinary areas;                    
              workshops on specific industrial problems and innovative                       
              materials; and short and intermediate length visits of graduate                
              students, post-doctoral fellows, faculty members, and scientists               
              and engineers form government laboratories and industrial                      
              organizations.  The Institute will not conduct extensive research              
              projects, per se, but will aim to serve as an intellectual forum               
              to catalyze the formation of research groups when new areas or                 
              methods of approach are identified.  This will include novel                   
              techniques for materials development, synthesis and processing;                
              characterization and identification of properties-microstructure               
              relations; physically-based micromechanical and computational                  
              modeling; and constitutive relations for nonlinear response and                
              failure analysis; as well as design and performance analysis of                
              complete structural entities.  Timely topics will be discussed in              
              think-tank-style workshops which will also be used for periodic                
              assessments of long-term goals in mechanics and materials science              
              and engineering.  An external Board of Governors of prominent                  
              senior scientists and engineers will direct the Institute                      
              activities through action subcommittees and regularly assess the               
              Institute's progress.  The educational efforts of the Institute                
              will include all levels of engineers and scientists in academia,               
              industry and government (both national and international); and a               
              strong outreach program to high school students and their                      
              teachers on a nationwide basis wherever there is interest, with a              
              deliberate effort to reach minorities and under-represented                    
              segments of the population, as well as the gifted.
