Title       : Time Averaging in the Formation of Fossil Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1992  
File        : a9218530

Award Number: 9218530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric N. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   PI will investigate the time span required for death                      
              assemblage formation and the extent to which the temporal                      
              events in its formation, and hence the temporal history of                     
              the community, are discretely preserved.  To do so requires                    
              an inexpensive method for dating time-since-death of shells.                   
              The method under development is based on the observation                       
              that the proteinaceous matrix in the shells of bivalves                        
              gradually decomposes, freeing protein-bound amino acids                        
              which then accumulate, and the observation that these free                     
              amino acids gradually diffuse out of the shell.                                
              Accordingly, the degree of proteinaceous matrix remaining                      
              and the amount of free amino acid present (determined by the                   
              balance of production and diffusional loss) are both time                      
              dependent properties of the shell.  For the technique to be                    
              useful, it is essential that it be usable on shelf                             
              assemblages.  The shelf is typified by a preponderance of                      
              small species and a significant cross-shelf thermal                            
              gradient, each of which would tax the capabilities of the                      
              technique.  Accordingly, the purpose of this proposal is to                    
              demonstrate the ability of the amino acid dating method to                     
              answer the following important questions about death                           
              assemblage formation:  (1) What time span is required for                      
              death assemblage formation in clastic depositional regimes?                    
              (2) Which temporal events in the community are discretely                      
              preserved during death assemblage formation (not how                           
              stratigraphically compressed they are, but are they                            
              discreetly preserved in stratigraphic sequence)?  (3) Can                      
              the rates of taphonomic alteration be determined or at least                   
              can the extent to which taphonomic alteration is correlation                   
              with shell age (time-since-death) be measured?
