Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Studies in Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9218533

Award Number: 9218533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3617               (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Heilbron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart M. Feffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Stuart M. Feffer, doctoral candidate; dissertation topic: "Academic            
              Science and the German Optical Industry."                                      
                                                                                             
              With support from this grant, Mr. Feffer is undertaking research in            
              the company archives of the German firm Jenoptik GmbH.   His study             
              of technical optics is focusing on several aspects of the rapidly              
              changing relationship between science and industry during the                  
              period of the "second industrial revolution" -- the time during                
              which industries based on technologies of the laboratory (such as              
              chemicals, pharmaceuticals, optics and electricity) became                     
              important engines of economic growth.  Jenoptik is the successor to            
              the optical firm of Carl Zeiss Jena, one of the first makers of                
              optical technologies to successfully exploit the possibilities of              
              scientifically directed research and development, and as such must             
              be part of any study of the history of modern optical technology.              
              Because of immanent reorganization, however, the Zeiss company                 
              archives will be closed to users by the end of this year and will              
              remain closed for an indefinite period of time.  The next few                  
              months represents a window of opportunity in which these materials,            
              located in the former East Germany and for so long virtually                   
              unavailable to western researchers, may be consulted.
