Title       : Biophysical and Cell Biological Approaches to the Cryopreservation of Embryos
               From Lines of Drosophila of Genetic Interest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9218635

Award Number: 9218635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Mazur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9119,9161,
Abstract    :
                   By carefully controlling the developmental stage of Oregon R              
              Drosophila embryos, we have succeeded in subjecting them to                    
              cryogenic temperatures with reasonably high survivals; Some 65-70%             
              hatch and nearly 40% of the resulting larvae develop into fertile              
              adults.  The purpose of the proposed work is (1) to identify the               
              especially critical factors and their tolerances so as to                      
              facilitate the use of the procedure by the Drosophila community;               
              (2) prepare a detailed protocol of the procedure which identifies              
              the critical steps and their tolerances; and (3) test the                      
              applicability of the procedure to two representative mutant lines.             
              With respect to Aim (1) we are finding that the step that limits               
              survival is the exposure to 8.5 M ethylene glycol that precedes                
              vitrification.  Part of the damage from that exposure could be a               
              result of the osmotic dehydration accompanying the addition of                 
              concentrated ethylene glycol or it could be osmotic swelling                   
              associated with the removal of ethylene glycol after vitrification.            
              Part of the damage could be the result of chemical toxicity of the             
              high concentrations of glycol used.  The damage associated with                
              shrinkage and toxicity could be ameliorated by reducing the extent             
              and duration of shrinkage by reducing the concentration of glycol,             
              by changing the exposure temperature, or by the use of a more                  
              permeable cryoprotectant like perhaps dimethyl sulfoxide, all of               
              which will be tested.  A critical point to be determined is to what            
              extent one can manipulate these aspects of the cryoprotectant and              
              still achieve vitrification.  To reduce potential damage from                  
              osmotic swelling, we shall optimize the sucrose dilution procedure             
              used to control that swelling.  We also propose to determine the               
              tolerances to certain critical steps during vitrification per se.              
              These include (a) can boiling liquid nitrogen be used in place of              
              nitrogen slush?  If so, it will simplify the procedure; (b) are the            
              15-hr embryos now being used as sensitive to brief exposures above             
              -100 C and to warming rates slower than ultra rapid as the 12-hr               
              embryos used previously?  Knowledge on these points will be                    
              important to users of the procedure.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Because Drosophila melanogaster is such an experimentally powerful             
              organism, the numbers of mutant and/or genetically modified stocks             
              has become an overwhelming problem.  To date, all stocks must be               
              transferred about every two weeks.  The development of a method to             
              freeze embryos which is simple enough to be used in biology                    
              laboratories and yet allows a recovery of fertile at a 40% level               
              will save millions of dollars and man-hours of work in a reasonably            
              short time.  It should also help to ensure that important stocks do            
              not undergo genetic drift over time.
