Title       : Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative: Emerging Electronic and Photonic
               Materials Synthesis & Processing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9218096

Award Number: 9218096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Auner gauner@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir V. Mitin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9246,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The technology of electronic and photonic materials has an impact              
              on and is of vital importance to most of the leading manufacturing             
              industries and government laboratories in the United States.  In               
              fact, direct feedback from local industries indicates a pressing               
              need for students with a strong background in new advanced                     
              electronic and photonic materials synthesis and processing                     
              technology.  On-the-job training in high-technology industries                 
              costs enormous resources in time and money.  For this reason                   
              Wayne State University will develop a unique sequence of two                   
              courses on materials synthesis and processing that builds on                   
              existing courses and covers new electronic and photonic materials              
              of current and future importance.  Key topics include plasma, ion              
              beam, and laser deposition and processing technology; key                      
              electronic and photonic materials such as wide bandgap                         
              semiconductors, high-Tc superconductors, low dimensional                       
              structures, and associated new synthesis and processing techniques.            
              Special attention will be paid to the incorporation of Computer                
              Aided Engineering of processsimulation into the education process.             
              This course sequence isalso designed to give real world experience             
              using hands-onlaboratory experiments and directed projects in                  
              advanced electronicand photonic materials synthesis and processing.            
              Evaluation willbe carried out by direct student feedback, together             
              with review bya committee of faculty and industrial researchers.               
              The developedcourse will be published as a text accompanied by a               
              laboratorymanual and associated simulation software.  The college              
              ofengineering will sponsor a workshop after completion of course               
              development to disseminate this course to other universities and               
              institutions.
