Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Study of Interface Radiative Properties by
               Electromagnetic and Molecular Kinetic Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1995     
File        : a9218172

Award Number: 9218172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15086              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Buckius buckius@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a two-year collaborative research project                  
              between Professor Richard O. Buckius of the University of Illinois             
              and Professor Kunio Hijikata of Tokyo Institute of Technology and              
              Professor Toshiro Makino of Kyoto University.  The objective is to             
              experimentally and theoretically analyze radiative heat transfer               
              properties of surfaces and films from first principles.  Usual                 
              radiant energy transfer calculations for surfaces and films make               
              rather ad hoc assumptions about the surfaces roughness, length                 
              scales, and material properties due to the lack of fundamental                 
              knowledge of the radiation scattering characteristics and the                  
              interface parameters.  Very common engineering approximations                  
              include specular reflection, diffuse reflection, constant bulk                 
              material properties, small interface roughness, etc.  These                    
              approximations are often inaccurate for surfaces used in many                  
              practical applications, and they usually require an empirical                  
              approach to determine specific values of the radiative properties.             
              The collaborative project considers exact approaches to the                    
              quantification of the radiative surface properties through the use             
              of general electromagnetic scattering and molecular kinetic                    
              theories.  The U.S. group is addressing the rough and configured               
              surfaces while the Japanese groups are studying the superconducting            
              films and optical properties and rough films from a fractal-based              
              approach.
