Title       : Alpha-2-Macroglobulin of Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9218460

Award Number: 9218460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Armstrong   (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Quigley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The alpha-2-macroglobulins are plasma proteins that are present in             
              all classes of vertebrates and that function as broad-spectrum                 
              protease inhibitors.  The proposed research will investigate the               
              structure and function of a form of alpha-2-macroglobulin from the             
              horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus.  This laboratory has obtained              
              extensive peptide sequence information and antisera to Limulus                 
              alpha-2-macroglobulin which will be used to isolate and sequence               
              the full length cDNA from a CDNA library developed to the poly (A)+            
              RNA of the Limulus amebocyte.  In contrast to vertebrates, which               
              possess a large number of plasma protease inhibitors, alpha-2-                 
              macroglobulin is the only protease inhibitor in the plasma of                  
              Limulus, which should facilitate its functional characterization in            
              vivo.  The proposed research will investigate the possibility that             
              alpha-2-macroglobulin participates in a receptor-mediated clearance            
              pathway for proteases.  Alpha-2-macroglobulin also participates in             
              a cytolytic system in the plasma of Limulus that may be homologous             
              to the vertebrate complement system.  This system will be                      
              characterized, the participating molecules identified, and their               
              sequence of action and mechanism of cytolysis characterized.  This             
              study, which represents the first molecular characterization of a              
              complement-like cytolytic system in an invertebrate, should yield              
              valuable information concerning this important immune-like defense             
              system.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Multicellular organisms have a varied array of defense strategies              
              that limit their susceptibility to damage by potential pathogens.              
              These defense mechanisms generally involve cells and soluble                   
              factors of the blood.  One of the most ancient of these blood                  
              factors is the plasma protein, alpha-2-macroglobulin.  This                    
              molecule is found in a wide range of animals from invertebrates to             
              humans.  Alpha-2-macroglobulin appears to have two general types of            
              function, one as a trap for enzymes in the blood or on cell                    
              surfaces that might otherwise do damage by digesting other                     
              proteins, and the second is as a part of a specific biochemical                
              chain reaction that functions to kill invading pathogens or foreign            
              cells.   The purpose of this research is to characterize the                   
              structure and function of the alpha-2-macroglobulin from the                   
              horseshoe crab, Limulus, a relatively primitive animal.  The                   
              results of this research will contribute to understanding of the               
              diverse array of defense mechanisms found in nature, and may also              
              shed light on the functioning of the defense molecules of higher               
              organisms.
