Title       : Modeling Solution Crystal Growth Processes: Toward Three- Dimensional, Transient
               Simulations on Massively Parallel Supercomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1995    
File        : a9218842

Award Number: 9218842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Derby derby@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Large, single crystals of exacting quality are needed for the                  
              fabrication of advanced optical, magnetic, and electronic                      
              devices, and the growth of these crystals is one of the most                   
              difficult challenges in modern materials processing.  The                      
              properties responsible for the performance of a crystal in a                   
              device are determined by crystalline structure or composition.                 
                                                                                             
              Often, these characteristics are affected during the growth of                 
                                                                                             
              the crystal by processes which link molecularscale growth                      
              processes with macroscopic transport processes.  A long-term                   
              goal in crystal growth modeling is to understand the                           
              mechanisms which influence crystal quality through the                         
              hierarchy of length and time scales relevant to these                          
              molecular-scale and macroscale processes.                                      
                                                                                             
              The immediate goal of this research is to develop the tools                    
              necessary to understand the interactions of transport                          
              phenomena, crystal growth kinetics, and crystallography in                     
              solution crystal growth processes.  The realistic modeling of                  
              fluid flow, and mass transfer, and crystal growth habit in                     
              these systems has not been possible in the past due to the                     
              extreme computational challenges posed by these truly three-                   
              dimensional, time-dependent systems.  However, the coming                      
              generations of massively parallel supercomputers promise to                    
              deliver the performance (in terms of speed and memory) to make                 
                                                                                             
              such computations viable.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The principal investigator will develop, test, and apply new                   
              algorithms for modeling solution crystal growth systems.  This                 
                                                                                             
              work will place particular emphasis on algorithms appropriate                  
                                                                                             
              for massively parallel supercomputers.  The benefits of this                   
              work promise to be enormous, both in the development of                        
              appropriate algorithms for this type of supercomputer and in                   
              their application to understanding the complexities of                         
              solution growth systems.
