Title       : Procedures for Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9218679

Award Number: 9218679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $535191             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Yphantis david@spin6.mcb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ultracentrifuge is one of the few instruments that provide                 
              direct and reliable information about molecular weights and                    
              interactions of macromolecules in solution.  Sedimentation                     
              equilibrium techniques are especially valuable because of their                
              foundation on equilibrium thermodynamics.  They provide the most               
              reliable and foolproof estimates of solution parameters with an                
              excellent degree of precision using interferometric observations               
              of concentration distributions.  Sedimentation velocity                        
              experiments can yield detailed  information about size/shape                   
              distributions.  Recent advances have made automated on-line                    
              interferometric data acquisition a routine and simple procedure.               
              Commercial instrumentation currently provides high-quality                     
              absorbance measurements in a new ultracentrifuge.  This proposed               
              research will develop procedures and data analysis techniques for              
              characterizing difficult macromolecular interacting system.                    
              Equilibrium experiments will be analyzed primarily by various                  
              least squares fitting programs that will make possible extensive               
              global fits to physicochemical parameters of the solute (s) with               
              assured confidence limits.  Programs will be devised for                       
              precisely and automatically monitoring attainment of equilibrium.              
              Novel approaches to equilibrium sedimentation experiments will be              
              explored. Instrumentation will be developed for significant                    
              improvement of precision on-line interferometry in both                        
              equilibrium and velocity experiments.  These various approaches                
              will be applied to problems of topical interest, largely, but not              
              completely, from biotechnology enterprises.
