Title       : U.S.-Japan Seminar: Hyperon-Nucleon Interactions/October 1993/Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9218081

Award Number: 9218081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Barnes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Alamos National Lab
	      
	      Los Alamos, NM  87545    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports the participation of eleven U.S. scientists                
              in a U.S.-Japan Seminar on Hyperon-Nucleon Interactions, to be                 
              held in Hawaii October 25-28, 1993.  The co-organizers are Dr.                 
              Peter Barnes, Director of the Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility                
              (LAMPF) and Professor Kozi Nakai, Head of the Proton Synchrotron               
              Physics Division, National Laboratory for High Energy Physics                  
              (KEK), Japan.  In addition to participants from the United States              
              and Japan, scientists from Canada, France, Germany, Israel, The                
              Netherlands, and Korea have been invited.                                      
                                                                                             
              The seminar will focus on investigation of techniques to perform               
              hyperon-nucleon scattering experiments in the U.S. facilities at               
              the Brookhaven National Laboratory and Los Alamos and the                      
              Japanese facilities at KEK.  The utilization of modern kaon and                
              pion beans, combined with new techniques in tracking detectors,                
              makes possible a new generation of hyperon production and decay                
              measurements.  Special emphasis will be placed on the status of                
              theoretical approaches to these problems and identification of                 
              those observables, which will clarify the theoretical issues.                  
              The discussion will include analysis of topics related to                      
              hyperon-nucleon scattering such as hypernuclear spectroscopy, H                
              dibaryon searches, polarization in hyperon production, and                     
              hyperon semileptonic and nonmesonic weak decay.  The participants              
              will formulate specific plans for realistic experiments.
