Title       : Site-directed mutagenesis of two glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1994    
File        : a9218856

Award Number: 9218856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Richard Levy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenases of L. mesenteroides and Z.              
              mobilis exhibit dual coenzyme specificities, utilizing either NAD              
              or NADP.  The long-range goal of these studies is to develop an                
              understanding of the structural features of these enzymes which                
              permit this dual specificity.  Site-directed mutagenesis will be               
              utilized in order to identify those residues involved in                       
              specificity for each coenzyme and perhaps to switch specificities.             
              Chemical modification studies will be utilized to identify coenzyme            
              binding sites.  Kinetic studies will be employed to characterize               
              the enzyme in the presence of different coenzymes.  The                        
              conformation change induced by the coenzymes will be characterized.            
              These studies will provide new insights into the relationship                  
              between structure and function in the more common NAD- or NADP-                
              specific glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenases.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Enzymes involved in metabolic pathways exhibit high specificity for            
              coenzymes.  In fact, this dependence on the presence of specific               
              coenzymes is often utilized in the general control of metabolic                
              pathways.  What structural aspects of the glucose-6-phosphate                  
              dehydrogenases (G6PDs) determine their requirement for NAD or NADP             
              coenzymes is an interesting and important question.  The proposed              
              research utilizes two interesting G6PDs which show dual coenzyme               
              specificity.  Binding of either NAD or NADP induces structural                 
              changes in the enzyme which result in quite distinct catalytic                 
              properties.  Site-directed mutagenesis will be utilized to probe               
              the structure of the enzyme as it relates to coenzyme binding.  The            
              results will provide insights into the functional behavior of the              
              more common NAD- or NADP-specific G6PDs.
