Title       : U.S.-Czechoslovakia Mathematics Research on Iterative Methods for Nonsymmetric
               Linear Systems and Eigenvalue Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1993  
File        : a9218024

Award Number: 9218024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10101              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Greenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5930,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this U.S.-Czech research project between              
              Anne Greenbaum of the New York University Courant Institute and                
              Zdenek Strakos of the Institute of Computer and Informations                   
              Science, Czech Academy of Sciences, is to analyze and develop                  
              iterative methods for solving the non-symmetric linear systems and             
              eigenvalue problems that arise in many areas of scientific                     
              computing.  Current iterative methods for solving such problems                
              are sometimes effective but lack a firm theoretical foundation and             
              may not be robust.  Dr. Greenbaum and Dr. Strakos intend to                    
              develop criteria for determining the effectiveness of an iterative             
              method and to design new methods for which these criteria will be              
              satisfied.  They will analyze Krylov space methods for shich these             
              criteria will be satisfied.  They will analyze Krylov space methods            
              and consider the advantages of choosing approximations from                    
              different spaces as well.  The researchers hope to explain the                 
              success of the biconjugate gradient and QMR (Quasi-Minimal                     
              Residual) methods and to analyze the effects of finite precision               
              arithmetic on these algorithms.  They also will study the potential            
              for parallelism in various algorithms and develop parallel                     
              implementations for specific machine architectures.  Altogether                
              results are expected to contribute to our ability to solve large sparse        
              linear equations.  Iterative algorithms for such problems are keys to          
              numerous computational solution methods in science and                         
              engineering.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project in computational mathematics fulfills the program                 
              objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the             
              U.S. and Czechoslovakia to combine complementary talents and                   
              pool research resources in the areas of strong mutual interest and             
              competence.
