Title       : Undergraduate Materials Education Initiative: An Innovative Undergraduate
               Materials Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9218126

Award Number: 9218126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Gaskell gaskell@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith J. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin P. Trumble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Caruthers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas A. Peppas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9246,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the past few years, a new core undergraduate materials                  
              educations program has been introduced at Purdue.  This core                   
              program is based upon an integration of structure, properties,                 
              processing, and performance across the classes of materials.  A                
              major need in the full curriculum is to emphasize the development              
              of microstructure through synthesis and processing.  To meet this              
              need, Purdue will develop six new senior level courses.  Four                  
              courses in the inorganic materials area will involve deposition                
              processing, solidification processing, powder processing, and                  
              deformation processing.  Two courses on organic materials will                 
              include synthesis and manufacturing and physical chemistry and                 
              microstructures, together with a new comprehensive polymer                     
              engineering laboratory.  An Advisory Committee involving                       
              representatives from industries with processing operations will                
              assist in all stages of the proposed program.  Evaluations by this             
              Committee and input from students at all phases will be utilized to            
              maintain a focus and provide direction for the development of                  
              instructional materials.  Dissemination of information will be made            
              by presentations at various professional society symposia and by               
              monographs.  Culmination of this effort will be a special symposium            
              on Materials Synthesis and Processing Education at Purdue.
