Title       : Stable Isotope Stratigraphy of the Miocene Monterey Formation, California:
               Testing the Monterey Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9218738

Award Number: 9218738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97711              (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Kennett kennett@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   PI will conduct sedimentologic, stable isotopic and                       
              biostratigraphic studies of the Naples Beach exposure of the                   
              Miocene Monterey Formation, California.  Monterey Formation                    
              deposition occurred over a significant interval of global                      
              change, and the preservational quality of the Naples Beach                     
              section represents an important opportunity for obtaining                      
              detailed paleoenvironmental records.                                           
                   The sequestering of great quantities of organic carbon                    
              in the Monterey Formation and correlative deposits around                      
              the Pacific Rim has been linked to an early to middle                          
              Miocene increase in deep-sea  13C, and to global cooling                       
              through drawdown of pCO2, termed the "Monterey Hypothesis".                    
              The proposed work will test a corollary of the Monterey                        
              Hypothesis by evaluating the synchroneity between intervals                    
              of enhanced organic-rich deposition in the Monterey                            
              Formation and deep-sea  13C maxima, which requires better                      
              age control than the existing biostratigraphy and                              
              chemostratigraphy provide.  Stable isotopic stratigraphy has                   
              the potential for direct comparison of intervals of organic-                   
              rich deposition with  13C maxima in the Naples Beach record,                   
              or for correlation to deep-sea  13C maxima.  Central                           
              questions which the proposed work will address are:  Can                       
              stable isotopic stratigraphy enhance international                             
              correlation of the Monterey Formation and aid in testing the                   
              Monterey Hypothesis?  What is the relationship between                         
              sedimentary sequences in marginal basins of the Pacific Rim                    
              to global paleoceanographic changes?                                           
                   PI will develop a stable isotopic stratigraphy and a                      
              detailed paleoenvironmental history based on quantitative                      
              analysis of benthic foraminiferal faunas.  integration of                      
              the resulting faunal and stable isotopic time series with                      
              sedimentologic information will greatly enhance correlation                    
              to Miocene sequences of the Pacific Rim and illuminate the                     
              relationship between organic-rich deposition and global                        
              oceanographic events in the early to middle Miocene.
