Title       : Temporal and Spatial Regulation of Cyanogenesis in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1995   
File        : a9218929

Award Number: 9218929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan E. Poulton jonathan-poulton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Che Shih  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rosaceous stone fruits (Prunus spp.) are among many commercially               
              important crops causing cyanide poisoning in humans and livestock              
              through their release of hydrogen cyanide from cyanogenic                      
              glycosides by endogenous enzymes.  To understand better the                    
              biochemistry and physiology of plant cyanogenesis, the metobolism              
              of the cyanoglycosides (R)-prunasin and (R)-amygdalin will be                  
              investigated in black cherry (Prunus serotina) using biochemical,              
              immunocytochemical and molecular approaches.  Levels of prunasin,              
              amygdalin, two biosynthetic enzymes (UDPG:mandelonitrile                       
              glucosyltransferase (GT I) and UDPG:prunasin glucosyltransferase               
              (GT II), and three catabolic enzymes (amygdalin hydrolase (AH),                
              prunasin hydrolase (PH) and mandelonitrile lyase (MDL)) will be                
              assayed during embryogenesis.  The distribution of GT I and II and             
              of amygdalin within seeds will be determined by immunocytochemistry            
              and FT-IR microspectroscopy, respectively.  Using previously raised            
              polyclonal antibodies, an existing black cherry cDNA library will              
              be screened to obtain AH, PH and MDL cDNA clones.  These clones                
              will be utilized to begin examining the temporal and spatial                   
              expression of these genes during embryogenesis by Northern blot                
              analysis and in situ hybridization techniques.                                 
                                                                                             
              Whether germinating seedlings utilize amygdalin as a nitrogen                  
              source will be examined by measuring the levels and localization of            
              the aforementioned cyanoglycosides and enzymes, along with the HCN             
              detoxification enzyme Beta-cyanoalanine synthase, in various                   
              seedling parts.
