Title       : Mathematical Sciences: 1993 Summer Research Institute: Stochastic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9218183

Award Number: 9218183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69238              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Durrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In recent years the stochastic point of view has achieved                 
              great prominence, both as an active area of probability theory and             
              as a powerful tool in problems of analysis, geometry, and                      
              mathematical physics.  For example, the classical Ito theory of                
              stochastic differential equations, which defines a finite-                     
              dimensional diffusion process, already leads to many interesting               
              connections with analysis in Euclidean space and finite-dimensional            
              differentiable manifolds.  The same stochastic differential                    
              equations can also be used to define a stochastic flow, which is a             
              diffusion process on the group of diffeomorphisms, an infinite-                
              dimensional space.  This naturally leads to the study of other                 
              infinite-dimensional processes, especially those defined by                    
              stochastic partial differential equations.                                     
                   This project will support the 1993 AMS Summer Research                    
              Institute on Stochastic Analysis to be held July 11-30, 1993 at                
              Cornell University in Ithaca, NY.  This Institute is the 41st in a             
              series designed with the purpose of bringing together a group of               
              mathematicians interested in a particular field of mathematical                
              research.  Emphasis is placed on instruction at a very high level              
              with seminars and lectures by distinguished mathematicians in                  
              related fields, in order to promote interaction between                        
              participants while broadening their mathematical perspectives.  The            
              goal of the Institute will be to highlight the main directions of              
              the field through principal lectures by leaders in the following               
              general areas:  stochastic (ordinary) differential equations,                  
              applications to analysis, applications to geometry, stochastic                 
              flows, infinite dimensional problems, and stochastic partial                   
              differential equations.
