Title       : Resonance Ionization Detection of Hazardous Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9218398

Award Number: 9218398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrill A. Cool   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0313030   Solid Waste Disposal                    
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9187,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Investigation of the use of resonance-enhanced multiphoton                     
              ionization spectroscopy and time-of-flight mass spectrometry                   
              (REMPI/TOFMS) for the continuous monitoring of stack gas                       
              emissions from hazardous waste incinerators will be carried                    
              out.  In this program, the potential of the REMPI/TOFMS method                 
              for repetitive on-line monitoring of numerous species chosen                   
              from a list of currently identified surrogates will be                         
              investigated; the effort will combine detailed spectroscopic                   
              measurements of fundamental importance in understanding                        
              molecular structures with measurements of detection limits and                 
              selectivities needed for practical application of the                          
              technique.  The apparatus to be used is a prototype of a                       
              potential portable sampling and detection system envisioned                    
              for on-line real-time monitoring at an incineration facility.                  
              Particular emphasis will be placed on one- and two-color REMPI                 
              spectroscopic studies of chlorinated polycyclic aromatics;                     
              analyses of the vibronic spectral signatures of these species                  
              will be carried out.  Since  formation and destruction of                      
              congeners of the chlorinated dibenzodioxins and dibenzofurans                  
              are expected to follow siminar pathways, spectroscopy of the                   
              less toxic, more abundant mono- and di-chlorinated species                     
              will receive high priority.  Due to the importance of                          
              chlorinatef congeners of phenol as precursors to the formation                 
              of PCDDs and PCDFs, studies of detection limits and                            
              sensitivities for mono- and di-chlorinated phenols will also                   
              be carried out.  Selectivity and detection limit measurements                  
              for two-color R2PI of biphenyl, p-dichlorobiphenyl,                            
              phenylphenol(4-hydroxybiphenyl), chloro-phenylphenon,                          
              phenanthrene, anthracene, and pyrene will also be made.                        
              Finally, studies of REMPI spectroscopy of dibenzo-p-dioxin,                    
              dibenzofuran, and several of their mono- and di-chlorinated                    
              congeners will be carried out.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The spectral sensitivity of REMPI, realizable with jet-cooling                 
              of the sample, eliminates the need for time-consuming                          
              capillary column sample separation of conventional GC/MS                       
              analysis procedures which are considered to be impractical for                 
              use in continuous emission monitoring of incinerator                           
              effluents.  It is anticipated that the potential of                            
              REMPI/TOFMS for real-time on-line repetitive monitoring of                     
              trace concentrations of wide classes of chlorinated organics,                  
              including polycyclic aromatic compounds, may help address                      
              current public health concerns and produce more effective and                  
              simplified licensing procedures for incinerators.
