Title       : Development of an in Situ Spectrofluorometer and Absorption Meter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9218223

Award Number: 9218223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490365             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Ronald V. Zaneveld   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Cowles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Oregon State University in conjunction with a local small business             
              will undertake an ocean sciences instrumentation development                   
              project to develop an in situ spectral fluorescence and absorption             
              meter for use at sea.  Specifications call for it to quantitatively            
              measure absorption and fluorescence at multiple excitation and                 
              emission wavelengths throughout the ultraviolet and visible parts              
              of the spectrum.  The instrument will address several research                 
              areas in biological, chemical, and optical oceanography.  It will              
              facilitate measurements of the concentration and nature of                     
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC), the composition of suspended matter            
              in the water column, the rate of photosynthetic processes, the                 
              degree of light absorption in the ultraviolet (and the related                 
              problem of the potential effects of ozone depletion on biota), and             
              the contribution of spectral absorption and fluorescence on                    
              radiative transfer.  Spectral data improves upon non-spectral                  
              information by allowing accurate representation of the relationship            
              between the depth-dependent changes in the spectral underwater                 
              light field with phytoplankton absorption and quantum yield                    
              spectra.  The instrument represents new capability to help address             
              critical questions in bio-optical oceanography and it represents an            
              important step toward remote detection of quantities previously                
              measured only from discrete bottle samples.
