Title       : Dissertation Research: The Kinematics and Kinetics of Fore- limb Use During
               "Arboreal" and Terrestrial Quadrupedalism inPrimates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9218451

Award Number: 9218451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Schmitt  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Theories of the evolution of upright locomotion in primates               
              (bipedal walking and suspensory arm-swinging) generally assume a               
              starting point of adaptation to arboreal quadrupedalism.  All these            
              theories have assumed that quadrupedal locomotion in a complex,                
              discontinuous arboreal habitat requires a unique pattern of                    
              flexible forelimb use accompanied by reduced weight support by the             
              forelimb, and that together these factors allowed for the                      
              development of several specialized hominoid locomotor behaviors.               
              However, no study exists to date that evaluates the differences in             
              forelimb use between arboreal and terrestrial primate quadrupeds               
              travelling in both sorts of environments.  And no study in this                
              area has examined the actual mechanics of forelimb use in these                
              quadrupeds.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                   This study, from the finest laboratory investigating the                  
              kinetics and kinematics primate locomotion, will provide such an               
              analysis of a variety of primate species with different locomotor              
              patterns.  Preliminary studies already suggest very different sorts            
              of forelimb use of a single species when involved in different                 
              sorts of locomotion.  The results of this study will provide                   
              empirical data with which we may better understand primate                     
              quadrupedalism and be able to evaluate the accepted stereotype of              
              arboreal quadrupedalism as a basis for erect locomotion.                       
                                                                                             
                   This project is also important in its contribution to the                 
              training of a promising young scholar in biological anthropology.
