Title       : Investigation of Guangala Exchange and Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1993   
File        : a9218526

Award Number: 9218526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16547              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria A. Masucci   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Masucci will                
              conduct neutron activation analysis of clay samples collected in               
              the southwestern portion of Ecuador. She will also conduct                     
              neutron activation as well as petrographic analysis on a series                
              of ceramics which date from Guangala Phase (100B.C.-A.D.800)                   
              sites located in the same region. These studies will shed light                
              on details of the ceramic manufacturing process and also allow                 
              the clay in finished vessels to be traced back to raw material                 
              source areas. This information in turn will permit Dr. Masucci to              
              reconstruct the economic and political interactions among                      
              individual Guangala Phase communities and determine how they                   
              changed over time.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The Andean region was home to one of the world's great                         
              civilizations which saw the incorporation of large numbers of                  
              individuals into a state comparable in size to those which exist               
              in the region today. Centralized authorities commanded enough                  
              labor to erect monumental constructions and maintain an extensive              
              road system. Archaeologists wish to understand the processes                   
              which lead to the rise of complex societies and many believe that              
              trade, and relative inequities which developed through it may                  
              have played an important part. While much is known about the                   
              prehistory of Peru, relatively less information is available for               
              Ecuador, its northern neighbor, and as the political situation in              
              Peru has grown more difficult, archaeologists have focussed their              
              attention more in other Andean regions. The Guangala Phase                     
              appears to mark a period of incipient political centralization                 
              and therefore the results of Dr. Masucci's work should shed light              
              on the state development process.                                              
                                                                                             
              This project will produce data of interest to a large number of                
              archaeologists. It will also help to develop analytic techniques               
              which may be applied in many archaeological situations.
