Title       : Viruses in Marine Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9218234

Award Number: 9218234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9117,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Recent evidence suggest that viruses may be very important in                  
              marine food webs, with some estimates suggesting they are                      
              responsible for the majority of bacterial mortality, and driving a             
              significant component of nutrient cycling.  If these estimates are             
              correct, the scientific community will need a major rethinking of              
              our conceptual models and modification of the performance and                  
              interpretation of many currently-accepted field measurements.                  
              However, the evidence to date is only from a few samples, and the              
              methods and results are in real need of verification before they               
              can be accepted with confidence.  The objectives of this project               
              are to use a variety of independent methods to measure from marine             
              samples: (1) mortality rates of bacteria from viral infection in               
              the context of bacterial growth and mortality from other sources               
              including protistan grazers, and (2)  the rates and mechanisms by              
              which free viruses are removed or destroy.  There are no known                 
              direct means to measure virus-induced bacterial mortality in                   
              natural mixed population, so two indirect methods will be used: (a)            
              electron microscopy of field populations containing mature                     
              intracellular viruses, and (b) native virus population size changes            
              and removal or decay rates in field samples.  Rates will be                    
              compared to estimates of bacterial growth, grazing losses, and                 
              size-fractionated total mortality in an attempt to assemble a                  
              "source and sink" budget for large enclosed samples.  Rates and                
              mechanisms of viral decay and removal will be studied with both                
              natural populations and cultured viruses.  This project includes               
              some laboratory work, but primarily field studies to be performed              
              in nearshore and offshore environments off California.  The use of             
              multiple methods, cross-verified with each other, should greatly               
              increase the confidence in any conclusion that are reached.
