Title       : Network Information Services for the NSFnet and the NREN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1994 
File        : a9218749

Award Number: 9218749
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Priscilla Jane Huston                   
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4793092            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent England kwe@cerf.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Estrada  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Calcari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9217,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   To put information and tools at the Internet user's finger                
              tips, the InterNIC information services will include a full-service            
              Reference Desk, a database of comprehensive networking materials               
              called the Info Source, training classes and documentation, and                
              coordination services among all appropriate groups in the                      
              community. Several additional methods will be used to maintain                 
              quality over the life of the project, such as reference desk                   
              tracking procedures, reviews by the Liaison Council, and internal              
              quality scores. In keeping with the innovative spirit of the                   
              Internet, several new approaches to distributing services will be              
              implemented. Among these innovations is NICLink, a user-friendly               
              hypermedia interface offering access to the Info Source and all the            
              information it contains. NICLink will be distributed on both                   
              standard computer diskettes and CD-ROM. Another is the concept of              
              the Info Scout, an individual who will scout out new resources and             
              innovative uses of the network for inclusion in the Info Source.               
              Access methods to the Info Source will include services such as                
              WAIS and X.500, and the InterNIC staff will add additional                     
              state-of-the-art access methods as they come into use by the                   
              community. The project is one of three collaborative activities                
              comprising the Network Information Services Management Project. To             
              create a single, seamless user interface to the three activities a             
              coordination plan will be implemented to make the InterNIC appear              
              to be one network information center--a single source to handle all            
              user questions. The interface will be intuitive and easy to use,               
              and users will be able to access the various services using a                  
              simple unified procedure.
