Title       : Workshop on Approaches to Artificial Intelligence, Santa Fe,New Mexico, November
               1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1992 
File        : a9218448

Award Number: 9218448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nils J. Nilsson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Rumelhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6856,
Abstract    :
              The field of artificial intelligence (AI) has as its goal the                  
              development of machines that can perceive, reason, communicate, and            
              act in complex environments much like humans can, or possibly even             
              better than humans can.  Even though the field has produced some               
              practically useful machines with rudiments of these abilities, it              
              is generally conceded that the ultimate goal is still distant.                 
              That being so, there is much discussion and argument about what are            
              the best approaches for AI in the sense of laying the core                     
              foundations for achieving ultimate goals as well as best in the                
              sense of producing practically useful shorter-term results.  Thus,             
              a number of different paradigms have emerged over the past                     
              thirty-five years or so.  Each has its ardent advocates, and some              
              have produced sufficiently many interesting results so as not to be            
              dismissable out of hand.  Perhaps combinations of these approaches             
              will be required.  In any case, the advocates of these approaches              
              often feel that theirs is the "breakthrough" methodology that                  
              deserves special support. In order to acquaint researchers and                 
              others with these paradigms and their principal results, the Santa             
              Fe Institute organizes a workshop to which advocates actively                  
              working in the different approaches will be invited.  Such a                   
              workshop allows leading workers to understand each others' points              
              of view and the relationships among them.  Specifically the                    
              workshop is not organized around what classically have been the                
              main sub-disciplines of AI, namely machine vision, natural language            
              processing, knowledge representation, planning, expert systems, and            
              so on.  Instead, different perspectives are presented on how the               
              whole, or major parts, of AI ought to be attacked.
