Title       : Regulation and Structure of the mer Operon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1994   
File        : a9218636

Award Number: 9218636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne O. Summers summers@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9187,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Metal ions figure significantly in the activity of many enzymes                
              biological systems also make very subtle distinctions among                    
              metallic elements to control fundamental information transduction              
              processes.  Moreover, proteins with active-site sulfhydryl groups              
              (potential metal binding targets) play key roles in DNA replication            
              and repair.  Presently, our understanding of what determines                   
              specific protein-metal interactions and of how alternative metals              
              can modulate protein behavior is incomplete.  Summers studies the              
              bacterial mercury (Hg) resistance (mer) locus, an operon controlled            
              by a small, Hg-responsive, DNA binding, transcriptional                        
              activator/repressor, MerR.  Her work has focussed on MerR                      
              interactions with its cognate DNA site, merOP, and with RNA                    
              polymerase.  She will use molecular genetics and biochemistry to               
              discern the MerR domains which enable it to sequester RNA                      
              polymerase at merOP prior to induction and those responsible for               
              the DNA distortion which takes place during activation.  She will              
              dissect the relationship between the mer operon and the                        
              chromosomally encoded oxidative shock regulon.  Finally, she will              
              employ random and site specific mutagenesis to obtain MerR mutants             
              responsive to transition metals other than Hg(II).  These variant              
              MerR proteins will be examined in vitro for their metal and DNA                
              binding properties.                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Certain micro-organisms have the ability to grow in the presence of            
              chemicals which are toxic to most other organisms.  One way this is            
              accomplished is through conversion of the toxic form of the                    
              chemical to a non or less toxic form.  This proposal investigates              
              the genetic mechanisms which regulate and control the expression of            
              a set of genes in bacteria which function in the detoxification of             
              mercury.                                                                       
              $$$//
