Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Spectroscopic Characterization of Redox
               Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1997      
File        : a9218155

Award Number: 9218155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Therese M. Cotton tmcotton@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a two-year collaborative research project                  
              between Professor Therese Cotton of Iowa State University and                  
              Professor Katsume Niki of Yokohama National University.  The                   
              objective of the research is to develop methods for enhancing the              
              heterogeneous electron transfer process at the electrode surface.              
              An understanding of those factors that are important for reversible            
              electron transfer could result in the preparation of bioelectronic             
              devices based upon the photosynthetic components.  Professor Cotton            
              will continue development of monolayer methods and use resonance               
              Raman spectroscopy (RR) and surface-enhanced resonance Raman                   
              scattering (SERRS) to characterize the monolayers.  Professor Niki             
              will develop electrode surface modifications for improving electron            
              transfer kinetics.  The adsorbed monolayers will then be                       
              characterized by electroreflectance spectroscopy.  Also involved in            
              the project is Professor Robert Uphaus of Iowa State University.               
                                                                                             
              The U.S. and Japanese groups have complementary expertise in the               
              characterization of proteins and other electroactive species on                
              electrode surfaces.  The use of RR and SERRS in the U.S. component             
              of the research will provide vibrational spectra of the various                
              redox active species.  The Japanese group will determine                       
              electroreflectance spectra on the same systems.  Measurement of                
              optical changes in the pigments as a function of potential will be             
              extremely valuable in those cases where the vibrational spectra                
              overlap strongly.  Moreover, the use of optical measurements may               
              enable the accurate determination of the midpoint potential of BChl            
              and BPheo in the reaction centers.  This information is very                   
              important with respect to the mechanism of photoinduced electron               
              transfer.
