Title       : COLLABORATIVE PROJECT: Defining Plant Signals That StructureMicrobial
               Communities in the Rhizosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9218567

Award Number: 9218567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Phillips daphillips@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence I. Kado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9218567  Phillips  Natural bacteria on and near roots contribute to plant
              growth, but  little is known about how particular bacterial species form 
              communities in the rhizosphere.  Therefore, it is important to  clarify the
              molecular basis of plant-microbe signaling and define  its role in bacterial
              growth, survival, and colonization of roots.   Recent results show that small
              quantities of certain plant  compounds regulate transcription of genes required
              for infection by  Rhizobium and Agrobacterium bacteria.  It is postulated that
              other  plant-induced genes in these bacteria control earlier stages of  root
              colonization and that homologous genes are present in other  rhizosphere
              microbes.  This project will use Rhizobium and  Agrobacterium as models to find
              novel plant-regulated genes that  are important for understanding broader
              issues of rhizosphere  biology.  By moving beyond the well-studied nodulation
              and  virulence genes in these organisms, it is hoped to build a basis  for
              future research on rhizosphere ecology.  This project  specifically will 1)
              define chemical structures of plant signals  that induce genes in soil
              bacteria, 2) isolate novel bacterial  genes responding to the compounds, 3)
              deduce signal transduction  pathways, and 4) assess the importance of the
              molecules as  regulators of microbial colonization in the soil.  These goals
              will  be achieved by identifying natural signals from alfalfa (Medicago  sativa
              L.) which induce transcription of random bioluminescence  (lux) gene fusions in
              R. meliloti and A. tumefaciens.  The tools  and experience for this project are
              available in the complementary  programs of the three co-principal
              investigators.  D. A. Phillips  has studied Rhizobium-legume interactions for
              many years and uses  modern methods to isoate and identify compounds involed in
              that  symbiosis.  Drs. Kado and de Bruijn are experienced microbial 
              geneticists with major research programs on Agrobacterium and  Rhizobium.  This
              project will define in molecular terms how alfa lfa  controls root colonization
              by two model soil microbes, and it will  develop information and tools required
              for testing detailed  hypotheses on physiological processes that structure
              microbial  communities in the rhizosphere.  This is a collaborative research 
              project with Dr. de Bruijn at Michigan State University.  ***
