Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Gene Expression and Regulation in Early B Cell
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9218147

Award Number: 9218147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max D. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Burrows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hiromi Kubagawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5921,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports a two-year collaborative research project                  
              between Max Cooper, M.D., of the University of Alabama at                      
              Birmingham and Professor Takeshi Watanabe of Kyushu University.  on            
              the analysis of the function of the surface antigen BP-1/6C3                   
              expressed on mouse hematopoietic cells (mostly B-lymphocytes) and              
              analysis of its possible influence on B-lineage differentiation.               
              Cell surface proteins expressed by developing B lymphocyte                     
              precursors are involved in regulatory interactions with other cell             
              types in hemopoietic tissues that help orchestrate this entire                 
              process.  The antigen identified by the BP-1 antibody is a good                
              candidate for this type of function since its expression is                    
              restricted to early B-lineage cells, and it may modulate their                 
              proliferation.  BP-1 is a cell surface metallopeptidase,                       
              animopeptidase A (APA).  To determine the function of APA in B cell            
              development, two strategies will be followed.  First, transgenic               
              mice expressing APA driven by the immunoglobulin heavy chain                   
              promoter and enhancer will be constructed.  Study of this                      
              transgenic mouse model will permit the determination of the effect             
              of prolinged expression of APA beyond the early B cell stage where             
              its expression is normally extinguished.  An alternate informative             
              approach will be to disrupt the APA gene by homologous                         
              recombination.  Since BP-1/APA is expressed in a variety of tissues            
              outside of the homopoietic lineage, these "knockout" mice should               
              also help to define the necessity for and function of this enzyme              
              in other systems.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The expertise of the U.S. and Japanese groups is complementary and             
              collaboration has been in progress for several years.  Dr. Cooper's            
              group has made appropriate monoclonal antibodies, cloned the                   
              corresponding c-DNA, and established its aminopeptidase A activity.            
              Dr. Watanabe's group is well known for their expertise in molecular            
              biology, particularly in the area of B cell gene expression.
