Title       : Visual Performance Instruments (VPI's): Bringing Music and Musicianship to the
               Deaf and Hard of Hearing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9461236

Award Number: 9461236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74798              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Durlach david@technofrolics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TechnoFrolics
	      11 Miller Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/441-8870

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6845,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on developing
              Visual Performance  Instruments (VPIs) that will enable the Deaf and hard of
              hearing both to appreciate music and to perform in a medium that serves as a
              visual analog of music. Object-oriented control software for these devices will
              be capable of processing musical data in a MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital
              Interface) format, and generate choreography based on this music for a 3-D
              visual display. The displays will be choreographable sculptural media designed
              to be as emotionally evocative and flexible as possible. The VPIs will be
              visual analogies of musical instruments, in that they are equipped with control
              interfaces such that they can be played directly in real time. The instruments
              can be extended or combined to produce visual orchestras, accessible to Deaf,
              hard of hearing, and hearing individuals. The controlling software will allow
              direct programming of the VPIs by the non-technician, thus enabling composers
              to score pieces to be played by VPIs without a musical intermediary. Proposed
              Phase I research on visual performance instruments is viewed as a natural
              extension of TechnoFrolic's research into interactive, choreographable, 3-D
              display media. TechnoFrolics' patented technology is emotionally-engaging and
              highly expressive, but is currently unable to respond automatically to music. 
              They feel that by adding this capability, they would have an exciting medium
              capable of translating music into a visual performance, much like dance or
              theater. Such a medium would enable the Deaf and hard of hearing to appreciate
              music on a new level of understanding. In addition, by refining the user
              interfaces on the displays, they can create visual instruments which can be
              played directly.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
