Title       : A High-Gradient Electron Injector for X-Ray Chip Lithography and
               Microfabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9461156

Award Number: 9461156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David U. L. Yu davidyu@pacbell.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DULY Research Inc
	      1912 MacArthur Street
	      Rancho Palos Verdes, CA  902751111    310/548-7123

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A method is proposed to enable full-energy injection in an x-ray lithography
              machine used for etching future high-density computer chips and
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). A high-gradient accelerator, which
              utilizes a high-power microwave source to drive electrons through a linear
              accelerating structure, can be used as a full-energy injector to an x-ray
              superconducting synchrotron radiation ring (SSRR), or to a granular e-beam
              driven x-ray source. Examples of microwave sources capable of producing the
              high power needed to drive the HGA are a relativistic klystron, a high-power
              X-band klystron combined with an rf pulse compression system, a sheet-beam
              klystron or a cluster klystron. Full-energy injection increases the stored
              current in the SSRR by eliminating energy ramp-up of electrons in the SSRR, a
              main source of current loss during injection. Higher stored current generates
              more intense x-rays, which in turn reduces the exposure time and increases the
              throughput, thus saving the unit cost of production. Development of the method
              and apparatus of an integrated system combining a full-energy HGA injector and
              the SSRR technologies is the main thrust of the present NSF SBIR project.
              Technical issues to be addressed in Phase I include continued R&D on the rf
              power source, feasibility of gridded gun modulation at the rf frequency of the
              ring, design of the septum and kicker magnets for high-energy injection, and
              optimization of the injection beamline layout in relation to the x-ray
              beamlines to minimize interference in a compact space.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
