Title       : Object-Oriented Grammars for Syntactic and Semantic Analysis of Natural Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1995   
File        : a9461152

Award Number: 9461152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Slocum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Goodbyte Inc
	      1302 Darter Lane
	      Austin, TX  787466638    512/328-0226

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1311,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore a potential
              solution to one of the key problems hindering the development of practical
              computer systems that understand natural language-English, German, etc. In
              particular, although several different approaches have been taken to codifying
              linguistic rules, all have suffered from a common scaling problem: a the number
              of rules is increased to approach coverage of a usable subset of the language,
              the interactions become so complex and unmanageable that the systems tend to
              collapse. adding new rules to cover some previously neglected aspect of the
              language tends to `break` old rules, introducing bugs so that sentences that
              were once properly interpreted no longer are. This situation is very similar to
              what happens in the development of large software systems: the process of
              adding more and more features to existing bodies of software tends to break
              down as conflicts rapidly accumulate.  The recent advent of object-oriented
              programming (OOP) has had a major beneficial impact on this general software
              problem. The opportunity exists to adapt OOP techniques to the codification of
              linguistic rules, allowing the creation of systems that break through the
              complexity barrier that has previously prevented the rapid development of
              natural language systems for a wide range of applications. The research
              objective is to demonstrate a concrete means of structuring linguistic rules as
              independent `objects` with inheritance, following the OOP paradigm. Goodbyte,
              Inc. anticipates that this technique will make it far easier to extend natural
              language grammars without disrupting previous coverage.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
