Title       : Efficient Electrical Impedance Tomography Software Based on the Dual Reciprocity
               Boundary Element Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9461681

Award Number: 9461681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramani Duraiswami   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dynaflow Inc
	      7210 Pindell School Road
	      Fulton, MD  207599752    301/604-3688

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1260,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Phase I Research project will develop efficient
              computational algorithms that will enable accurate imaging using Electrical
              Impedance Tomography (EIT) for both two-dimensional (2-D) and three-dimensional
              (3-D) applications in medicine and industry. EIT attempts to determine the
              distribution of electrical conductivity inside objects by applying specified
              currents at their surface, and measuring the voltage induced there. In
              comparison to other imaging methods, if successful, EIT offers significant
              advantages in economy, convenience, and safety for a wide variety of clinical
              and industrial applications. While much progress in experimental EIT techniques
              and in the mathematical modeling of EIT have been made, it remains restricted
              to laboratory situations and imaging objects in 2-D. The chief stumbling block
              to extending EIT to practical situations appears to be the lack of efficient
              algorithms that can perform accurate inversion of data. Conventional inversion
              algorithms in EIT are based on either heuristic techniques that are only
              applicable to 2-D ring-like geometries, or on full numerical solution using
              Finite Elements. In the proposed research the much more computationally
              efficient Boundary Element Method (BEM) will be extended to EIT by using new
              algorithms that use dual reciprocity techniques. These algorithms will allow
              efficient imaging in complicated 2-D and 3-D geometries and will significantly
              reduce problem size, avoid cumbersome grid/mesh generation, and offer order of
              magnitude speed-up. Phase I research will develop the numerical algorithms and
              software for inverting EIT data using Dual Reciprocity BEM. The software
              developed will be tested on analytically generated forward problem data. Phase
              II will develop algorithms in the develop a prototype EIT system using and
              further refining the Phase I algorithm. Phase III will commercialize the
              developed system and software.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
