Title       : Standard Reagents for Molecular Haplotyping of Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1994  
File        : a9461102

Award Number: 9461102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gualberto Ruano Ruanog@mggsunc.ctan.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genaissance Pharmaceu Inc
	      5 Science Park
	      New Haven, CT  065111966    203/773-1450

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1392,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business innovation Research Phase I project is concerned with the
              development of molecular tools for direct haplotyping of an individual's
              genomic DNA without access to family or related individuals. For many questions
              in population genetics, it is necessary to consider the arrangement of multiple
              polymorphisms along either the maternally or paternally derived chromosome.
              Such arrangement constitutes haplotypes, i.e., haploid genotypes. Classically,
              haplotypes have been inferred from mammalian inheritance in families or from
              statistical simulations of genotyping data. The overall aim of this project is
              to develop molecular haplotyping reagents for several loci distributed
              throughout the human genome. Phase I research objectives include the following.
              First, development of a molecular haplotyping strategy based on allele-specific
              extension and exonuclease VII degradation of single-stranded DNA resulting in a
              hemyzygous double-stranded product. Second, application of the molecular
              haplotyping strategy to targets in the CD4 gene and HOX2 cluster. Third,
              molecular haplotyping at these targets of 100 human samples from African and
              non-African populations. The development of haplotyping reagent kits will
              accelerate the information gathering efforts of,the Human Genome Diversity
              (HGD) initiative. The kits will be designed to be analytically robust and
              operationally simple. In addition, the molecular haplotyping kits could be used
              to supplement current databases on selected loci thus enhancing their value for
              anthropologists and geneticists. The HGD provides the primary and immediate
              market for this project, but applications in forensic science are also
              practical.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
