Title       : Novel Aerogel-Filled Diffractive Optical Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1995  
File        : a9461091

Award Number: 9461091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74753              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Thornton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AERG
	      3681 S Lagoon View Drive
	      Greenbank, WA  982539749    401/863-3939

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes how one can
              protect the grooves of the microscopic surface relief pattern in optical
              diffractive elements by filling them with aerogel, a very fine quartz foam,
              which protects the grooves against dust and grease and thereby improves the
              usefulness of various types of these optical diffractive elements by saving
              them from severely degraded optical performance. In applications of coherent
              optics, the use of optical diffractive elements is spreading rapidly and they
              are even important in certain non laser devices. This project combines two
              recent material technologies and applies them to two important national needs,
              one of which is energy savings in buildings through innovative window designs,
              the other is to develop novel optical devices to be used in laser devices. The
              diffractive structures for windows (when eventually manufactured industrially
              in large sheets) would be placed in contact with the upper part of a window.
              Sunlight incident from the southeast, south, or southwest on the structure is
              diffracted with high efficiency towards the ceiling and from there shines
              downwards into dark corners, so called `daylighting.` The role of the aerogel
              is to fill the delicate diffractive grooves and thus protect them against
              damage from handling and against dust accumulation. The flat aerogel film would
              further improve thermal insulation and could also serve as a substrate for
              deposition of heat (infrared) reflecting layers. In that case, the structure
              would combine the function of daylighting (redirecting of incident light) with
              keeping out heat rays (low-E glazing) and be thermally insulating. Aerogel is
              the optimal material to combine with the diffractive plastic for various
              reasons: 1) Its refractive index is very close to that of air, which is
              essential in maintaining large efficiency over a wide range of incident angles
              as will be elaborated on later. 2) Aerogel is optically quite transparent,
              particularly in a thin layer. 3) Aerogel is lightweight and has recently been
              deposited in micron thick films. 4) The trapped air gives aerogel very
              excellent thermal insulating properties.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
