Title       : Class-Specific Optimizations for Object-Oriented Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1995   
File        : a9461736

Award Number: 9461736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Ballance   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Object Science Corporation
	      2400 Rio Grande Boulevard, NW
	      Albuquerque, NM  87104    505/242-3528

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2845,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Software tools for efficient programming and scientific computing are two
              technologies labeled as `critical` to this nation's security and industrial
              growth.  Object-oriented programming (OOP) offers a  partial solution to
              increasing productivity during software development.   OOP emphasizes modular
              and  incremental development of applications. OOP enhances maintainability and
              reliability because changes  that are needed in an implementation can be
              localized to a specific component.  Object-oriented  development also fosters
              reuse of software assets.  Reuse leads to increased reliability, decreased 
              development costs, and increased productivity.   The cost of adopting an
              object-oriented, framework-  centered approach is the run-time overhead imposed
              by object-oriented languages.  Languages such as  C++ provide a wide-spectrum
              of support to a programmer, but little assistance to compilers that must 
              generate fast and efficient code.   This research approaches the specification
              and implementation of  class-specific program optimizations- optimizations
              defined by the user of an object-oriented  programming system and attached to
              object types. By associating optimizations with classes, one  preserves the
              class-oriented style of object-oriented programming while providing
              optimization  information at a level of specification convenient to the
              developer. To implement the class-specific  optimizations, Object Science
              Corporation proposes to draw on techniques for tree-rewriting systems.  The
              work will be validated by inserting the optimizer into an existing C++
              compiler.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
