Title       : An Intelligent Computer-based Method for Health Monitoring of Engine and
               Transmission Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9461313

Award Number: 9461313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Polyshchuk poly@bcea.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : B&C Engineering Associates
	      411 Wolf Ledges Parkway, Ste 104
	      Akron, OH  44311    330/375-1632

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1446,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The early detection of incipient failure in a Mechanical System is of great
              practical importance as it permits scheduled inspections without costly
              shutdowns and indicates urgency and locations for repair before a system will
              incur any catastrophic failure. One of the most commonly used approaches in
              failure detection is vibration signature analysis.  This project aims at the
              development of a joint time-frequency vibration analysis methodology that uses
              Wigner-Ville Distribution (WVD) function to identify incipient mechanical
              faults. In order to develop an accurate signature pattern recognition
              procedure, a complete database of vibration signal has to be generated.
              Experimentally validated analytical/numerical models will be developed to
              generate vibration signal database for both normal and abnormal operating
              conditions (Experimental generation of the database will be too costly). The
              main thrusts of this study are: a) development of accurate analytical models to
              simulate a variety of faults in engine and transmission systems and
              verification of the models using experimental data, b) comparison and
              verification of analytical simulations with the Wigner-Ville distribution
              results to experimental WVD results, c) create a comprehensive data base using
              analytical modeling to supplement the experimental data for fault pattern
              recognition, and most significantly d) development of a machine health
              monitoring system for identification of wear and failures in machine
              components.  Some initial success has been accomplished by the P.I. in using
              the WVD to determine gear surface pitting and tooth fracture -1921 from both
              experimental and analytical study. However, before an accurate pattern
              recognition procedure can be developed, a complete vibration signal databa s
              has to be generated and more in-depth examination of the vibration signature is
              required.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
