Title       : Real Time Sputter Depth Measurement for In Situ Surface Microanalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1995    
File        : a9461166

Award Number: 9461166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Colvard ccolvard@cea.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles Evans & Associates
	      301 Chesapeake Drive
	      Redwood City, CA  94063    415/369-4567

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Depth profile analysis of elemental composition at solid surfaces with secondary
              ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and Auger electron spectrometry requires ion beam
              sputtering of material from the surface to create a crater of increasing depth.
              Only after the measurement is completed can the crater depth be measured by
              profilometry, the sputter rate averaged, and the calibration of composition
              versus depth completed. Unfortunately, sputter rates can vary widely in
              different materials, which shifts the apparent position of interfaces. Sputter
              rate has also been linked to ion yield, which affects the relative sensitivity
              factors used to quantify impurity data in SIMS. As industrial demands increase
              for higher levels of spatial and compositional accuracy, and for faster
              analytical turn around, it is important to measure crater depth and sputter
              rate in situ and in real time. Interferometry is an ideal tool for this type of
              measurement since it is precise and non-contacting Charles Evans & Associates
              proposes to develop a tool, adaptable to existing analytical instruments, that
              provides dynamic depth measurements to a resolution approaching one nanometer.
              To do this, several issues specific to this unique application must be
              addressed. During Phase I the researchers will build a demonstration
              interferometer subject to the constraints of in situ application. They will
              perform experiments to assess depth resolution and to study the influence of
              various materials and near-surface structures. A design will be laid out for
              incorporating this device into an existing analytical instrument in Phase II.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
