Title       : Hydrogen Storage Systems Based on Fullerene-Hydrides and Fullerene-Converted
               Carbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1995  
File        : a9461804

Award Number: 9461804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao (Sean) Lu mercorp@opusl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials & Elctrochem/MER
	      7960 South Kolb Road
	      Tucson, AZ  85706    520/574-1980

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1065,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The current available hydrogen storage methods have their limitations. The
              compressed gas storage and metal hydride storage systems have relatively low
              energy densities, and the liquefied gas storage requires costly cryogenics. The
              hybrid carbon adsorption storage techniques have not lived up to their
              projected potential partly due to low hydrogen adsorption capacities of
              activated carbons. In the exploratory experiments conducted at MER, at the
              first time, to the best of their knowledge, they have successfully hydrogenated
              fullerene mixtures up to 5.5% by weight of hydrogen using physical method. The
              hydrogenated fullerenes -- fullerene hydrides are stable at ambient conditions
              and release hydrogen gas at elevated temperatures. Also, MER has converted
              fullerene mixtures into some kind of carbon (they call it super carbon) which
              has much larger hydrogen storage capacity than conventional high surface area
              activated carbons. In this proposal, the feasibility of using the
              fullerene-hydrides or fullerene converted super carbons as materials for
              hydrogen storage will be studied. In this work, the best procedures to
              physically hydrogenate fullerenes, and the best procedures to convert
              fullerenes into super carbons will be researched. The dehydrogenation (degas)
              properties of fullerene-hydride, and hydrogen adsorption-desorption properties
              of super carbons will be studied. And the economic and performance comparisons
              of the new hydrogen storage methods with other hydrogen storage methods will be
              made.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
