Title       : Advanced Intelligent Control Systems for Performance Monitoring and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1995   
File        : a9461244

Award Number: 9461244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa W. Long   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NeuroDyne Inc
	      One Kendall Square, Building 200
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/252-3360

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1065,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Strategic and societal concerns are driving current research and engineering
              efforts to produce more fuel-efficient, less polluting vehicles in the United
              States. Associated pollution problems such as the production of photochemical
              smog and ozone, with their adverse health effects are also important and
              compelling reasons to develop advanced methods of control for next generation
              vehicle engines. Advanced technology engines presently achieve emissions
              reduction by utilizing multi-point fuel injection, high compression ratios and
              high swirl combustion chamber design and by incorporating exhaust gas
              after-treatment using catalytic convertors. Future engine design will be
              significantly more radical in approach and will utilize lean burn combustion to
              meet increasingly strict emissions regulations. Currently envisioned ICE
              designs will utilize an array of control and performance sensors. Under a NSF
              and OSTP Clean Car sponsored program, NeuroDyne, the University of South
              Carolina, West Virginia University, and MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
              are collaborating as an interdisciplinary research team in the development of
              advanced lean-burn engine control for reducing pollution and enhancing fuel
              economy in existing automobiles. NeuroDyne, Inc., proposes to leverage this
              program to investigate the integration of advanced sensor technology with
              intelligent sensor processing and control methods to enhance the performance
              and efficiency of next generation vehicle engines.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
