Title       : Intelligent Monitoring and Control of Chemical Processes Using Wavelet and FJ
               Transforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9108649

Award Number: 9108649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolphe L. Motard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Babu Joseph  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Automatic intelligent plant operation and control requires                      
                                                                                            
              methodology that uses plant measurements in some optimal                       
              manner.  The visual and auditory systems in human beings                       
              preprocess information before presenting it to the brain.  For                 
                                                                                             
              example, large sets of high frequency raw data are analyzed to                 
                                                                                             
              extract data trends which are as detailed as necessary for the                 
                                                                                             
              situation at hand.  The purpose of this research project is to                 
                                                                                             
              develop procedures to mimic this preprocessing of data.  In                    
                                                                                             
              chemical plants a number of factors need to be considered                      
                                                                                             
              the time constants of various responses are typically                          
              different and one is required to consider each variable at a                   
                                                                                             
              different scale, there is multirate sampling a temperature                     
                                                                                             
              measurement is typically available much more frequently than a                 
                                                                                             
              composition measurement, sensor signals vary greatly for each                  
                                                                                             
              process, etc.                                                                  
              This project is aimed at developing methodology to preprocess                  
                                                                                             
              raw sensor data and develop viable automatic control systems                   
                                                                                             
              for chemical plants.  Two functional analysis methods the                      
              Wavelet bases and the Frazier Jawerth bases will be used to                    
                                                                                             
              preprocess data which will then be fed into a neural net to                    
                                                                                             
              yield process trend analysis used to detect failed sensors and                 
                                                                                             
              abnormal operating conditions.  The combination of Frazier                     
                                                                                             
              Jawerth transforms and Wavelet decomposition enables                           
              description of a signal in a single domain which has                           
              information about its time evolution and frequency context.                    
                                                                                             
              Neural networks capture information from examples which                        
              typically come from the past operational history or online                     
                                                                                             
              information.
