Title       : New Ozonide Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1992  
File        : a9108712

Award Number: 9108712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Bunnelle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9156,
Abstract    :
              In this project both mechanistic and synthetic aspects of                      
              alkene ozonolysis will be investigated. The mechanistic studies                
              will focus on the determination of the stereochemistry of the                  
              elusive carbonyl oxide intermediate, making use of an                          
              intramolecular trapping protocol which will permit reliable                    
              assignment of syn-anti geometry to carbonyl oxides produced by                 
              alkene ozonolysis. The effect of various substituents in                       
              determining carbonyl oxide stereochemistry will also be                        
              studied, as will the influence of ring size in cycloalkenes.                   
              These studies will provide important information for refinement                
              of theoretical models which account for the overall                            
              stereoselectivity of alkene ozonolysis. Another mechanistic                    
              study will investigate the role of dioxirane-like intermediates                
              in ozonide decomposition through O-labelling experiments. In                   
              the synthetic area, the cationic ring expansion of certain                     
              ozonides to the 1,2,4-trioxane system will be investigated in                  
              terms of the scope of the reaction and its application to the                  
              synthesis of the antimalarial artemisinin.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. William H. Bunnelle                  
              of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri -                 
              Columbia. Both mechanistic and synthetic aspects of reactions                  
              of hydrocarbons containing double bonds (alkenes) with ozone                   
              will be investigated.  Some of the proposed intermediates in                   
              the ozonolysis process may be significant with regard to the                   
              toxicity of fatty acid ozonides.
