Title       : Dissertation Research: Regulation of Pollen Collection by Honey Bee Colonies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9108760

Award Number: 9108760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Seeley tds5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Colonies of advanced social insects consist of thousands of                    
              separate individuals each acting independently, yet the colony as              
              a whole functions as a coherent unit.  This is clearly seen in                 
              such collective activities as group food-gathering, colony                     
              thermoregulation, nest construction, and colony defense.  The                  
              subunits of the colony, the individual workers, are somehow                    
              coordinated into a well-organized functional unit, but the                     
              integrative mechanisms remain largely a mystery.                               
                                                                                             
              Scott Camazine's doctoral dissertation will focus on one example               
              of a precisely organized colony-level process:  the collection of              
              the honey bees' protein food, pollen.  The goal of the research                
              is to understand how the collection of pollen is regulated.  The               
              approach will be to identify which castes of bees are involved in              
              the pollen-foraging process, and to identify the flow of                       
              information among these bees concerning the colony's need for                  
              pollen.  These results will elucidate how the regulation of a                  
              colony's foraging emerges from the collective behaviors and                    
              interactions of its constituent members.  This research will both              
              suggest how honey bees' pollen collection could be manipulated to              
              enhance their value as pollinators of food and seed crops, and                 
              strengthen our understanding of how biological subunits--be they               
              molecules, cells, or organisms--are tightly integrated into                    
              functionally organized wholes.
