Title       : Enriched Modeling of Auctions and Bidding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9108551

Award Number: 9108551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rothkopf rothkopf@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald M. Harstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Standard models of auctions need enrichment in order to be applied             
              in realistic contexts.  Many common but neglected factors                      
              invalidate the advice that current auction theory offers to bid-               
              takers and to bidders.  This research will augment bidding theory              
              in several realistic directions and isolate sources of divergence              
              between theoretical predictions and laboratory observations.  One              
              thrust of the research replaces the usual assumption of a fixed                
              number of bidders with endogeneous determination of bidder                     
              participation based upon the probability of competing.  We indicate            
              when the usual revenue comparisons are confirmed and when they are             
              reversed.  Another thrust will include several realistic models of             
              cheating and rule bending in auction models.  One model allows                 
              bidders to submit multiple bids and withdraw a `winning' bid when              
              it is advantageous to do so.  A third thrust will examine various              
              formats for the sequential or simultaneous sale of multiple assets             
              examining how auction form may influence bidders' strategies and               
              the values of the assets.  A fourth thrust examines information                
              flows between bidders during the course of an English auction and              
              how those flows affect strategies and the values of the assets.                
              A fifth thrust reconsiders the standard assumption of symmetric                
              bidders to see which comparative static predictions are robust to              
              asymmetries.
