Title       : Factors Influencing Response Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9108719

Award Number: 9108719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund J. Fantino efantino@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Fantino will carry out experiments to investigate choice                   
              behavior.  All are relevant to his delay-reduction theory of                   
              choice, which states that performance for a stimulus may be                    
              predicted most accurately by calculating the reduction in the                  
              length of time to reinforcement correlated with the onset of the               
              stimulus in question relative to the length of time to                         
              reinforcement measured from the onset of the trial.  In other                  
              words, the greater the improvement in terms of temporal proximity              
              or waiting time to reinforcement, correlated with the onset of a               
              stimulus, the more preferred that stimulus will be.  The                       
              experiments are to assess potentially important modifications of               
              this theory.  For example, it has never been ascertained whether               
              the effectiveness of a stimulus in delay-reduction terms is                    
              predicted most accurately by calculating the reduction in the                  
              time to reinforcement measured from the onset of the preceding                 
              stimulus or by calculating the reduction in the time to                        
              reinforcement measured relative to the average time to primary                 
              reinforcement in the situation.  These experiments will assess                 
              those questions which are central to an appreciation of response               
              strength.  The second set of experiments will explore the                      
              adequacy of delay-reduction in accounting for choice in                        
              situations where the theory predicts nonoptimal behavior.  The                 
              third set of experiments includes a novel extension of the theory              
              to conditional discrimination problems, in which Dr. Fantino will              
              asses the effectiveness of two conflicting sources of information              
              on choice.  This section also should help illuminate the factors               
              governing base-rate errors reported in judgment tasks.  Topics                 
              such as reinforcement and choice--including nonoptimal decision-               
              making--have relevance for health concerns.
