Title       : Documentation and Collections Management of North American Ethnographic Basketry
               Collections at the Denver Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9108658

Award Number: 9108658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce L. Herold   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane S. Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Bourcier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles G. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Denver Museum of                 
              Natural History will curate its collection of native North                     
              American basketry.  This includes approximately 1,700 items made               
              by 92 native American tribes.  In the first step of a four part                
              plan, documentation will be updated.  Records will be                          
              supplemented, descriptive data checked out and uniform                         
              information entered in catalogs.  This will improve the research               
              data and lay the groundwork for a computerized data base.                      
              Secondly, the museum conservator will survey conditions, perform               
              minor stabilization and produce a basketry conservation plan.  In              
              the third phase of the project, baskets will be rehoused with                  
              mounts and supports in new cabinets.  Inventorying, labeling, and              
              recording of storage locations will take place.  Finally, a                    
              summary guide to the collection, related records, research                     
              potential, policies and procedures will be published.                          
                                                                                             
              The collection constitutes a significant resource because of both              
              its breadth and its depth in specific areas.  It documents an                  
              almost 200 year period since some of the baskets were collected                
              in the early 1800s.  Collecting has continued until recent times               
              and many of the items have detailed supporting documentation.  In              
              some cases, the names of the craftsmen are known.  From an                     
              anthropological perspective, the collection provides a strong                  
              data base to address a number of questions and not all of these                
              concern basketry per se.  Through the study of such material                   
              objects, insight can be gained into the nature of culture contact              
              and culture change over time.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Because of the imperfect state of the documentation and storage                
              the basketry collection is difficult to use and therefore not                  
              maximally available for scientific research.  This project should              
              remedy the situation.
