Title       : A Knowledge-based Diagnostic System that Unifies Systems Theory with Human
               Decision Making Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9108685

Award Number: 9108685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zohreh Fathi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most industrial accidents occur during transient operations                    
              (start-up, shut down, etc.).  During these periods, it is                      
              sometimes difficult for operators to determine abnormal                        
              operating conditions, identify causes of process trends                        
              (external load disturbances, degradation due to parametric                     
              changes, sensor and actuator failures, structural faults), and                 
              plan and schedule a sequence of operating steps.  This                         
              research project will consist of studying a way to unify                       
              systems theory with human decision-making knowledge in the                     
              development of a generic and robust diagnostic methodology for                 
              fault diagnosis in chemical plants.                                            
                                                                                             
              The technique involves integrating experimental knowledge with                 
              expert systems based on dynamic models of the process.   The                   
              system structure consists of embedding estimation-based                        
              techniques of fault detection and isolation within the                         
              framework of a knowledge-based system.  Raw data are fed to a                  
              fault detector (a preprocessor) which performs statistical                     
              tests to identify the process conditions (normal or abnormal).                 
              The preprocessor triggers the initiation of the knowledge-                     
              based system.  The task of the knowledge-based system is to                    
              either identify the false alarm or to determine the source and                 
              extend of the true fault.  Both a state/parameter estimator                    
              and a statistical analyzer are included in the loop of                         
              diagnostic reasoning.  The design methodology is a layered                     
              knowledge base that houses heuristic knowledge in high levels                  
              and process-general estimation knowledge in the low levels.                    
              The diagnostic reasoning alternates between the two domains of                 
              knowledge.  The algorithm developed will be tested on a                        
              subsystem of a power plant that includes a deaerator.                          
                                                                                             
              This is research planning grant under the Research                             
              Opportunities for Women Program.
