Title       : ROW/RPG: Genetic Characterization of Marine Ultramicro- bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9108968

Award Number: 9108968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy Arps   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Most microbes live in a world that is limited by the very                 
              nutrients that are required for their growth and replication.  In              
              response to the harsh conditions of  most natural environments,                
              bacteria have adopted numerous strategies for survival.  One                   
              solution that appears to be quite common is that of                            
              miniaturisation, and in fact, most of the microorganisms seen in               
              marine and soil samples tend to be smaller than those capable of               
              growth in the laboratory.  At the very end of the size spectrum                
              are marine bacteria that are known by various names, but which                 
              are frequently referred to as "ultramicrobacteria" due to their                
              especially small size.  These bacteria may well represent the                  
              lower limit of cellular life, since the amount of genetic                      
              material (DNA) that they contain per cell is much less than that               
              typically seen in other bacterial cells.  This proposal is a                   
              first step in testing whether the ultramicrobacteria represent a               
              physiological group distinct from the larger marine                            
              microorganisms or are simply members of this group of larger                   
              bacteria that have adopted a miniature size for survival.  In                  
              order to determine the evolutionary relationships among these                  
              organisms, the total marine microbe population will first be                   
              separated into various size classes by filtration.  The DNA from               
              each size class will be isolated and compared to that from the                 
              other filters using short radioactively labeled fragments of RNA               
              to determine the diversity of species that comprise the                        
              ultramicrobacteria.  The experiments will utilize probes produced              
              from known marine bacteria and from species of any                             
              ultramicrobacteria that are capable of growing in pure culture.                
              The initial research will focus on developing protocols to                     
              successfully prepare pure chromosomal DNA from the marine                      
              microbes captured on the filters.  Later studies will test the                 
              ability of the various probes to recognize and bind to the DNA in              
              the samples.
