Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9108262

Award Number: 9108262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Sawyer sawyer@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Theoretical models and DNA sequence analysis will be used to              
              study gene conversion and other problems in genetics.  A                       
              particular family of statistical tests that can detect specific                
              instances of gene conversion as well as cryptic patterns of gene               
              conversion will be studied.  One aim will be to develop                        
              parametric models that would allow gene conversion and point                   
              mutation rates to be jointly estimated from DNA sequence data.  A              
              second major goal will be to apply these techniques to study gene              
              conversion in the Alu family of repeated sequences, which has                  
              about 500,000 repeats in the human genome and constitutes about 5              
              per cent of total human DNA.  The subfamily structure and                      
              relationships of the Alu repeats will also be studied, both for                
              their own sake and for the extent to which family heterogeneity                
              may affect statistical tests for gene conversion.                              
                   The spontaneous mutation of genetic material is a major                   
              contributor both to evolution and to genetic disease.  In many                 
              particular cases this mutation, rather than being purely random,               
              has been shown to be the result of a conversion or copying                     
              process from nearby similar genetic material. The first part of                
              the proposal will develop tests for detecting a cryptic pattern                
              of gene conversion that may appear purely random, and to estimate              
              the relative importance of the two mutational processes at a                   
              particular genetic loci.  A significant pattern of gene                        
              conversion may imply a similar nearby genetic locus.  Alu                      
              sequences are not only interesting for what they can tell about                
              the evolution and structure of genetic material, they also have                
              been used as tags of pieces of human DNA that have been cloned                 
              into bacterial plasmids or yeast chromosomes.  If nearby Alu                   
              sequences show a pattern of gene conversion under certain                      
              circumstances, this can help to piece together these clones in                 
              the construction of the human genomic map.
