Title       : Physical Studies of Xanthine Oxidase and Trimethylamine Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1994      
File        : a9108417

Award Number: 9108417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Hille   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A study of the biophysical properties of two complex                           
              oxidoreductases, xanthine oxidase and trimethylamine dehydrogenase,            
              is proposed.  The goal of this work is to fully characterize the               
              several redox-active centers in the proteins from a physical                   
              standpoint, with particular regard to their spectroscopic and                  
              electron-transfer properties. Xanthine oxidase catalyzes the                   
              oxidative hydroxylation of xanthine to form uric acid, a reaction              
              that takes place at the molybdenum center of the enzyme.  For a                
              variety of reasons, the enzyme has become the prototypical                     
              molybdenum hydroxylase, a small but extremely important group of               
              enzymes that utilize oxygen derived from water rather than dioxygen            
              in the hydroxylation of substrate.  Two specific aspects of this               
              enzyme are the focus of the proposed work:  (1) the determination              
              of rates of electron transfer among the four redox-active centers              
              of the enzyme and the factors that govern the observed rates (as               
              studied by pulse radiolysis and pH-jump techniques); and (2) the               
              structure of the molybdenum center in a variety of forms, including            
              catalytic intermediates, to be examined by circular dichroism and              
              resonance Raman spectroscopy, with the aim of characterizing the               
              physical and electronic structure of the center.  Trimethylamine               
              dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidative demethylation of                         
              trimethylamine to dimethylamine and formaldehyde.  The enzyme                  
              possesses a covalently linked flavin mononucleotide cofactor and a             
              ferredoxin-type center, and thus represents a useful system to                 
              investigate the general applicability of the principles governing              
              the behavior of xanthine oxidase.  The proposed studies include:               
              (1) studies of the pH-dependence of electron distribution within               
              partially reduced enzyme, and both pH-jump and pulse radiolysis                
              studies of electron transfer between the two centers; (2) a                    
              determination of the spectral contributions and reduction                      
              potentials of the flavin and iron-sulfur centers: and (3) rapid and            
              steady-state kinetic studies of the catalytic cycle aimed at                   
              elucidating the role of electron transfer in the catalytic cycle of            
              trimethylamine dehydrogenase.
