Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Set-Theoretic Investigations on Classical Classes of
               Topological Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9108476

Award Number: 9108476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan T. Balogh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis K. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The study of normal topological spaces has long been an                   
              important topic in classical set-theoretic topology and, more                  
              recently, the structure theory of normal locally compact                       
              Hausdorff spaces has been of spacial interest.  Several well-                  
              known problems, mostly involving topological spaces in the                     
              classes of normal or normal locally compact spaces, will be                    
              studied by the investigators.  It is expected that set-theoretic               
              techniques such as forcing, infinite combinatorics and large                   
              cardinals will be the principle tools used in the eventual                     
              solution of these problems.                                                    
                   Set theory lies at the foundations of mathematics in that                 
              all of mathematics can in principle be built up from set theory,               
              albeit laboriously, by adding appropriate definitions, deriving                
              consequences from the chosen axioms, and then compressing their                
              statements by use of the definitions.  Some topics lie closer to               
              set theory, however, by virtue of needing fewer added definitions              
              in this process.  Classical set-theoretic topology is such a                   
              subject, really a very close neighbor, and so it shares some of                
              the philosophical importance of set theory itself.
