Title       : Solar Differential Rotation and Its Connection to Solar Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9108315

Award Number: 9108315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwing L. Chan kchan@solar.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Applied Research Corp
	      8201 Corporate Drive, Suite 1120
	      Landover, MD  20785    301/459-8442

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   So far, there is no definitive proof of a causal connection               
              between sunspot cycle and the Earth's climate, but a large                     
              collection of suggestive correlations and circumstantial                       
              evidence have been compiled.  The recent discovery of the                      
              positive correlation between the level of solar activity and the               
              total solar irradiance over a solar cycle provided a physical                  
              ground for an activity-climate relationship.  During a solar                   
              cycle, the total solar output varies but the measured change is                
              relatively small, but it is legitimate to expect that during the               
              prolonged period of low solar activity, the solar output may drop              
              substantially.  This makes the association of a Maunder-Minimum-               
              like event (low sunspot numbers for several decades) to a cooler               
              climate more plausible.  An important question relating to the                 
              study of causal connections between the sun and Earth is: What is              
              the basic mechanism that connects the solar activities to the                  
              variation of solar output?  This study aims at eventually                      
              answering this question.  Presently, there are two steps to take:              
              (i) to develop a solar differential rotation model which agrees                
              with the results of helioseismology; (ii) to relate the temporal               
              variation of the solar differential rotation with the change in                
              conditions of the convection zone.  The first step is a                        
              prerequisite for understanding the solar dynamo which is the                   
              basis of solar activities.  The second step explores the                       
              application of the knowledge of differential rotation to                       
              diagnosing changes of the solar interior.  A combination of                    
              analytical and numerical techniques will be used to accomplish                 
              these tasks. ***
