Title       : Surface Photochemistry of Molecules Adsorbed on Supported Metal Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9108615

Award Number: 9108615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki H. Grassian vicki-grassian@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the study of photo-induced reactions of                  
              molecules adsorbed on supported metal catalyts.  Photochemistry                
              of adsorbates on supported metal catalysts will be monitored by                
              infrared absorption spectroscopy, mass spectrometry and UV-Vis                 
              reflectance spectroscopy.  Photodissociation of chlorinated                    
              hydrocarbons adsorbed on Ni/aluminum oxide surfaces will be the                
              first candidates for study.  The wavelength dependence of the                  
              photodissociation process will be investigated in order to                     
              elucidate the mechanism involved in the surface photochemistry                 
              and to demonstrate whether a significant red-shift in the                      
              photodissociation threshold of the adsorbed molecule exists, as                
              is found for single crystal metal surfaces.  The extension of                  
              photo-induced surface chemistry from single crystal metal                      
              surfaces to supported metal catalysts is an important step in                  
              determining the feasibility of utilizing transition metal                      
              photo-assisted catalysis in chemical synthesis and processing.                 
              Of particular interest is the possible development of decom-                   
              position catalysts for halogenated hydrocarbons and other                      
              hazardous wastes.  The research planning grant will be used to                 
              assemble the necessary apparatus and perform preliminary                       
              experiments on the wavelength dependence of the                                
              photodissociation of methyl chloride adsorbed on Ni/alumina.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research project.  This project involves the photochemistry of                 
              molecules adsorbed on supported metal catalysts, an area of                    
              great significance in chemical synthesis and processing, and in                
              hazardous waste control.
