Title       : State/Industry UniversityCooperative Research Center for Molecular and
               Microstructure of Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9108700

Award Number: 9108700
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hatsuo Ishida hxi3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The principal research objective of the State/Industry                    
              University Cooperative Research Center for Molecular and                       
              Microstructure of Composites at the Case Western Reserve University            
              and the University of Akron is to conduct fundamental research on              
              the development of ultra-performance composites through purposeful             
              molecular and microstructure design.  The characteristics of the               
              ultra-performance composites include more than 50% improvement of              
              properties such as fracture toughness, hardness, radar                         
              transparency, electromagnetic shielding, reduction of viscosity for            
              the ease of processing, reduced coefficient of friction, reduced               
              weight, cryogenic compatibility, high energy resistance, etc.                  
                   An interdisciplinary cross-campus team will address the core              
              research program which includes five interactive components.  These            
              are:  molecular modeling, interface/interphase, characterization,              
              chemistry and synthesis, and processing.  Research in the non-core             
              program designed to promote use of developments in industry will               
              be initiated only as the core research projects yield technology               
              transferable results.  The Edison Polymer Innovation Corporation               
              (EPIC) will play a key role in facilitating, coordinating and                  
              implementing the Technology Transfer/Implementation Program which              
              is designed to advance Ohio's economic development and industrial              
              competitiveness.                                                               
                   Initially, the Center will have eleven large, medium and small            
              companies in the industrial consortium.  Company representatives               
              will participate in the Center's Advisory Board and Technical                  
              Committee.  The Director and the Associate Director of the Center              
              will be located at the Case Western Reserve University and                     
              University of Akron, respectively.  The educational program will               
              include:  joint advisorship of graduate students, summer program               
              for industry personnel.  The State of Ohio, industry and NSF will              
              provide matching funds totalling $750,000 in the first year.
