Title       : Electron Transfer Dynamics in Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9108437

Award Number: 9108437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Photo-induced intramolecular electron transfer will be studied                 
              in ruthenium(II) and osmium(II) complexes containing chelating                 
              ligands with nitrogen donors.  The goal of the research is to                  
              elucidate the role of solvent dynamics in controlling the rate                 
              of excited state electron transfer when both internal and                      
              solvent-induced reaction barriers exist.  Reaction rates will                  
              be determined in solvents with different relaxation rates and                  
              the experimental results compared to theoretical predictions of                
              the contribution of inner- and outer-sphere reaction barriers.                 
              Photoexcitation will place the system at its transition state                  
              where, if theoretical predictions prove valid, non-exponential                 
              dynamics will be observed.  Excited state electron transfer                    
              between ligands will be observed in both symmetric and                         
              assymmetric complexes using picosecond absorption polarization                 
              spectroscopy.  In addition, studies will be carried out                        
              concerning solvent effects on excited state proton transfer                    
              reactions in porphyrin complexes.  The experimentally                          
              determined rates, activation energies, and preexponential                      
              factors will be interpreted using theories constructed by                      
              analogy to excited state electron transfer kinetics.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic program, Dr. David F. Kelley of Department of                   
              Chemistry at Colorado State University will excite various                     
              transition metal complexes photochemically and measure the                     
              subsequent rapid rates of electron transfer within the excited                 
              molecules.  While this work is of a very fundamental nature,                   
              the results are relevant to development of a theoretical                       
              framework for utilization of solar energy.
