Title       : Updating the Maxwell Museum's Information Management System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9108216

Award Number: 9108216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krisztina Kosse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Trinkaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the University of New                
              Mexico's Maxwell Museum will purchase an ARGUS computer system                 
              and use it to manage their large and valuable anthropological                  
              collections.  The ARGUS system includes a relational data base                 
              which will allow artifacts to be catalogued, described and                     
              retrieved in different combinations according to required                      
              criteria.  It will also be used to record registration and loan                
              data.  The result will be improved management of the collections               
              and increased ease of use for researchers.                                     
                                                                                             
              The collections of the Maxwell Museum consist of approximately                 
              15,000 individually catalogued and 7,500 cubic feet of box stored              
              archaeological materials, 30,000 individually catalogued                       
              ethnological objects as well as large numbers of photos, slides,               
              paintings and other materials.  Not surprisingly, they focus on                
              the Southwestern United States.  The archaeological materials                  
              span the period from Paleoindian through contact times  and are                
              particularly strong in documenting late Puebloan and contact                   
              period occupation from about 1250-1700 A.D.  The ethnographic                  
              materials include extensive series of kachinas as well as sand                 
              paintings and constitute a particularly valuable resource for                  
              students of native American cultures.  The Maxwell Museum was one              
              of the first in the United States to automate its collection                   
              management and the original SELGEM system is both inadequate and               
              out of date.  As a result, it is difficult to find and track                   
              materials and to meet researchers' specific needs.  Installation               
              of ARGUS will remedy this situation.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project is important because it will help the Maxwell Museum              
              curate its large and irreplaceable collections.  It will increase              
              access not only to scientists but to the general public.
