Title       : A Program for Improving Access and Storage Conditions for Research Collections
               in Archaeology and Dental Anthropology at Arizona State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9108353

Award Number: 9108353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73865              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Barton Michael.barton@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy A. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Redman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, the Arizona                 
              State University (ASU) Department of Anthropology will curate                  
              major parts of their archaeology and physical anthropology                     
              collections.  The overall holdings, of which these materials form              
              a significant part include over 2,000,000 specimens with                       
              associated archival records and together these comprise one of                 
              the largest in the American Southwest.  At the present time,                   
              these materials are difficult to use because they are not fully                
              catalogued and individual items are therefore difficult to                     
              locate.  Storage conditions are less than optimal and this                     
              results in risk to the objects themselves.  To address these                   
              problems, most of the archaeological collections as well as a                  
              large series of dental casts will be inventoried.  The                         
              information will be entered into a computerized index.  Archival               
              paper records will be preserved and storage cabinets and                       
              containers will be purchased to preserve the objects.                          
                                                                                             
              The ASU collections are of great anthropological significance and              
              an important source of research data.  The archaeological                      
              materials included in the project derive primarily from the                    
              Southwest and the majority were excavated from ca. 900 sites in                
              central Arizona.  This was the prehistoric core area of Hohokam                
              culture.  Within this region, numerous towns, hamlets, and                     
              individual farmsteads constituted one of the densest areas of                  
              human settlement in prehistoric North America and are associated               
              with one of the most extensive prehistoric irrigation systems                  
              known.  The dental materials which are included in this                        
              conservation project include over 15,000 casts of human dentition              
              and represent about 11,000 individuals.  In many instances                     
              multiple casts were taken over the lifetimes of single                         
              individuals and information about biological relationships among               
              individuals is available.  These materials provide an ideal base               
              for longitudinal studies of dental development, wear, attrition                
              and disease often among members of a single genetically related                
              population.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project is important both because it will help to preserve                
              valuable scientific data and also because it will make this                    
              information more readily accessible to the scientific community.
