Title       : A Spatially-explicit, Hierarchical Model of Pattern-process Dynamics of
               Grassland Landscape (Jianguo Wu)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9108790

Award Number: 9108790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon A. Levin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,
Abstract    :
                   The objectives of the proposed research are (1) to develop a              
              systematic, computerized procedure to detect the structural                    
              patterns in the grassland landscape of Jasper Ridge, California,               
              based primarily on the 2-Dimensional Net Function Interpolation                
              Theory; (2) to construct and validate a hierarchically                         
              structured, spatially explicit, stochastic simulation model of                 
              pattern-process dynamics, based mainly on data from the Jasper                 
              Ridge grassland ecosystem.  The model will take into                           
              consideration processes involving small-scale/high frequency,                  
              middle-scale/low frequency, and large-scale/very low frequency                 
              phenomena.  Stochasticity in each process will have to be                      
              incorporated.  Large-scale phenomena may include weather                       
              fluctuations (e.g., precipitation, temperature), wind/water                    
              erosion, prolonged drought, and irregularly timed, fires.  Small-              
              scale phenomena, on the other hand, may involve physical                       
              environmental patchiness and activities of mound-building animals              
              such as gophers and ants.  Overall, the model will incorporate                 
              demographics of small-scaled disturbances in grasslands, monitor               
              the temporal changes of patches, and trace aging and extinction                
              of the patches at various scales.  The spatially explicit,                     
              multiple-scale pattern induction model takes a bottom-up                       
              approach, deriving landscape-level dynamics of the grassland from              
              that of hierarchically decomposable lower levels.  The                         
              computational demand in spatial and temporal statistical analyses              
              of patterns, and the sensitivity anaLysis and Monte Carlo                      
              simulation of the model, will make desirable and imperative the                
              use of the parallel capabilities of the supercomputer facilities.              
              The completion of the proposed study will add substantially to                 
              understanding of the role of naturally occurring disturbances at               
              various scales in creating the pattern-process dynamics, provide               
              a modeling framework for further comparative investigation on                  
              different types o grassland ecosystems, serve as a strong basis                
              for comparing grasslands with forests, and exemplify the                       
              significance of supercomputer facilities in enhancing ecological               
              understanding.
