Title       : Structural Optimization and Parallel Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9108787

Award Number: 9108787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will exploit parallelism in                         
              unconstrained structural optimization problems involving Finite                
              Element Analysis (FEA).  Typical engineering problems involve                  
              large finite element models and optimization algorithms take                   
              several hundred iterations.  Parallel finite element analysis and              
              optimization cannot be decoupled because calculation of gradients              
              is closely tied with the function evaluation (FEA), requiring                  
              proper distribution of data such as global stiffness matrix and                
              displacement solution across processors.  Since the total                      
              computational cost is dominated by the cost of function                        
              evaluation, methods that result in fewer function evaluations at               
              the expense of more linear algebraic operations per iteration                  
              might be preferred.  This might require the calculation of second              
              derivatives in order to obtain a better quadratic model.  The                  
              parallelization of linear elastic finite element analysis and                  
              parallel calculation of first and/or second derivatives will be                
              considered.                                                                    
                   In the area of biomechanics, researchers are using                        
              optimization methods to predict the distribution of material                   
              properties in the human femur due to the presence of artificial                
              implants.  Several theoretical models have been proposed.  A                   
              typical model would formulate bone remodeling as an optimization               
              problem where the objective function is strain energy and the                  
              independent variables are the material properties in each finite               
              element.  Parallel structural optimization will be used to solve               
              some problems in this field.
