Title       : Computational Studies of Peptide Folding Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1991    
File        : a9108780

Award Number: 9108780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33559              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Brooks, III   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research seeks to gain knowledge of protein                  
              structure through increased understanding of the microscopic                   
              interactions and mechanisms of folding initiation.  Peptide                    
              folding events will be studied using a novel combination of                    
              configurational energy methods, statistical mechanics and                      
              statistical clustering techniques.                                             
                   The microscopic mechanisms leading to nascent folding events              
              are generally unknown.  Two extremely long molecular dynamics                  
              simulations (2.2 nanoseconds each), recently carried out on a                  
              pentapeptide that forms stable reverse turns in solutions, will                
              be analyzed by statistically based methods to identify folding                 
              pathways.  The large number of conformations obtained from the                 
              simulations (>30,000) will be clustered into structurally similar              
              groups.  Transitions between the conformations in the reduced                  
              data set will be analyzed for concerted dihedral angle changes.                
              The mechanisms causing these conformational transitions will be                
              deduced from intra-peptide and peptide-solvent interactions,                   
              assessed for each cluster.  This research develops new techniques              
              for the analysis of large numbers of conformations resulting from              
              long simulations, and the knowledge of folding pathways gained                 
              can lead to the design of more computationally efficient folding               
              simulations.                                                                   
                   Cluster analysis and other surveys of protein structures                  
              have shown that certain N-cap and C-cap conformations dominate                 
              helix termini.  Free energy simulations will be used to determine              
              the free energy contribution of these capping structures to a-                 
              helix initiation and propagation, and their potential to act as                
              helix stop signals.  The free energy contributed to helix                      
              formation by charge/helix dipole interactions will be calculated,              
              an the role of solvent structure in capping will be examined.
