Title       : Postdoctoral Research Associateship: Computer Visual Analysis of Surface
               Reflection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9108813

Award Number: 9108813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maxine Hynson                           
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36758              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruzena K. Bajcsy bajcsy@cis.central.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,
Abstract    :
                   Visual measurement of surface reflectance properties is an                
              important issue both in basic and in applied computer vision                   
              research.  Surface reflectance gives a reliable cue for image                  
              segmentation and object recognition.  The goal of the proposed                 
              research is to detect and separate specularity from Lambertian                 
              reflectance based on physical models.  In order to provide enough              
              information to extract various properties of reflectance, we                   
              generally need more than one frame of images.  One direction is                
              to use color information and another is to use multiple images                 
              with different views.  An algorithm for color image segmentation               
              and detection of specularity and inter-reflection is proposed.                 
              In addition to the use of color, the use of different views to                 
              differentiate specularity from Lamertian reflectance and to                    
              obtain object structure is proposed.  the proposed algorithm is                
              based on the fact that the appearance of specularity varies                    
              depending on viewing direction while that of Lambertian does not.              
              In order to build a more robust and reliable vision system,                    
              information by color and multiple views will be integrated.  For               
              efficient processing of a large amount of spectral (color),                    
              temporal (multiple views) and spatial (image) data, parallel                   
              algorithms using a Connection Machine of 4K processors will be                 
              designed and implemented.  The high degree of computational                    
              parallelism will bring the algorithms into practical reality.
