Title       : Auctions with Entry/Exit Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1994   
File        : a9108888

Award Number: 9108888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66233              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Cox jcox@bpa.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Naturally-occurring auction markets are characterized by                       
              endogenous determination of bidder entry and exit.  In contrast,               
              most previous theoretical and experimental research has assumed                
              that the number of bidders in an auction is exogenously                        
              determined.  The proposed research involves developing the theory              
              of and undertaking experiments for auctions with endogenous entry              
              and exit decisions.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The first application will be to paired private value auctions,                
              where the value of an auctioned item may differ for different                  
              bidders, and to common value auctions, where the value of an                   
              auctioned item is the same for all bidders.  This application is               
              motivated by earlier experiments with common value auctions in                 
              which it was observed that: (1) in small groups of 3 or 4 people,              
              subjects' earning were only about 65% of predicted profits; and                
              (2) in larger groups of 6 to 9 people, subjects incurred losses,               
              followed by bankruptcies, causing attrition in the number of                   
              bidders.  Theory and experiments that are designed to accommodate              
              endogenous entry and exit of bidders will be developed.                        
                                                                                             
              The new auction framework will be based on independent draws of                
              individual agents' opportunity costs of bidding.  These will be                
              used in both the common value and private value environments.                  
              Paired experiments for common and private value auctions that                  
              will test the implications of the new models will be compared,                 
              including their ability to predict individual exit and entry                   
              behavior.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The endogenous-bidders extension of the economics of auction                   
              markets will lead to various insights, and provide a more                      
              fundamental conception of the winner's curse.
