Title       : Design, Construction and Implementation of a Submersible Pulsed Holocamera for
               Deep Sea Detection of Particle Characteristics and Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9108527

Award Number: 9108527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Percy L. Donaghay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Rhode Island and Johns Hopkins University                    
              will undertake a collaborative, multidisciplinary instru-                      
              mentation development project to develop and implement a                       
              means of increasing capabilities to resolve interactions                       
              betweenparticles and small scale physical processes in the                     
              ocean by simultaneously measuring particle properties and                      
              small scale motions of the fluid surrounding it.                               
                                                                                             
              The project involves laser optic holography and fluid                          
              mechanics methods to derive information about plankton                         
              dynamics and particle characterization.  A pulsed ruby laser                   
              holocamera will be modified for use in the ocean and will                      
              use recent advances in holography and digital image                            
              processing. Design criteria call for in situ measurement of                    
              particle number, size, distribution, type, and orientation                     
              and inter-particle distances over a size range of 10 microns                   
              to 5 cm. Instantaneous velocity of all particles within a                      
              sample volume would also be measured by adapting triple-                       
              pulse techniques used for motion sensing within laser                          
              sheets.  The proposed instrument will be usable in the                         
              laboratory or in the field, when attached to a submersible.                    
                                                                                             
              The development of a motion sensing holocamera is driven by                    
              a growing recognition that a new class of instruments is                       
              required to address a series of critical questions in ocean                    
              science and marine fluid mechanics.  Presently available                       
              instrumentation is inadequate to address and test hypotheses                   
              concerning complex physical-particle interactions of                           
              plankton dynamics and boundary layer fluid dynamics.
