Title       : Long-term, Intersite Experiments of Leaf and Fine Root Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1995       
File        : a9108329

Award Number: 9108329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Harmon harmonm@fsl.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Aber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry M. Melillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl L. Moorhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Rastetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1306,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Decomposition can be thought of as a continuous process beginning              
              with fresh plant litter and leading to formation of increasingly               
              refractory organic matter.  This refractory material in turn                   
              influences nutrient availability, production, and carbon                       
              sequestration in ecosystems.  At present, only early stages of the             
              decomposition process have been intensively researched.  The few               
              long-term data available indicate the decomposition process begins             
              with an initial rapid loss of labile litter constituents and                   
              becomes progressively slower as more recalcitrant compounds compose            
              an increasingly large fraction of the remaining material.  This                
              continuum can be divided into two phases: the first phase is                   
              characterized by a relatively rapid loss of mass, immobilization               
              of nutrients, and a rapidly declining overall decomposition rate;              
              the second phase is characterized by uniformly slow decomposition              
              rates and is accompanied by nutrient mineralization.  Transition               
              between these two phases appears to occur when the lignocellulose              
              index reaches 0.5.  A team of scientists, LIDET (Long-term                     
              Intersite Decomposition Experiment Team), has started a set of                 
              experiments to test whether these general relationships are                    
              consistent across a wide range of macroclimates and substrate                  
              qualities.  These long-term experiments involve 17 LTER and 4 other            
              cooperating sites, and a total of 31 types of litter.  Experiments             
              are designed to follow changes in mass, carbon fractions, and total            
              nitrogen and phosphorus for up to 10 years.  This newly funded                 
              component of the study supports the addition of 7 new sites to                 
              represent conditions that are not yet covered.  It also supports               
              the chemical characterization of changes in litter as it decomposes            
              and testing of four decomposition models (CENTURY, GEM, GENDEC, and            
              VEGIE) to predict long term dynamics across the full suite of 28               
              sites.  The analysis and modeling exercise will assess the ability             
              of models to predict the amount of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus            
              during the second phase of litter decomposition, as well as the                
              timing of transition between the initial phase of constant mass                
              loss and the final phase of very slow mass loss. The LIDET team of             
              twenty-eight scientists is coordinated through the electronic mail             
              network established under LTER to foster intersite communication.              
              This outstanding research team is coordinated by Drs.Harmon,                   
              Melillo, Moorhead, Parton, Rastetter and Aber.
