Title       : Investigations in Compositional Models Arising in Atmospheric Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9108177

Award Number: 9108177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73400              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Rayens   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cidambi Srinivasan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1524,
Abstract    :
                   Compositional data arise naturally in several branches of                 
              science, including analytical chemistry, geology, biology,                     
              medicine, ecology, and manufacturing design.  Hence, constrained               
              data are not observed solely in the atmospheric sciences.  However,            
              such data are routinely produced in atmospheric chemistry, where an            
              adequate understanding of such data is often critically important              
              to the environment. To optimally extract the information that is in            
              such data, there is need to go beyond the application of                       
              established statistical techniques.  Some attention should be                  
              focused on the development of new statistical methods that are                 
              motivated by characteristics that are especially common in                     
              atmospheric chemistry data sets.  As was eluded to above, one such             
              characteristic is the presence of a constant-sum constraint, which             
              may have been inherent to the data or imposed by the chemist.  A               
              collection of statistical methods for handling such data, based                
              principally on log-normal models, has been developed.  This project            
              will investigate the use of new parametric and nonparametric                   
              approaches to significantly improve this existing methodology.  In             
              the parametric setting, an extension of some recent work by the                
              principal investigators will be used with a practical regression               
              model to address problems.  In the development of the nonparametric            
              approach, minimum distance methods, coupled with multivariate                  
              bootstrap techniques, will be used to suggest point and region                 
              estimators and other associated problems is proposed.
