Title       : U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Boundary Phenomena in Spin- Polarized Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9108116

Award Number: 9108116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander E. Meyerovich Meyerovich@CERBERUS.PHYS.URI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 5958      BULGARIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1447,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Bulgaria research                             
              project between Dr. Alexander Meyerovich of the University                     
              of Rhode Island and Dr. Klara Ivanova of the Institute                         
              for Solid State Physics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,                        
              is to study boundary phenomena.  This project focuses on                       
              the physics of spin-polarized quantum systems to                               
              research slip effects and transverse or longitudinal                           
              spin relaxation at the walls in the presence of absorbed                       
              boundary layers.  Researchers plan to generalize from the                      
              existing theory of slip effects in order to incorporate                        
              spin-polarized quantum systems, to analyze new effects                         
              and to accomplish the technical aspects by the calculation                     
              of different slip coefficient for quantum systems.  They                       
              will use spin-polarized Fermi liquids and quantum gases                        
              to determine the length, derive proper Onsager relations                       
              and calculate the values of slip coefficients, and to                          
              apply to longitudinal spin diffusion in spin-polarized                         
              quantum systems.   The results of this project in the                          
              physics of spin-polarized quantum systems are expected                         
              to lead to noticeable corrections for stationary values                        
              of several thermo- and hydrodynamic characteristics such                       
              as temperature or magnetization and result in the                              
              reanalyzing of well-established experimental results.                          
              The information resulting from this project is likely to                       
              be applicable to the study of any multicomponent                               
              mixtures of quantum liquids or cases.                                          
                                                                                             
              This project in materials theory fulfills the program                          
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe                        
              to combine complementary talents and pool research                             
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                               
              competence.
