Title       : Development of Control of Fetal Adrenal Medulla Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9108377

Award Number: 9108377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia Y. Cheung   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves the study of the factors which control the               
              secretory function of the adrenal medulla (the inner portion of the            
              adrenal gland) during fetal development using the pregnant sheep               
              as the animal model.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The adrenal medulla is active in early fetal life and responds to              
              stressful stimuli by releasing catecholamines into the circulation.            
              In the immature fetus before the establishment of functional neural            
              input to the gland, the adrenal medulla can respond directly to                
              stress such as hypoxia.  During maturation, there is a transition              
              from direct to neural control of adrenal medullary secretory                   
              function such that in the mature fetus and adult, adrenal medullary            
              function is entirely under neural control.  The neurotransmitter               
              mediating the neural control is acetylcholine.  In the present                 
              project, the hypothesis that the adrenal peptide vasoactive                    
              intestinal peptide (VIP) is the mediator of the direct control will            
              be tested.  Two specific objectives will be investigated.  First,              
              the effectiveness of VIP and acetylocholine in stimulating                     
              catecholamine release and biosynthesis in the adrenal medulla will             
              be determined in sheep fetuses at early, mid and late gestation.               
              Secondly, the appearance of receptors for VIP and acetylcholine on             
              the fetal adrenal medulla at these gestational ages will be                    
              examined.  The maternal adrenal medulla will be similarly studied              
              for comparison.  The hypothesis that in the immature fetus, the                
              adrenal medulla responds to VIP stimulation but not to cholinergic             
              stimulation because of the lack of cholinergic receptors will be               
              tested.  As the fetus matures, responsiveness of the adrenal                   
              medulla shifts from VIP to acetylcholine in association with the               
              appearance of cholinergic receptors.  The results from these                   
              studies will provide understanding for the factors which regulate              
              adrenal medullary function during fetal life, and the maturation               
              of these events leading to adult type of function.//
