Title       : National Academy of Sciences International Conference: Emerging Issues in the
               International Protection of Intellectual Property Rights; Washington, DC;
               January, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1991    
File        : a9108535

Award Number: 9108535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carole Ganz                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchel Wallerstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad Sci-Nat Res Cnl
	      
	      Washington, DC  20418    /   -

NSF Program : 5931      INTERNATIONAL INFO & ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              92        Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide support to the Office of International                 
              Affairs of the National Academy of Sciences for a two-day conference-          
              ,"Emerging Issues in the International Protection of Intellectual              
              Property Rights"  to be held January, 1992. A primary purpose of the           
              conference is to recast the current dialogue on international                  
              intellectual property rights (IPR) issues in terms of the role of              
              science and technology in promoting economic advance. The conference           
              will involve international paticipants, as well as U.S. academic,              
              industrial, and government representatives. Papers, commissioned from          
              distinguished national and international experts on IPR issues, will           
              provide the basis for discussion at the conference. An advisory                
              committee composed of distinguished economists, lawyers, and                   
              representatives from U.S.industrial and academic organizations will            
              recommend topics for these papers, as well as qualified authors. The           
              proceedings of the conference will be published, along with the                
              commissioned papers, and widely disseminated to U.S. policymakers,             
              the international community, and U.S. universities and industry.               
              These results will have direct implications for the IPR aspects of             
              the National Science Foundation's planning and management of                   
              international cooperative programs and for the NSF's role in assessing         
              the impact of IPR issues on the international exchange of science and          
              engineering knowledge.
