Title       : RUI: Arabidopsis Genes Related to Brassica Pollination/ Self Incompatibility
               Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9108232

Award Number: 9108232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen G. Dwyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Scranton
	      Linden Street and Monroe
	      Scranton, PA  18510    717/961-7400

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,1113,1118,9109,9178,9229,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research in this proposal is designed to examine                           
              stigma/pollen interactions in the self-fertile crucifer                        
              Arabidopsis thaliana. The molecular work will initially focus on               
              the members of a multigene family in Arabidopsis that are                      
              homologous to the well characterized S-multigene family in                     
              Brassica. In the self-incompatible crucifer, Brassica, members of              
              the S-multigene family produce protein products functioning in                 
              the stigma/pollen interactions of pollination, including the                   
              cell-cell recognition and rejection of self pollen, which                      
              prevents inbreeding. Since Arabidopsis is self-fertile, it does                
              not have functional self-incompatibility genes but does carry S-               
              homologous regions that may be equivalent to the members of the                
              Brassica S-multigene family involved in the pollination response.              
              Their analysis in Arabidopsis system will elucidate aspects of                 
              the pollination process at the molecular level. Specifically,                  
              Arabidopsis S-homologous genomic clones and a PCR-generated                    
              fragment already isolated using Brassica S-gene sequences are                  
              being characterized by restriction mapping and sequencing to                   
              develop Arabidopsis S-homologous and gene-specific probes. With                
              these probes expression and organization of the S-multigene                    
              family in the Arabidopsis genome will be determined. Expression                
              of an S-related sequence has already been demonstrated by RNA                  
              blot analysis. Additional S-related transcripts will be isolated               
              from a cDNA library prepared from flower polyA+ RNA. Their                     
              temporal and spatial expression will be analyzed by in situ                    
              hybridization and GUS reporter gene expression regulated by the                
              S-related gene(s)' promoter. The available molecular genetics of               
              Arabidopsis (RFLP maps and contiguous cosmid and YAC libraries)                
              will facilitate characterization of the genomic organization of                
              the S-related multigene family. The ease of Arabidopsis                        
              transformation via Agrobacterium will facilitate study of the                  
              function of the S-related gene(s) by gene inactivation using                   
              antisense constructs. Ligand blotting will be used to determine                
              if the S-related proteins bind specifically to any pollen                      
              proteins.
