Title       : Learning and Evolution of Equilibrium in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1991     
File        : a9108351

Award Number: 9108351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25128              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michihiro Kandori   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The purpose of this project is to examine how the rationality of               
              economic agents and equilibria in games evolve over time through               
              repeated interaction of bounded-rational players.  The basic idea              
              is that players do not solve a complicated problem of finding                  
              optimal strategies by introspection, but rather they try to solve              
              it by trial and error.  Rather than determining players' behavior              
              by an equilibrium, some simple but plausible behavioral assumptions            
              are adopted, and whether the process converges to an equilibrium               
              is examined.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The evolution of equilibria in a society where a finite number of              
              players are randomly matched to play a game will be investigated.              
              Relatively unsuccessful strategies are abandoned over time, and                
              occasionally new strategies are introduced by new entrants                     
              ("mutations").  While most of the literature on this subject                   
              examines the local stability of equilibria with respect to a few               
              one-shot mutations, the long-run, global behavior of the system                
              subject to a series of random mutations will be studied here.  A               
              new technique is introduced to analyze the long run distribution               
              of strategies when the mutation rate is vanishingly small, and it              
              is shown that this approach can drastically reduce the set of                  
              equilibria.  Also, the evolution of pre-play communication will be             
              re-examined in this framework.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Game theory has become one of the most fundamental analytical tools            
              in economics and related social sciences.  The core of game                    
              theoretic analysis is the Nash equilibrium concept.  Although                  
              widely used, its logical foundations are rather shaky: Namely, we              
              do not have satisfactory answers to the following fundamental                  
              questions.  How do players come to play a Nash equilibrium, and,               
              if there are many Nash equilibria, which one is chosen?  This                  
              project will answer those questions in a certain class of                      
              situations, where rationality and equilibrium evolve over time                 
              through repeated interaction of players.
