Title       : Perceptual Processes in Search and Detection: Density- and Frequency-Dependence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9108941

Award Number: 9108941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Getty getty@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Behavioral ecology addresses questions about how behavior                      
              mediates processes with important ecological and evolutionary                  
              consequences.  For instance, we would like to know how foraging                
              behavior is adapted to the distribution of resources and how                   
              these behavioral adjustments influence the relationship between                
              the distribution of a resource density and the rate at which it                
              is harvested.  The details of this relationship are important for              
              a variety of behavioral, ecological, and evolutionary problems.                
              Earlier attempts to understand this kind of relationship have                  
              taken a "black box" approach to describing mathematically the                  
              relationship between prey distribution and predation rate.  The                
              goal of this project is to open up the black box and analyze the               
              component parts (processes and mechanisms), focusing on the role               
              of perception in search and prey detection.                                    
                                                                                             
              Ecological foraging theory has paid little attention to how                    
              perception influences foraging behavior.  Models developed to                  
              guide naval search operations include perceptual processes and                 
              constraints that are not explicit in ecological models.  This                  
              project will examine whether the approach developed in operations              
              research helps us to understand the role of perception in animal               
              foraging behavior.  The particular system under study is a native              
              sparrow species foraging for cryptic weed seeds.  During                       
              experiments, individuals are video-taped as they search for seeds              
              scattered on the soil.  From detailed analysis of the location of              
              individual seeds and of search tactics and success, Dr. Getty can              
              develop alternative models and test their ability to describe and              
              predict behavioral tactics and predation rates under various                   
              conditions.  From these analyses, he can determine the extent to               
              which perceptual processes alter the relationship between                      
              resources, behavior, and resource exploitation.
