Title       : Stimulating and Facilitating Collaborative Long-Term Ecological Research: A
               Proposal for Continuing Support of the LTER Network Office
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9300679

Award Number: 9300679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4046204            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry F. Franklin jff@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Vande Castle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program has                           
              transformed itself from a loosely affiliated collection                        
              of sites to an integrated network.  Recent                                     
              accomplishments include: development of an effective                           
              electronic communication system; creation of data                              
              catalogs and shared data sets, including comprehensive                         
              satellite imagery for the network of sites; stimulation                        
              of cross-site syntheses and experiments; and linking                           
              with other scientific centers and federal agencies.                            
              Collectively, the LTER Network has expanded its focus                          
              to include larger spatial dimensions (regional and                             
              global) and has assumed a leadership role in ecological                        
              research involving long-term experimentation and                               
              observation and multi-site synthesis.                                          
                                                                                             
              The networked activities of LTER had allowed scientific                        
              collaboration far beyond the formal LTER Network.                              
              Initial collaborations with the general ecological                             
              community and other research organizations and agencies                        
              have involved research planning and electronic                                 
              communication.  During the next two years LTER expects                         
              to forge new linkages with such diverse entities as the                        
              NSF-funded supercomputer and GIS centers, NASA, and                            
              LTER-like programs in other countries.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project will presents the continuation of                                 
              activities which facilitate collaborative research in                          
              the LTER Network and provide the linkages to other                             
              long-term research networks (domestic and                                      
              international), agency programs, and scientists.  Most                         
              of the resources will be used to support the                                   
              infrastructure of the organized, electronically-linked                         
              group of scientists working on multi-site research and                         
              synthesis within and beyond the formal LTER Program.                           
              Support of Network communication, information and data                         
              exchange continues as a primary focus for the Network                          
              Office.  A major element is electronic access and                              
              information exchange, ranging from electronic mail                             
              services to on-line databases and data sharing.  A                             
              special project during this proposal period (1993) is                          
              the third LTER All Scientists meeting and an associated                        
              international LTER summit.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The major strategic emphasis in the next two years is                          
              building working linkages with other agencies,                                 
              institutions, research programs, and scientists with                           
              interests in long-term ecological research, including                          
              other NSF-funded science centers.  Proposed activities                         
              include: (1) Expansion of the existing communication                           
              network, data catalog, and on-line databases and                               
              development of a bibliographic database;                                       
                                                                                             
              (2) Acquisition, archiving, and analysis of an array of                        
              remotely sensed data from collaboration with NASA and                          
              the Supercomputer Centers; (3) Maintenance of the                              
              facilitating structure and publication program                                 
              associated with the Coordinating Committee and LTER                            
              Network; and (4) Increased involvement with other long-                        
              term research programs both domestically (e.g.,                                
              sponsored by USGS, USDA, and NPS) and internationally.                         
              Research and development efforts by the network staff                          
              will occur in areas of database management, remotely                           
              sensed data, geographic information analysis, and                              
              intersite comparisons.
