Title       : Machine Learning in Engineering Design: A Constructive Induction Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9300742

Award Number: 9300742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz Arciszewski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ryszard S. Michalski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9148,9216,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This interdisciplinary research aims at determining the                   
              feasibility and practicality of recently developed machine learning            
              methods to the acquisition and/or creation of conceptual design                
              knowledge.  Specifically, this research investigates, enhances and             
              adapts to the design problems new methods of constructive induction            
              that are capable of automatically inventing new problem-oriented               
              attributes, in contrast to the conventional machine learning                   
              methods that use only the attributes given in advance by the user.             
              Two novel approaches are investigated-DCI (data-driven constructive            
              induction) and HCI (hypothesis-driven constructive induction).                 
                   The first part of this research studies, adapts, and                      
              experimentally tests the methods on the problems of learning                   
              decision rules for conceptual design of wind bracing in tall                   
              buildings.  The  primary training data is a collection of optimal              
              (minimum weight) designs produced by a design and  optimization                
              computer system.  In the second part, the methodological experience            
              gained will be used to suggest and implement improvement to the                
              methods, and to synergistically integrate them into a single                   
              system, specifically oriented toward problems of conceptual design.            
              This experience will be also utilized to develop a method for                  
              applying constructive induction-based learning systems in design               
              knowledge acquisition.  The resulting system and method will be                
              tested in an industrial environment.  The research has a potential             
              to significantly improve conceptual design by developing a new                 
              powerful tool for the designers, as well as to make contributions              
              to the field of machine learning by conducting the study in the                
              context of practical and important real-world problems.
