Title       : GEM: GGCM Assembly Project Leader
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9300856

Award Number: 9300856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171437             (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Siscoe siscoe@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9300856  Siscoe  This is a proposal to the NSF's GEM program.  The GEM program's
               ultimate goal is to create a Geospace General Circulation Model  (GGCM).  A
              GGCM is a model that simulates the behavior of Earth's  magnetosphere like
              general circulation models (GCMs) simulate the  behavior of Earth's atmosphere.
               As GCMs are the most advanced and  powerful computer codes designed to study
              global atmospheric  weather and climate, so a GGCM will be the most advanced
              and  powerful computer code to study global magnetospheric processes,  which
              might also be described as weather and climate.  The GEM  program uses a series
              of multi-year, foucused campaigns to provide  the information needed to
              assemble a GGCM.  But the assembly itself  becomes a topic of focus very late
              in the program.  The point of  this proposal is to begin the organization,
              planning, and research  leading to a GGCM now.  The total GGCM assembly effort
              at this time  can be relatively small, but its effect in terms of guiding the 
              major ongoing campaigns toward GEM's ultimate goal can be great.    The PI
              proposes to assume responsibility for that part of the GEM  program that is
              directly involved with assembling a GGCM out of GEM  campaign products.  He
              proposed to organize a GGCM Working Group  (GGCM-WG), to coordinate its
              activities, and to manage GEM's GGCM  Assembly Project (GGCM-AP).  He will thus
              function as the GGCM-AP  leader.  As such, he will coordinate the activities of
              the GGCM-WG  through arranging its meeting and setting its agendas (by 
              consensus) according to a regular calendar.  The PI will schedule  ad hoc
              meetings of GGCM-WG subgroups tasked with specific GGCM-WG  projects.  The PI
              will manage the GGCM Assembly Project by  conducting, through the GGCM-WG, a
              review of GGCM types and  prospects, followed by devising, with the GGCM-WG, a
              Project Plan,  followed by focusing the attention of the WG on the steps called
               for in the Plan through the course of the Project.  This means  keeping the
              total Project in mind, und erstanding how the steps in  the Plan relate to the
              Project, and executing the steps.  In  practice, one executes the steps by
              selecting agenda topics, by  pacing the meetings, by working through e-mail
              between meetings,  and by taking on some GGCM-WG tasks.  Among the tasks are
              research  problems specifically related to the GGCM Assembly Project.  As the 
              PI's initial share of these, he proposes to work on two specific  problems: 
              one an interface problem between two essential modules  in a modularized GGCM,
              and one a system integration problem  involving the cooperative interaction of
              several modules.  ***
