Title       : Perceptual Speed, Switching, and Temporal Acuity Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9300482

Award Number: 9300482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Essex Corporation Florida
	      1430 SPRINGHILL ROAD
	      McLean, VA  221023000    407/894-5090

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 0000,1180,5373,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Over and above fine-spatial acuity, a substantial number of                    
              visual capabilities exist on which persons can be expected to                  
              differ reliably.  One such capability which has received                       
              insufficient attention is temporal acuity, the capability to                   
              resolve stimuli which are presented over time.  Results of the                 
              Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) study establish              
              the technical basis for a new human performance measurement                    
              product that has as its purpose the measurement of visual                      
              temporal acuity with a battery of tests.   The research                        
              objectives of the Phase II study focus on collecting data                      
              necessary to bring laboratory demonstrations of temporal                       
              phenomena in vision to a level useful outside the laboratory by                
              moving the temporal acuity measures from the present battery to                
              the new and faster computer hardware; developing and testing new               
              candidate measures of temporal visual acuity; developing the                   
              synthetic performance task (a task with substantial visual                     
              components, requiring vigilance and quick response to fine visual              
              detail embedded in a large and variable visual field); collecting              
              data relating Temporal Acuity Battery (TAB) measures to                        
              performance on the synthetic task; developing reliability vs.                  
              time trade-off functions and establishing guidelines for practice              
              until stability and long-term reliability; collecting data from                
              other laboratory spatial and temporal visual tests (e.g., static               
              and dynamic contrast sensitivity) to serve as correlates of the                
              TAB; conducting studies assessing the effects of alcohol and                   
              aging on temporal acuity; pooling the data collected from all                  
              studies to perform Factor Analysis of the battery; and                         
              establishing the prototype battery.  The project aims to produce               
              an assessment system that provides test administrators with                    
              useful data interpretations and prediction on field studies and                
              in the workplace.  Such a system can contribute to our                         
              understanding of how to improve temporal visual acuity                         
              performance to the extent that such abilities are required for                 
              jobs, tasks, leisure activities and how to identify temporal                   
              aspects of visual displays so as to advance understanding in                   
              engineering design.
