Title       : Plasma Activated Sintering--A Novel Rapid Consolidation Manufacturing Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9300999

Award Number: 9300999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna R. Groza jrgroza@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kazuo Yamazaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash H. Risbud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A new plasma activated sintering (PAS) process for                        
              consolidation of a variety of ceramic, intermetallic, and                      
              electronic materials will be investigated with a focus on the                  
              potential for developing a PAS manufacturing technology                        
              encompassing materials processing issues, system control, process              
              automation, and technology transfer to US industry.  The research              
              is an interdisciplinary effort involving materials processing,                 
              manufacturing and automation.  Specific research on PAS processing             
              of Nb-Al and NiAl intermetallics and AIN rapid consolidation will              
              be performed to create the scientific and engineering foundation               
              of this new and powerful processing method and to develop optimal              
              process control parameters.                                                    
                   Based on the fundamental understanding of the mechanism of PAS            
              consolidation, a process model will be developed.  The evaluation              
              of process parameters will be performed using modern                           
              microstructural analysis techniques (to determine phase formation,             
              grain size, and grain boundary structure) in conjunction with                  
              density and mechanical properties measurements.  Architectures and             
              functions relevant to an advanced PAS technology for the future                
              will also be designed as part of the research in anticipation of               
              the potential for intelligent manufacturing by the PAS process and             
              eventual transfer of this promising technology to US industry.
