Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Control of Singular Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9300805

Award Number: 9300805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel N. Barron enb@math.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenxiong Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Optimal control of solutions of dynamical systems which may               
              not exist globally in time will be the focus of this project. The              
              maximum time for which the solution exists is called the blowup                
              time. When the dynamics contain a control the blowup time depends              
              on the control. It is natural to pose the problem of optimally                 
              controlling the blowup time. The main direction of this research               
              will be to characterize the blowup time and associated blowup                  
              set, that is, the set on which the blowup time is finite, as a                 
              function of the initial conditions of the problem. Additional                  
              problems of interest include optimal control of extinction time,               
              that is, the first time the system reaches the zero state, which               
              is related to classical questions of controllability, and optimal              
              control of the quenching time, that is, the first time the                     
              derivative blows up but the function remains bounded.                          
                   This project is concerned with controlling the onset of                   
              unbounded behavior in singular systems.  Mathematical models of                
              phenomena such as thermal combustion exhibit this behavior, which              
              is known as blowup. In such problems the solution of the model                 
              problem becomes unbounded in finite time. As a practical matter,               
              it may be desired to delay the onset of blowup for as long as                  
              possible in order to allow, for example, the temperature to                    
              increase as much as possible prior to combustion. Similarly,                   
              certain biological and economic problems can be described by                   
              equations which exhibit blowup in finite time. Maximizing the                  
              blowup time in a system governing the growth of tumors, for                    
              example, would be effected through the use of chemotherapeutic or              
              radiation therapy as the control. Controlling the extinction time              
              of such a system would amount to minimizing the time at which the              
              tumor size decreases to zero.
