Title       : REU Site in Minority Group Demography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9300358

Award Number: 9300358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer R. Galle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa A. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9250,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to continue an REU Site at the Population            
              Research Center at the University of Texas, Austin.  Demography is             
              a technical field within sociology in which minorities are                     
              underrepresented.  This underrepresentation may stem from                      
              weaknesses in the typical undergraduate curriculum, combined with              
              low enrollment of minority students at colleges with strong                    
              demography programs.  The University of Texas, Austin supports a               
              strong, active research program in minority group demography, which            
              has had notable success in training minority demographers,                     
              especially Mexican-Americans.  In the past four years, the REU Site            
              summer training program has brought these skills to a mix of                   
              undergraduate students from the University and other smaller, non-             
              research oriented schools in the Southwest.                                    
                                                                                             
              As before, this REU Site has three specific objectives: (1) to                 
              provide undergraduate sociology students with more intense                     
              technical demographic training than is currently available in most             
              undergraduate sociology curricula; (2) to provide "hands-on"                   
              experience with faculty-led research teams conducting externally-              
              funded research projects on topics related to minority-group                   
              demography; and (3) to encourage undergraduate participants to                 
              develop a scholarly paper based on their summer research experience            
              and to present it at a regional demography group meeting after                 
              their summer program.  Although issues regarding the ethics of the             
              scientific research enterprise have been routinely covered in                  
              previous years, they will be incorporated in a more deliberate                 
              manner in the upcoming years.  The ethics component will include:              
              (a) issues regarding the use of human subjects, confidentiality of             
              data, and privacy in the execution of social-demographic research;             
              (b) issues regarding the publication of scientific research; and               
              (c) issues involved in grant applications and grant reviewing                  
              procedures.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to               
              attract talented students into careers in science through active               
              undergraduate research experiences.
