Title       : A Survey of the Freshwater Fishes of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9300996

Award Number: 9300996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Reinthal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie L J. Stiassny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1198,5928,
Abstract    :
              The project will (1) determine fish diversity and distribution in              
              the remnant rainforest and coastal plains of Madagascar; (2)                   
              assess, for conversion and sustainable use purposes, the status                
              of scientifically and commercially important native fish species;              
              (3) study fish ecology and physical and chemical habitat                       
              characteristics of the Madagascar rivers: (4) produce a checklist              
              and database of the fishes of Madagascar for in-country                        
              conservation planning; (5) provide research and teaching                       
              collections (preserved specimens frozen and alcohol tissues) to                
              Madagascar and US institutions for future biodiversity, molecular              
              systematic, and ecological studies, and for in-country and US                  
              training of students.  Madagascar fish are highly endemic,                     
              paralleling the endemism of the rest of of that African island                 
              fauna.  Many of the fish lineages are ancient, with their own                  
              origin dating to the geologic rifting of Madagascar from the                   
              African mainland about 80 million years ago.  The fish fauna;                  
              however, is poorly known and studied, and its diversity is                     
              severely threatened by deforestation and the introduction of                   
              foreign species.  Many of the surveyed and sampled fish will be                
              new to science.  This project has US partners (World Wide Fund                 
              for Nature, World Wildlife Fund, Conservation International) and               
              extensive Madagascar collaboration (scientists and students at                 
              the University Antananarivo; Parc Botanique et Zoologique de                   
              Tsimbazaza, Perinet Faunal Reserve, Ranomafauna National Park).                
              This biodiversity study is extremely urgent and has the full                   
              permitting and logistical support od Madagascar officials.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              By virtue of its more than 80 million years of isolation,                      
              Madagascar has developed among the most unique plants and animals              
              on earth.  This project will survey the freshwater fish of the                 
              rainforest and coastal plain rivers of Madagascar, many of which               
              are highly endemic and threatened by habitat extinction.  Many of              
              these fish lineages are ancient, with the origin dating to the                 
              geologic rifting of Madagascar from the African mainland about 80              
              million years ago.  The project will also assess, for                          
              conservation and sustainable use purposes, the status of                       
              scientifically and commercially important native fish species.                 
              The Madagascar fauna and flora is disappearing at a desperate                  
              pace -- for example, only 10 to 15% of the original rainforests                
              are left.  This support will enable the goals of sustainable                   
              development and conservation of biodiversity, building up                      
              Madagascar's scientific capacity in biodiversity research and                  
              strengthening long-term collaborative research linkages between                
              US and Malagasy scientists.
