Title       : Neotropical Montane Forests: Biodiversity and Conservation Symposium; Bronx, New
               York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9300635

Award Number: 9300635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Luteyn jluteyn@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5926,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the travel costs of 22 Latin American                  
              botanists and ecologists to a symposium at the New York Botanical              
              Garden on "Neotropical Montane Forests: Biodiversity and                       
              Conservation".  The symposium participants will address and discuss            
              the origin and composition of Andean montane plant diversity, and              
              the conservation and sustainable use of these forests.  A symposium            
              synthesis of peer-reviewed papers will comprise a "state of the                
              Andes" report.  Latin American participants will represent                     
              institutions and research in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Argentina,             
              Costa Rica, Ecuador, Bolivia and Mexico.  Because of the number of             
              Latin American botanists involved, the symposium will be a major               
              impetus for assessing the state of knowledge of biodiversity and               
              conservation research in Latin America and for promoting these                 
              activities. New York is also a logical venue for such a                        
              symposium, given the history of the Andean botanical collections               
              and research activity at the New York Botanical Garden, and the                
              opportunity provided the Latin American botanists to acquaint                  
              themselves with and study these collections first hand.  NYBG will             
              organize the symposium and assemble the final symposium report.                
              %%%                                                                            
              Much of the biodiversity of the Andean montane forests are                     
              threatened by human activity.  This award will support the                     
              participation of 22 Latin American botanists and ecologists in a               
              symposium at the New York Botanical Garden on "Neotropical Montane             
              Forests: Biodiversity and Conservation".  New York Botanical Garden            
              has a long history of Andean botanical collecting and research                 
              activity.  The symposium participants will treat the origin and                
              composition of Andean montane plant diversity, and the conservation            
              and sustainable use of these forests.  A symposium synthesis of                
              peer-reviewed papers will comprise a "state of the Andes" report.              
              Latin American participants will represent institutions and                    
              research in Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Argentina, Costa Rica,                  
              Ecuador, Bolivia and Mexico. As such, the symposium will be a major            
              impetus for assessing the state of knowledge of biodiversity and               
              conservation research in Latin America and for promoting these                 
              activities.
