Title       : Workshop/Conference on Representation Theory of Groups and Finite-Dimensional
               Algebras; August 4-13, 1993 Curacao, Netherlands Antilles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9300970

Award Number: 9300970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Martinez martinez@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5926,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Americas Program award will partially                                     
              support travel expenses of a group of                                          
              mathematicians from the Caribbean region and                                   
              from Latin America to a workshop/conference on                                 
              representation theory of groups and finite-                                    
              dimensional algebras, sponsored by the                                         
              Caribbean Mathematics Foundation, (CMF).  The                                  
              workshop will take place in Curacao,                                           
              Netherlands Antilles, August 4 - 13, 1993.  Dr.                                
              Jorge Martinez, University of Florida,                                         
              Gainesville,  is the organizer, with Dr.                                       
              Geoffrey R. Robinson, University of Florida as                                 
              coorganizer. The workshop will consist of                                      
              survey lectures, presenting an introduction to                                 
              Representation Theory of Groups and Finite                                     
              Dimensional Algebras.  The main objective of                                   
              the workshop is to contribute to the                                           
              development of mathematics in the region by                                    
              adding to the knowledge and background of the                                  
              participating young researchers and students.                                  
              The proceedings of this workshop/conference                                    
              will be published, and several volumes of the                                  
              work will be made available, free of charge, to                                
              individuals and libraries in the Region.                                       
                                                                                             
              The program will bring together mathematicians                                 
              from the developed mathematical community and                                  
              their colleagues from the Caribbean region and                                 
              Latin America.  Among the speakers are several                                 
              eminent mathematicians who are at the cutting                                  
              edge of research in the field.  From the                                       
              international perspective, benefits will                                       
              include establishment of dialogue and                                          
              communication for future research collaboration                                
              between mathematicians from different                                          
              countries; promotion of the international                                      
              exchange of scientific knowledge; and                                          
              strengthening of the mathematical                                              
              infrastructure of the countries of the region                                  
              through linkages to prominent researchers and                                  
              mathematical institutes in developed countries.
