Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research on Regional Assessments of Environmental Change in
               Mountainous Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9300017

Award Number: 9300017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94962              (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Zurick geozuric@acs.eku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Kentucky Univ
	      Division of Sponsored Programs
	      Richmond, KY  40475    606/622-3636

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9229,9278,
Abstract    :
                      Ongoing research by geographers and scientists from many               
              other disciplines has highlighted the complexity of the processes              
              through which demographics, economics, and other dynamic aspects               
              of human activity induce changes in natural systems as well as in              
              the ways that humans respond to changes in the natural                         
              environment.  Mountainous regions have been locales where human-               
              environment interactions have been especially significant.  The                
              the Himalayas have been the site of some of the most pronounced                
              interactions, because population levels and physical relief both               
              are at relatively high levels.  This collaborative research                    
              project will be conducted by P.P. Karan of the University of                   
              Kentucky and David Zurick of Eastern Kentucky University, both of              
              whom are geographers with considerable experience in the analysis              
              of human-environment interactions in the Himalayas.  They will                 
              conduct an historical study that focuses on land use and                       
              vegetative cover at different geographic scales.  In the first                 
              part of the study, they will analyze data on population, economic              
              activities, land use, and land cover gathered over the last                    
              century at the district level in Pakistan, India, Nepal, and                   
              Bhutan.  These analyses will identify general trends and permit                
              identification of areas where relationships between key factors,               
              especially population growth and forest cover, indicate that                   
              local case studies are likely to yield greater insights into                   
              crucial processes.  During the second part of the study, rigorous              
              local analyses will be undertaken in the case-study areas using                
              intensive field observation techniques, surveys and interviews,                
              and  air-photo interpretation.  Special emphasis in this part of               
              the inquiry will be placed on analysis of land-use, socio-                     
              economic, and population trends.                                               
                      Through these regional and local studies, the investigators            
              will provide valuable new insights about the processes through                 
              which humans impact on natural systems and respond to changes in               
              natural conditions in regions where stresses on both human and                 
              natural systems are great.  They will assemble a useful century-               
              long database, and they will provide external assessments of the               
              viability of a number of different types of economic development               
              regimes.
