Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Approximation in Stochastic Programming and Other
               Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9300930

Award Number: 9300930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger J. Wets rjbwets@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9300930  Wets       The unifying theme of this research is the epi-convergence 
              of  integral functionals as they arise in variational problems,  in particular
              stochastic optimization, i.e., problems involving  random integral functionals.
               The P.I. has identified the  following questions that will be investigated:
              the preservation  of epi-convergence under addition and epi-addition, the epi- 
              convergence of integral functions with discontinuous integrands,  the
              development of a quantitative theory for the convergence of  integral
              functionals.  In the case of random integral  functionals, the P.I. will
              develop epi-consistency results for  random lower semicontinuous functions with
              and without the epi-  iid assumption, design implementable procedures to
              estimate the   reliability level of approximate solutions and exploit the
              theory  of large deviations to obtain convergence rates.  %%%      
              Optimization problems (such as the allocation of scare  resources, optimal
              engineering design, planning of logistic  support operations, etc.) cannot be
              solved without resorting to  approximations.  To validate an approximation
              scheme one should  demonstrate that a refinement of the approximation yields a 
              better solution (convergence questions) and, whenever possible,  allows for the
              calculation of error bounds so that one can have  an estimate of the error that
              may occur (convergence rate).  The  P.I. plans to investigate such questions,
              in particular in  connection with so-called stochastic optimization problems
              (that  model decision making under uncertainty) a class of problems that  is
              very difficult to solve, but are very important as far as  applications are
              concerned.  ***
