Title       : Concept Database: A Design Information System for Concurrent Engineering with
               Application to Mechatronics Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9300025

Award Number: 9300025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice M. Agogino aagogino@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This is a program of research, development and technology                 
              transfer of a multimedia conceptual design aid, the Concept                    
              Database.  The Concept Database provides design teams with easy                
              access to information with regard to life cycle design issues for              
              competing design concepts and access to relevant past designs and              
              other information databases of the engineering enterprise.  The                
              Concept Database methodology provides "smart navigation" through               
              a hypermedia database of linked design concepts.  Such a system                
              expands the amount of information available to the designer and                
              other members of the product development team in a manner that is              
              selective, using search techniques that are based on heuristic,                
              deterministic, and decision-analytic methods.  Normative design                
              methodologies are used to develop the structure of the search in               
              order to guarantee that the full range of life cycle issues are                
              considered and provides a framework for making design decisions                
              that take account of multiple and often conflicting life cycle                 
              objectives.                                                                    
                   Mechatronic design is the domain of the first prototype                   
              system.  Mechatronic design is an area of key strategic                        
              importance, playing an important role in the design of consumer                
              products, computer peripherals, automation systems, and aerospace              
              and defense systems.  It is also an area where off-the-shelf                   
              component selection is essential, and one in which the expertise               
              crosses departmental boundaries; electronic design, mechanical                 
              design, interface design, supplier coordination, packaging,                    
              logistics and support are all involved in the realization of a good            
              mechatronic system design.
