Title       : Survey and Study of Late Cretaceous Terrestrial Vertebrates from the Gobi Desert
               of Mongolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1996  
File        : a9300770

Award Number: 9300770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Novacek novacek@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Norell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm C. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1197,1198,
Abstract    :
              This project will continue a survey and inventory of the famous                
              Late Cretaceous Flaming Cliffs deposits in the Gobi Desert,                    
              Mongolia, site of the Central Asiatic Expeditions in the 1920s.                
              Three previous expeditions by the AMNH has succeeded in recovering             
              a wealth of well-preserved tetrapod vertebrates, especially                    
              theropod dinosaurs, mammals, and a new lineage of extraordinary                
              flightless birds with mole-like adaptations for digging.  These                
              expeditions have also mapped old and new localities using GPS.                 
              Specimen and locality/geological information for the 10,000                    
              specimens will be entered in a computer database.  Cooperation with            
              Mongolian authorities and scientists is excellent and includes                 
              field work in Mongolia and long-term study visits of Mongolian                 
              scientists to the AMNH.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will continue a survey of the fossil mammals,                     
              reptiles, amphibians and birds from the famous Late Cretaceous                 
              dinosaur beds in the Gobi Desert, Mongolia.  This survey is                    
              revisiting the sites of the Central Asiatic Expeditions in the                 
              1920s, which first discovered dinosaur egg nests and other                     
              important fossils.  Three previous expeditions by this current                 
              survey team has succeeded in recovering a wealth of well-preserved             
              fossil vertebrates, especially theropod dinosaurs, mammals, and a              
              new lineage of extraordinary flightless birds with mole-like                   
              adaptations for digging. Cooperation with Mongolian authorities and            
              scientists is excellent and includes field work in Mongolia and                
              long-term study visits of Mongolian scientists at the American                 
              Museum in New York.  Study of the fossils recovered by these                   
              expeditions will help elucidate the nature of dinosaur extinctions             
              and climate change 65 million years ago.
