Title       : Fish Diversity of the Principal Channels of the Amazon River, Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9300151

Award Number: 9300151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355503             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Lundberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5913,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year project will survey and document the scarcely                  
              known fishes inhabiting the deep, principal channels of the                    
              Brazilian Amazon.  Aquatic invertebrates and fish parasites will               
              also be sampled.  The project will also determine the large scale              
              and local scale distribution of fish species and correlate these               
              geographic patterns with environmental factors.  The collection                
              data will become part of NEODAT, an on-line database of                        
              neotropical fish biodiversity.  This documentation of Amazonian                
              deep channel fishes and their distribution is essential for                    
              monitoring biotic change and for planning fisheries management and             
              conservation along the Amazon.  The project will deposit research              
              and teaching collections of fishes and associated tissues in                   
              Brazilian and US institutions for voucher records, future studies              
              and the training of students.  Collaborating Brazilian                         
              institutions/scientists include: (1) the Brazilian government                  
              funding agency, CNPq; (2) two ichthyologists from the Museu de                 
              Zoologia and the Universidade de Sao Paulo, and two fish ecologist             
              at Museu Paraense Emilio Goeldi in Belem; (3) one masters student              
              and two doctoral students, one of which is currently completing                
              her PhD with the PI at Arizona; (4) and INPA researcher with a                 
              CNPq scholarship; and (5) five postdoctoral students who will                  
              receive research training at the University of Arizona in addition             
              to being part of the on-site research team.  Other collaborators               
              include researchers in the US (University of Washington),                      
              Venezuela (Universidad Central de Venezuela), France (ORSTROM) and             
              Germany (Max Planck Institute).                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will document the deep water fishes the Amazon River,             
              Brazil and the mouths of its major tributaries.  The results will              
              become part of a national fish biodiversity database and will be               
              critical to planning fisheries management and conservation for the             
              Amazon region.  The project includes training of Brazilian and US              
              students in the field as well as the laboratory in the most modern             
              methods of fish sampling and biodiversity research.
