Title       : A Systematic Survey of the Metazoan Parasites of the Elasmobranchs from the Sea
               of Cortez
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9300796

Award Number: 9300796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $532248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janine N. Caira jcaira@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Benz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will survey the metazoan parasitesand their                       
              elasmobranch hosts from the Sea of Cortez, Mexico.  The fishes (and            
              putatively, the parasites) are highly endemic and are threatened by            
              severe overharvesting by commercial fishing.  Aside from collecting            
              whole specimens, the survey will sample tissues of hosts and                   
              parasites for future molecular analysis. Collections will be                   
              deposited in Mexico's Guaymas Marine Station; other in-country                 
              collaborators include scientists and students at the Universidad               
              Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, the Mexican government, and native                
              Mexican fisherman.  Aside from documenting the composition and                 
              geographic distribution of the elasmobranch fishes and their                   
              metazoan parasites, the survey will contribute to the conservation             
              and sustainable commercial use of these fishes in the Sea of                   
              Cortez.                                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This four-year biodiversity project will survey, for the first                 
              time, the elasmobranch fishes (sharks, skates and rays) inhabiting             
              the Sea of Cortez, along with their internal metazoan parasites.               
              Because of their relative isolation, many of the elasmobranch                  
              fishes and their parasites in the Sea of Cortez will be new to                 
              science.  However, knowledge of  both the fishes and the parasites             
              is threatened because the elasmobranch fishes are in danger of                 
              being wiped out by overharvesting.  The survey will also sample                
              tissues of hosts and parasites for future molecular analysis.                  
              Aside from documenting the composition and geographic distribution             
              of the elasmobranch fishes and their metazoan parasites, the survey            
              will contribute to the conservation and sustainable commercial use             
              of these fishes in the Sea of Cortez.
