Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1995  
File        : a9300974

Award Number: 9300974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal L. Smith halsmith@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9169,9218,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9300974  Smith       Ordinary differential equations, equations with time
              delays,  reaction-diffusion systems containing time delays, and hyperbolic 
              partial differential equations with nonlocal boundary conditions  arise
              naturally in population biology, epidemiology, and in  neural modeling.  They
              are commonly used in the biological  modeling of populations.  The focus of
              this project is on means  of determining the long-term behavior of solutions of
              this wide  variety of differential equations.  From the dynamical systems 
              point of view,  the investigator aims to find and exploit common  features of
              the dynamics exhibited by this wide class of systems  in order to determine
              asymptotic behavior.  Monotonicity, the  preservation of a partial order
              relation on the space of initial  states by the dynamics, is one such feature
              shared by many  systems that model competing populations of organisms, neurons,
               etc.  More realistic models often take the form of complex  hyperbolic systems
              modeling the time-evolution of densities of  populations structured by size,
              age, stored nutrient, etc.   Often, in their original form, these systems are
              mathematically  intractable and means must be found to transform them to
              simpler,  more well-understood, dynamical systems.  Finding transformations  of
              these complicated systems to simpler ones is an aim of the  present study.     
               Mathematical modeling of interacting populations  of organisms, neurons, etc.,
              is an important area of  current interest.  The goal is to try to explain
              observations of  complex behavior in real populations by ignoring all but the 
              "essential" features of the interactions and constructing  simplified models of
              these systems that are amenable to  mathematical analysis.  If too much biology
              is ignored in the  modeling then the models do not mirror the interactions of
              real  populations; if too little is ignored, the models become so  complicated
              that present knowledge does not permit successful  analysis.  Progress in
              applying the rapidly d eveloping field of  dynamical systems to biological
              systems has steadily pushed this  fine line between biologically irrelevant
              models and  mathematically intractable ones forward, so that ever more  biology
              can be incorporated into the models, making them more  realistic to biologists,
              better mirrors of real populations,  while yet remaining tractable. 
              Essentially, the aim of this  project is to push further in this direction. 
              ***
