Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9300300

Award Number: 9300300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald W. Esch   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald V. Dimock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biology at                      
              Wake Forest University to continue a successful Research                       
              Experiences for Undergraduates SITE.  Undergraduate                            
              students, with the primary emphasis on women and minorities,                   
              will be given the opportunity of a 10 week research                            
              experience (Summer Undergraduate Research                                      
              Experience) with faculty members in the Department .  The                      
              research interests of the students will be matched with                        
              those of participating faculty.  In conjunction with the                       
              research experience, students will be exposed to a range of                    
              other activities, including two, overnight field trips and a                   
              weekly seminar program given by departmental faculty                           
              members. Special time will be set aside for instruction in                     
              elementary biostatistics, experimental design, slide                           
              preparation, etc. The summer's research activities will                        
              culminate with an afternoon-long colloquium, at which time                     
              the students will present the results of their work to                         
              faculty and other summer participants. Students will be                        
              quartered in one of the University's residential houses in                     
              order to facilitate maximum student-student interaction.                       
              During the final days of the summer program, the students                      
              will be joined by their faculty Mentors from their home                        
              institutions. In this way, it is hoped that the students can                   
              better share their research experiences with faculty with                      
              whom they may be spending the remainder of their                               
              undergraduate career. In this way they may also be able to                     
              sustain their research momentum and perhaps entice them into                   
              a graduate program on completion of their baccalaureate                        
              degrees.
