Title       : REU: Molecular and Organismal Evolution: A Comparative Focus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9300372

Award Number: 9300372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall D. Sundberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Louisiana State University to                   
              continue a successful Research Experiences for                                 
              Undergraduates SITE.  The primary activity will involve                        
              eight week summer sessions of independent research in                          
              evolutionary biology. A select group of ten students, (at                      
              least six non-LSU students) of junior or senior standing,                      
              will be invited to participate in the program. Each student                    
              will be under the direct supervision of an LSU faculty                         
              member who will serve as the research mentor and be directly                   
              responsible for the student' s progress. Faculty                               
              participants have been chosen on the basis of their                            
              experience working with undergraduates in the laboratory,                      
              suitability of research projects and general research                          
              productivity. Additional components of the summer program                      
              will be an intense library orientation, communication skills                   
              workshop, and an honor and ethics in science seminar. The                      
              program will also involve a weekly seminar series for all                      
              participants, including the faculty advisors and members of                    
              their research laboratories. The latter activities will be                     
              coordinated by the P. I.. Upon completion of the summer                        
              research program, each REU investigator will present his/her                   
              research results as an oral paper at an undergraduate                          
              research symposium, and a written paper in a form suitable                     
              for publication. Students will be encouraged to present the                    
              results of their completed work to a scientific audience at                    
              regional or national professional meetings.  This program                      
              targets students in the South Central region of the United                     
              States, with three schools, Centenary College, Jackson State                   
              University and the University of Texas - Pan American to                       
              receive focused recruiting.
