Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1995        
File        : a9300778

Award Number: 9300778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene B. Fabes fabes@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in three areas of mathematical analysis will be                  
              supported by this award.  The theme of the work revolves around                
              partial differential equations defined on domains with nonsmooth               
              boundaries and inverse problems related to such equations.  The                
              first areas concerns computational algorithms for approximating                
              the inverse of classical layer potentials on nonsmooth domains.                
              One is interested in determining mathematically justified                      
              numerical schemes for approximating inverses of boundary integral              
              operators arising from layer potentials.  These potentials are                 
              associated with boundary value problems for second order                       
              partial differential equations and systems.  A second line of                  
              study concerns Fatou theory and potential theory for nonlinear                 
              elliptic equations and linear parabolic equations with                         
              nonsmooth coefficients.  The goal is to determine exactly how                  
              solutions, defined on the interior of a domain, change as the                  
              boundary is approached in a nontangential direction.  The final                
              goal is to establish sharp boundedness estimates for classes of                
              functions on nonsmooth domains in the form of multiplicative norm              
              inequalities involving a second or higher order elliptic operator              
              on the functions of involving the Stokes operator in the case of               
              a vector=valued function.The analysis of partial differential                  
              equations on nonsmooth domains is an subject of intense recent                 
              activity in mathematical research.  It has been possible to make               
              steady headway on problems once thought to be out of reach. Aside              
              from their intellectual challenge, these problems have a                       
              practical side -most phenomena in the physical world which can be              
              modeled by differential equations are burdened with rough                      
              boundary conditions.  This type of research validates information              
              only obtained intuitively or through computation.
