Title       : Connections to Concrete-Filled Steel Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9300682

Award Number: 9300682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil M. Hawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project conducts studies in steel-concrete composite                      
              structural systems which are becoming more prevalent in building               
              frame construction today.  A common type of composite structure                
              is a steel frame with composite primary columns.  This combines                
              the advantages of a light-weight, ductile steel frame with the                 
              added stiffness of steel-concrete composite columns to control                 
              lateral drift.  The focus of this research is on the performance               
              of connections to concrete-filled tube columns.  An inelastic                  
              seismic analysis of building frames, an inelastic finite element               
              analysis of the specific details and experimentation of critical               
              connections are carried out.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The current limited practices of these composite elements and                  
              provide guidelines for the safe and economical design of                       
              connection details are assessed.  Connections with elements that               
              penetrate the steel tube and steel-to-steel connections to the                 
              exterior of the tube wall are investigated.  Several detailing                 
              issues are considered, including: embedment length of members                  
              without shear connectors, required thickness of the tube wall in               
              the area of the beam-to-column joint, required vs. available                   
              bonding between the steel tube and concrete core, creep and                    
              shrinkage of the concrete core, and crushing of the concrete and               
              buckling of the tube wall at the connection.                                   
                                                                                             
              It is expected that results from this research will stimulate                  
              wide-spread interest in the design community.  Composite                       
              construction has many advantages over the more traditional                     
              structural systems, and this research will be the first step in                
              making concrete-filled steel tube columns more feasible and                    
              practical for future use.
