Title       : Japan STA Program: Biochemical Correlates of Metabolic Enzymes in Juvenile
               Salmon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9300914

Award Number: 9300914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8150               (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Hershberger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7137,
Abstract    :
              9300914    Hershberger  Silverstein    Japan STA Program:  Biochemical
              Correlates of Metabolic Enzymes in Juvenile Salmon    This award will provide
              supplementary support to enable Dr. Jeffrey Silverstein of the  University of
              Washington to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Hiroshi Ogata for 24 
              months at the National Research Institute of Aquaculture in Mie, Japan.  They
              will apply Dr.  Silverstein's theories on the genetic parameters defining
              growth and reproductive traits of the  male coho salmon to the stock of masu
              salmon at Dr. Ogata's laboratory.    The breeding of fast growing, late
              maturing fish is a central goal of salmonid culture.  The  relationship between
              growth and sexual maturation is of great importance especially since  there is
              a marked reduction in growth rate and loss of economic value in salmon when
              they  begin to sexually mature.  Previous research on condition factors and fat
              levels of fast  growing, early maturing males has led to a hypothesis that an
              energy or growth threshold  must be surpassed in order for sexual maturation to
              ensue.  The goal of Silverstein and Ogata  is to examine salmonids with known
              differences in sexual maturation phenotype for  differences in nutrient
              partitioning into fat and lean growth.  Utilizing Dr. Ogata's expertise in 
              masu salmon genetics, the team will examine 10 full-sibling families of salmon
              which have  high and low probabilities for early maturation and develop assays
              for metabolic enzymes  such as ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), fatty acid
              synthetase, ATP citrate lyase, and several  NADPH generating enzymes.  The
              experimental results will not only clarify the association  between metabolic
              and sexual maturation phenotypes, it will provide evidence of biochemical 
              differences between fast and slow growing phenotypes.  By gaining an
              understanding of lean  and fat growth in these species of salmon, the salmonid
              industry will be able to more quickly  modify its selection criteria and
              approach its goal of fast growth and delayed ma turation in  cultured fish.
