Title       : Knowledge-Based Analysis of Speech Mixed with Steady and Sporadic Environmental
               Sounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9300194

Award Number: 9300194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29905              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Hamid Nawab hamid@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Y. Espy-Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project.  The            
              project investigates the feasibility of using knowledge from the               
              steady and sporadic background noise sources that occur in                     
              arbitrary environments not conditioned for speech recognition to               
              isolate them from speaker-independent articulation of telephone                
              numbers in a recognition task.  The environmental noisy background             
              could be found in home, offices, and automobiles; the types of                 
              steady-state noise include those originating from an air                       
              conditioner or from a car engine, while the sporadic noise sources             
              are discrete events such as a person walking, a door slammed, a                
              ringing telephone, or an appliance being switched on.  The problem             
              is addressed on the basis of a signal-understanding architecture               
              with context-dependent reconfiguration for the feature extraction              
              process.  The results from an initial round of feature extraction              
              are analyzed for time-frequency regions consistent with the                    
              system's knowledge regarding the correlates of various speech and              
              non-speech sources.  Those regions of higher certainty - or islands            
              of certainty - are considered in the prediction of potentially                 
              masked speech by non-speech sources that may occur in other parts              
              of the utterance.  Those regions are used also as a basis in the               
              reconfiguration of the feature-extraction process which is used in             
              analyzing the masked region as well as in verifying, pruning, and              
              refining hypotheses in all regions.  In summary, while the goal of             
              the system is to recognize speech, it must also perform the                    
              recognition on non-speech sounds to help the speech recognition                
              process.                                                                       
               //
