Title       : Research Internships in the Neural and Behavior Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9300595

Award Number: 9300595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Cruz-Uribe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantine N. Slobodchikoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Prior  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to Northern Arizona University to                    
              continue a successful Research Experiences for                                 
              Undergraduates Site.  The project will be sponsored by the                     
              three colleges at the University; Arts and Sciences, Social                    
              and Behavioral Sciences, and Engineering and Technology.                       
              Under the guidance of Faculty Mentors students will conduct                    
              research in the neural and behavioral sciences.  The total                     
              research internship integrates two major components.  During                   
              the year-long research internship, students receive training                   
              in research design, statistics, reading complex scientific                     
              literature, introduction to advanced technologies in                           
              research design and implementation, seminars in the history                    
              and philosophy of science, and an integrated lecture-                          
              discussion series that covers the range of research topics                     
              in neural and behavioral sciences. The program combines this                   
              training phase with research experiences during the academic                   
              year.  Scientists from the Department of Biology and the                       
              Department of Psychology will sponsor 10 research                              
              internships for undergraduates.  The Department of                             
              Vocational and Technological Education will provide training                   
              in advanced technologies, including basic computer training                    
              (wordprocessing, graphics, statistics, electronic                              
              communication) and training in the application of computer                     
              assisted design systems for production of research software                    
              and instrumentation.  The Science and Mathematics Learning                     
              Center will provide coordination and administrative                            
              assistance for the project, and also training in the basics                    
              of experimental design, statistics, reading scientific                         
              literature, scientific and technical writing, and                              
              collaborative learning.  Scientists from all participating                     
              departments will contribute lecture-discussion series on                       
              neural and behavioral research.
