Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Pollutant Dry Deposition to Snow and
               Vegetation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9300627

Award Number: 9300627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cliff I. Davidson cliff@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5937,
Abstract    :
              9300627  Davidson    This three-year award supports U.S.-Sweden cooperative
              research  between Cliff I. Davidson, of Carnegie-Mellon University and Mats 
              Oblad of the Chalmers University of Technology.  The objectives  of the
              research are (1) to measure and model dry deposition of  atmospheric acids and
              trace elements in the Gardsjon Lake forest  canopy in central Sweden as part of
              a large international  watershed study; and (2) to develop models and interpret
              data on  dry deposition in the Artic region.  The investigators will study 
              sulfate and nitrate acidic compounds known to cause ecosystem  damage, and
              certain trace elements that are known to neutralize  acids.  The proposed work
              will focus on field measurements and  computer modeling of dry deposition
              processes.    Atmospheric acids are transported to surfaces by wet and dry 
              deposition.  Dry deposition is an important mechanism of removal  of acidic
              compounds from the atmosphere; however, its processes  are not well understood.
               The forest deposition work and the work  in the Artic will provide better
              estimates and understanding of  the physical and chemical processes by which
              atmospheric  particles interact with vegetated and snow surfaces.  The 
              researchers at Carnegie Mellon have developed unique, symmetric  airfoil
              devices for measuring dry deposition.  These will be set  up in the forest
              canopy at Gardsjon Lake. The models on dry  deposition in the Artic, also
              developed by the Carnegie-Mellon  group, will be tested utilizing new datasets
              available at  Chalmers University.  The proposed collaboration takes advantage 
              of Swedish expertise in modeling methods and experience in  monitoring the
              deposition of acidic compounds in a forest canopy.   It also allows comparision
              of results at American sites with  those from Swedish sites.  ***
