Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inferences, Decision Theory, and Asymptotics
               of Eigenvalues and Eigenprojections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9300973

Award Number: 9300973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris L. Eaton eaton002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Research is proposed on a variety of problems in statistical              
              decision theory.  The main focus of this research is the                       
              evaluation of inferential methods with admissibility as one                    
              evaluative criterion.  The connection between the admissibility                
              of formal Bayes rules and the recurrence of symmetric Markov                   
              chains forms an important portion of the theoretical background                
              for this work.  In a nonparametric setting an alternative method               
              of inducing inferences is proposed.  This alternative is easily                
              implemented numerically and has connections with both frequentist              
              and Bayesian bootstrap procedures.  Another area of proposed                   
              research concerns questions related to the asymptotic                          
              distribution of eigenvalues, eigenprojections, and singular                    
              values.  Previous work contains new techniques which provide a                 
              unified treatment of eigenalues and singular values.                           
              Applications of these results to concrete examples and extension               
              of the basic results to eigenprojection problems is proposed.                  
                   Statistics deals with the activity of making statements                   
              about populations on the basis of available samples or data.                   
              Since information is most often incomplete, such statements are                
              typically in error.  The quantification of this error is a                     
              standard statistical activity and is often expressed in terms of               
              probability.  The research supported by this grant concerns                    
              various methods for quantifying statistical errors and the                     
              properties of such methods.  The ultimate goal of the research is              
              the development of new statistical methods for obtaining                       
              probabilistic quantification of errors in inferential statements.
