Title       : DLI-Phase 2: A Digital Library of Reusable Science and Math Resources for
               Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0002935

Award Number: 0002935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1143282            (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Graves   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Knox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Scott Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. McArthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1086,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main objectives of this two-year project are to build a functioning digital
              library of reusable instructional and learning materials for undergraduate
              level science and to use the library as a testbed to address several important
              research issues in the evolution and use of digital libraries.  The project
              represents a collaboration between the COLLEGIS Research Institute (CRI), the
              Instructional Management System (IMS) Project, the University of North Carolina
              at Wilmington (UNCW), the ACM SIGGRAPH Education Committee's Digital Library
              (SECDL), the institutions that comprise the Computer Science Teaching Center
              (CSTC), and EDUCAUSE.    

The library content includes diverse undergraduate
              science-education resources coming initially from the members of the
              collaboration.  The high quality digital resources provided by these groups
              range from primary source materials, such as datasets and images, to Java
              applets and visualization tools, to complex simulations and structured
              curriculum fragments.  They also span a wide range of subjects from Earth
              sciences to pure mathematics.  The library is adopting the IMS standards being
              created to represent instructional and learning materials in a
              platform-independent, reusable way.   Specifically, library content is being
              described using IMS metadata to provide a testbed for the IMS standards.  The
              IMS metadata is being extended as necessary to cover the diverse material being
              tagged.  

The main tasks of the project are to construct an initial version
              of the library, called XXDL, to incorporate the diverse content of the project
              partners into the library, to establish the procedures by which the resources
              are catalogued and reviewed independently, and to grow the library user
              community.  The main tasks of the second year include a broad evaluation of the
              effectiveness of the XXDL and a more focused investigation of the roles, costs,
              and benefits of using the standardized IMS metadata for tagging the data. The
              expectation is that IMS should provide superior indexing because it has been
              designed expressly to characterize instructional and learning content and
              because the use of standards should ensure that all content catalogers apply a
              uniform descriptive schema to diverse learning resources.   It is anticipated
              that XXDL users will benefit by having powerful and predictable tools with
              which to find appropriate learning and instructional materials. 

In addition
              to providing a "stress test" of the IMS metadata, the project should have
              several additional broad impacts.  It directly benefits undergraduate science
              faculty who use the library to develop improved digital course materials.  It
              also helps faculty to create collaborative communities to share and reuse
              learning resources.  The evaluation of XXDL helps library developers understand
              how to design more effective digital libraries and online communities that
              encourage reuse of learning materials and collaboration.  The XXDL testbed can
              be used for future focused investigations of digital library issues.

