Title       : Shaping the Network Society: The Future of the Public Sphere in Cyberspace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0002547

Award Number: 0002547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Schuler douglas@scn.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cptr Profess for Scl Res
	      P.O. Box 717
	      Palo Alto, CA  943020717    650/322-3778

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The symposium "Shaping the Network Society: The Future of the Public Sphere in
              Cyberspace" held on May 20 - 23, 2000 at the University of Washington in
              Seattle was highly successful.  Over 350 people from over 20 countries from a
              wide variety of academic and other disciplines attended the conference.  This
              symposium helped to identify and give voice to a large body of 
              interdisciplinary work.  It helped reveal a rich vein of new research topics
              and a burgeoning community of researchers eager to work on them: organizers
              received over 100 submissions in response to our call for abstracts.  Perhaps
              most importantly the community was in good measure a  younger one; a new
              generation of researchers is stepping up to address these insurgent issues. 
              The objective of this support is to disseminate the findings of the symposium
              to a large number of people.  Since this was among the first and most notable
              of conferences devoted to these themes it is particularly important to make the
              results available to other researchers.  At the same time it is equally
              important to reach out to non-specialists and the general public.  Computer
              technology is rapidly spreading into all sectors of society and "ordinary"
              people are intensely interested in how they can shape technology and how
              technology can shape them. This work will help people understand challenges and
              opportunities of the Internet and other communication technology and how they
              might themselves play a part in its ongoing  development.  The organization
              plans to build on this work and to further expand the awareness of this new
              work in many ways.  The major tasks covered by this proposal are:  (1) to
              develop a book based on invited panelist papers; (2) to develop a book based on
              research papers; (3) to develop special sections in journals (particularly the
              Communications of the ACM); (4) to add current and previous CPSR/DIAC
              submissions to the web site; and (5) to develop material for the CPSR
              Newsletter and an editorial for print and electronic distribution.  This
              support helps to leverage a strong volunteer effort.  
