Title       : Development of the Escape Response in Xyrauchen Texanus: Do Razorback Suckers
               have Poor Escape Performance?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0002301

Award Number: 0002301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Gibb Alice.Gibb@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The escape response is a reflexive behavior that allows fish to swim rapidly
              away from predators.  This behavior is believed to be particularly important
              for larval fishes, which are contstantly preyed upon by other fish and
              invertebrates.  In fact, it is thought that the main reason many species of
              native fish are currently disappearing from the Colorado River is that their
              larvae are consumed by introduced fish species.  Thus, escape responses
              performance may be of critical importance in the continued survival of native
              fish species.  This project will examine the development of the the escape
              response in the larvae of a native fish species, the razorback sucker
              (Xyrauchen texanus).  In addition, escape response performance of another fish
              with benthic larvae, the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), will also be
              measured during development and compared to the performance of the razorback
              sucker.  Rainbow trout provide an interesting ecological comparison with the
              razorback sucker for several reasons: (1) they are not native to the Colorado
              River, but currently live there in large numbers, (2) their larvae can survive
              in habitats with other predatory fishes, and (3) they are known to prey on
              young razorback suckers as adults.  For both species, the development of the
              musculoskeletal and the nervous systems will be quantified to determine their
              potential contributions to escape response performance.  Finally, two
              experimental temperatures will be used in this study to assess the role of
              recent temperature changes in the Colorado River on escape response
              performance, and to allow direct comparisons of the data colleted in these
              studies with data collected previously for other teleosts.
