Title       : Dissertation Research: Images of Anatomy, Idols of Devotion: The Reformation of
               Mortality and Experience in Sixteenth-Century Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0002254

Award Number: 0002254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine Park   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project uses popular anatomical prints (single sheet
              woodcuts with superimposed flaps) produced in the late 1530s in Reformation
              Germany as the starting point for the study of several issues of importance to
              history of medicine and science studies. This project continues ongoing
              interdisciplinary research which indicates that these anatomical images cannot
              be fully understood outside the broader context of changes in visual culture
              and visual practice around the Reformation. This project is primarily concerned
              with the implications for early modern science of the way in which these prints
              made use of and reformulated preReformation devotional viewing practices. The
              project argues that forms of visual attention considered proper for medieval
              devotion (but improper for the study of nature) were recast during the
              Reformation as proper for studies of natural objects and phenomena. After
              charting this shift from devotional to anatomical images and their association
              with religious and social changes in the Reformation, the researcher follows
              its effects in two directions: first, she looks at the influence of these
              prints on later sixteenth-century presentations of anatomy; second, she uses
              these prints as the starting point for a discussion of the changing
              epistemological status of visual experience in the sixteenth century. The
              understanding of these images in relation to broader changes in visual culture
              and viewing practices - people's interactions with images and the production of
              meaning through those interactions - adds to the knowledge of history of
              medicine and science studies on the following topics and issues: the origins
              and significance of specific forms of anatomical representations; the ways in
              which anatomy addressed moral and spiritual concerns, and the relationship of
              body and soul; the social and intellectual mechanisms of change in anatomy and
              science (especially, with regard to networks of publishers, scholars, and
              artisans); the role of images and crafted objects in effecting change in the
              epistemological status of visual experience, important for seventeenth century
              empiricism; and, the ways in which aesthetics, affects, sensibilities, and
              values can play important roles in the production of knowledge (not only in
              tenns of which objects and phenomena investigators study and how, but also in
              terms of what constitutes legitimate knowledge itself). This project emphasizes
              art historical methods of close visual analysis of objects and images, with
              textual support from primary and secondary sources. Because this research
              focuses on the importance of the visual and physical relationships between
              images and viewers, and because many prints and objects for this study are not
              well-reproduced (if reproduced at all), it is essential for the researcher to
              work directly with the images and objects. The resources made available by this
              grant will make it possible for her to travel to European collections which
              house the research materials she needs. She will base herself primarily in
              London, Munich and Berlin for three to four months each (ten months total) in
              order to work in several different libraries, large print collections, and
              museums of material culture.
