Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transnational Corporations and Livelihood
               Transformation in Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a0002347

Award Number: 0002347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Bebbington Anthony.Bebbington@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,5926,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During recent decades, transnational corporations (TNCs) have rapidly implement
              new forms of business operation throughout the world.  The impact of TNCs has
              been especially profound in developing nations, where previous locally oriented
              economies have been transformed by the influx of foreign capital and managerial
              control.  An increasingly important question across many nations is the degree
              to which TNCs impact on local development and on the livelihoods of the people
              who inhabit regions where they establish new facilities.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will evaluate how new transnational corporation
              business activities are affecting the human, natural, and social resources used
              by households in the northern Peruvian Andes.  The project will evaluate if and
              how changing access to resources has affected household livelihoods and
              intra-household access to resources, especially as differential access is based
              on gender.  In order to address these questions, three different sets of
              intensive, semi-structured interviews and focus groups based on intentional and
              random sampling procedures will be conducted in three communities over the
              course of eight months in the Cajamarca region of Peru.  In addition, both
              qualitative text-based of  archival material and analyses of data collected in
              a geographic information system will be used to evaluate the nature of the
              relationships between TNCs and livelihood transformation.  The study will
              generate new basic data on household livelihood production strategies in the
              Peruvian Andes and how TNCs are contributing to livelihood transformation.  The
              project also will generate data rgearding how TNC activities are affecting
              intra-household access to resources based on gender differences.  The project
              will contribute to a framework of analysis that seeks to understand the
              different dimensions of local resource change and the links between
              international economic actors and the local scale.  The field research will
              contribute to theoretical development in geographic political ecology and
              feminist political ecology studies, business and economic development research,
              and Latin American geographic studies.  Furthermore, the project will
              contribute to academic and policy debates as it will identify and assess the
              impacts of international corporate mining activities on local capital resources
              through qualitative and GIS-based methodologies.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

