Title       : Decentralized Decision-Making in Complex Network Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0002647

Award Number: 0002647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Nagurney nagurney@gbfin.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              June Q. Dong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Mokhtarian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Network systems provide the infrastructure and foundation for the functioning of
              today's societies and economies. They come in many forms and include physical
              networks such as transportation, communication, and power networks, as well as
              more abstract networks such as a variety of economic and financial networks and
              social and knowledge networks. Such network systems are characterized by
              decentralized decision-making, a large-scale nature, different time scales, and
              distinct system equilibrium concepts. This project studies complex network
              systems, consisting of the foundational systems of transportation and
              communication networks whose interplay is becoming increasingly important in
              the case of telecommuting, intelligent transportation systems, electronic
              commerce, and knowledge networks. The project aims to: develop a theory of such
              complex network systems, which emphasizes the individual behavior of the
              decision-makers and allows for the treatment of multiple criteria; construct
              algorithms for the solution of such systems, along with convergence analysis
              and computer implementation and numerical experimentation; develop
              visualization techniques to understand and depict the behavior, and apply the
              theory to complex knowledge networks; and conduct an empirical analysis. The
              results of the research are expected to have broad cross-disciplinary reach and
              to significantly add to the understanding of fundamental networks systems
              underlying our societies and economies for the purpose of both prediction 
and
              network management purposes.

