Title       : Dissertation Research: Science and Social Negotiation; Chinese Patients and the
               Culture of Biomedicine at PUMCH, 1928-1952
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0002092

Award Number: 0002092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Yans-McLaughlin vyans@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Grob  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will use Peking Union Medical College and
              Hospital as a site for examining how early 20th century American style
              "scientific medicine" functioned in a different cultural environment, that of
              early 20th century China. Founded in 1921, Peking Union Medical College and
              Hospital (PUMCH) was the Rockefeller Foundation's single largest project in
              medical philanthropy anywhere in the world. Its mission was to establish the
              first (sic) world class institution of scientific medicine, along an American
              model, in China. Patients accustomed to traditional Chinese medical practices,
              and staff at PUMCH trained in biomedicine, generally entertained differing
              assumptions about health, illness and treatment. Situated at the juncture of
              historical ethnography and medical history, this project will shed light on the
              problems and politics of health care delivery in the context of contact between
              two cultures. What role has science played - both objectively and rhetorically
              - in encounters between cultures? How have rhetorical claims about science
              structured relations between people and between intellectual traditions? What
              exactly is scientific medicine, as a social practice, rather than an abstract
              theory? Is there a "culture of biomedicine," and on what terms does it
              negotiate with other medical cultures and worldviews? Such broad, perennial
              questions may be explored empirically through the relations between Peking
              Union Medical College and Hospital and its Chinese patient base. How does an
              applied science that deals with human beings in social settings operate as a
              science. By paying close attention to laboratory research and its relation to
              the hospital setting, the researcher hopes to realistically assess the meaning
              of "scientific medicine" as promoted in that era.  The researcher will explore
              records from PUMCH's social work department, which left behind detailed
              documentation of the negotiations occurring at the interface between the
              hospital and its patients. The research will also draw on the Rockefeller
              Archive Center's underutilized collection of reprinted articles to explore the
              relation of basic medical research conducted at PUMC to the practical art of
              medicine in a pluralistic medical environment. PUMC's medical and social work
              case records, located in Beijing, which were not available to previous scholars
              who studied PUMC, will be central to this work. Combined, the medical and
              social work portions of the files form a multi-faceted picture of each patient,
              offering rich information on the doctors', social workers', and patients'
              perspectives. These records will allow the researcher to address questions
              regarding both the social relations of medicine as an applied science, and the
              role of science in relations between cultures.
