Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Neandertal Dental Morpology: Implications for Modern
               Human Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0002481

Award Number: 0002481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800               (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Kimbel wkimbel.iho@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This goal of this research is to shed light on the origin and evolution of
              anatomically modern humans through the first ever systematic, comparative study
              of Late Pleistocene hominid dental morphology from an evolutionary perspective.
               

At the core of the debate over modern human origins is the question of the
              ancestral relationship between Neandertals and anatomically modern humans. 
              This debate focuses on two competing hypotheses for modern human origins:
              Multiregional Evolution (modern humans evolved from archaic predecessors in
              many parts of the Old World) or Recent African Origin (modern humans have a
              single origin, from which they spread, replacing existing archaic humans in the
              rest of the world).  Much of the controversy is over whether or not Neandertals
              are "too different" from modern humans to have played a significant role in
              their evolution.  

The ultimate goal of this research is to assess the
              relationships among archaic and anatomically modern human samples through an
              analysis of tooth crown characters.  To this end, a large sample of Homo
              erectus, Middle to Late Pleistocene and Recent human teeth will be analyzed
              using widely accepted dental morphological standards - the Arizona State
              University Dental Anthropology - as well as analyses of cusp area and crown
              shape.  Results will be based on a combination of univariate and multivariate
              statistical techniques and phylogenetic analyses.  

It is hypothesized that
              if Neandertals played a significant role in the origin of modern humans, this
              should be reflected in their tooth crown characters.  If this is true, the
              analysis should demonstrate that (1) Neandertals are dentally more similar to
              early anatomically modern humans (AMH) from the same geographic region than
              they are to AMH from other geographic regions, (2) there are regionally
              distinct dental evolutionary paths toward Recent modern human dental patterns,
              (3) Neandertals lack a significant number dental characters that are unique to
              them, and (4) Neandertals and AMH more closely related to each other than
              either are to other archaic human groups.  

This study uniquely brings
              together temporal and geographic axes of dental variation in an analysis of the
              evolutionary relationship between Neandertals and modern humans.  In so doing,
              it will provide an independent evaluation of current biological and
              archaeological hypotheses concerning Neandertal affinities and modern human
              origins.  

