Title       : Dissertation: Formative Communities and Public Ritual Space, Lake Titicaca,
               Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0002438

Award Number: 0002438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11980              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Brown jabrown@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Brown, Mr. Robin Beck will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. He will examine the processes which led to the rise of
              complex society in Bolivia's Lake Titicaca Basin , home of one of the earliest
              state level societies in South America. The goal is to evaluate the hypothesis
              that by Middle Formative period (900-250 BC) a centralized hierarchical form of
              social organization had emerged. Prior archaeological research demonstrated
              that by this time villagers at the archaeological site of Chiripa built a large
              earthern platform that visually dominated their community. Atop this platform
              they erected a ritual precinct of stone and adobe structures arranged in an
              octagon around a sunken court. The construction of this precinct at Chiripa has
              long been recognized as a significant development in the development in social
              complexity. Follow recent completion of a full scale survey of the region
              however, archaeologists have discovered similar architecture at several nearby
              sites. By combining intensive excavation and systematic testing at three of
              these, Mr. Beck's project will contribute a set of comparative data on the
              nature of this public ritual architecture. This offers a valuable way to
              investigate changes in the scale of integrative institutions and to determine
              the spatial extent of Chiripa's power. If ritual centers at other sites are
              contemporary with and equal to Chiripa in size, then most likely they did not
              fall under Chiripa's control. If, on the other hand, they are smaller  and less
              complex they most likely are subordinate to it. Mr. Beck's work will test three
              models of regional integration: 1. Did a single community serve as this area's
              ritual and political center throughout the Formative period? 2. Did several
              different communities alternate as regional center? 3. Were Middle Formative
              communities in the region ritually and politically autonomous. To test these
              models the project will use a set of eight variables designed to measure
              differences in the organization of ritual space: centrality, permanence,
              accessibility, visibility, scale, ubiquity, function and timing. Mr. Beck will
              conduct intensive excavation to generate a comparative body of data which will
              allow intersite comparison.

This research is important because it will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase understanding
              of how complex societies arose and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

