Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sources of of Conflict and Power Variation in
               Male-Female Relationship in White Sifaka (Propithecus Verreauxi Verreauxi)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0002570

Award Number: 0002570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9957               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carel P. van Schaik vschaik@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Power in animal societies is typically studied in terms of differences in
              fighting abilities, or dominance. However, other more economic forms of power,
              or leverage, may influence an individual's power. Relationships between the
              sexes are particularly interesting for studying power because mating
              opportunities and protection services may be exchanged between males and
              females and often cannot be taken by force. The objective of this research is
              to examine some power-related factors that can lead to variation in male-female
              relationships. This study will examine the effects of leverage (based upon
              female reproductive status and the ratio of males to females) and dominance
              (based upon fighting ability) on male-female relationships in white sifaka.
              

The white sifaka is an ideal species for studying male-female
              relationships. First, males and females are not expected to differ in their
              fighting abilities because they are the same size. Nevertheless, female sifaka
              have priority of access to resources and often are aggressive towards males.
              Second, the effects of reproductive status on male-female relationships can be
              determined without depending upon hormone analysis because sifaka have a very
              short mating season. Third, services such as watching for predators, alarm
              calling, and defense against predators may be an important currency for
              exchange for sifaka. Finally, these lemurs live in social groups where the
              ratio of males to females varies across groups. These characteristics suggest
              that the effects of dominance will be reduced and that leverage effects will
              more easily be observed in this species.

Sex ratio, behavioral, and body
              size data will be collected by 4 observers on 6 focal groups with different sex
              ratios at Kirindy forest in Madagascar from October 2000-March 2002.
              Neighborhoods will be censused monthly. To estimate each individual's ability
              to use force, body size and condition data will be collected 4 times during the
              study and combined with canine size data.

The broader implications of this
              research include a better understanding of male-female relationships in all
              mammals, where a broad theoretical framework is lacking outside of mating
              systems. Moreover, male-female relationships have played a prominent role in
              hypotheses about human social evolution. The exchange of services, such as
              parental care and infanticide protection, may have led to some sort of bonding
              between the sexes. Using economic and political theory, this interdisciplinary
              project attempts to better understand human social evolution by testing these
              theories in a species where males and females are the same size, and hence,
              non-dominance power can best be studied. 



