Title       : Numerical and Observational Study of Secondary Potential Vorticity (PV) Banners
               and Wakes in the Alps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0002735

Award Number: 0002735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vanda Grubisic grubisic@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the observational analysis and numerical simulations of
              multiple shearlines and wakes and the associated potential vorticity (PV)
              anomalies (banners) downstream of a highly irregular mountain topography.  The
              goal of the study is to quantify different scales and regimes of orographic
              forcing and to determine effects such forcing has on observed mesoscale weather
              phenomena in the proximity of a major mountain range.  The Principal
              Investigator will take advantage of the observational data collected during the
              recently completed Mesoscale Alpine Program (MAP).

The extensive data sets
              collected during the MAP provide the most detailed documentation to date of the
              spatial and temporal structure of airflow in the vicinity of a major mountain
              range. In this study, the observational data from selected MAP Intensive
              Observation Periods (IOPs) will be used to perform analysis of the wind and
              thermodynamic fields and to reconstruct corresponding PV banners downwind of
              the Alps.  Each analyzed case will be numerically simulated in order to
              scrutinize mesoscale model's ability to reproduce observations at high temporal
              and spatial accuracy.  The objectives of the modeling work are to (1)
              reconstruct the observed PV anomalies during the selected MAP IOPs; (2)
              evaluate existing theories of orographic PV generation and dynamic evolution;
              and (3) investigate sensitivities of the model simulated PV field to different
              parameterizations (especially, boundary-layer representation and the subgrid
              scale orography) in order to recommend the optimal
              parameterizations.

Improved knowledge of climatological positions and
              strengths of major jets, orographic vortices and downslope windstorms, and the
              range of conditions under which they develop, will be beneficial in decreasing
              the negative economic impact of severe weather phenomena.  Such knowledge has
              practical application to problems such as the determination of bridge
              locations, prevention of road accidents in severe wind zones, avoidance of
              aviation hazards related to strong cross-runway winds and forecasting of the
              onset and termination of pollution episodes and convection.

