Title       : Ultrasound Image Guidance of High Intensity Focused Ultrasound Treatment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0002932

Award Number: 0002932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahram Vaezy adasi@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0002932
Vaezy
This project will investigate the real-time visualization of
              high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) therapy, using diagnostic ultrasound
              imaging.  HIFU is a therapeutic energy modality, capable of destroying tissues
              and cells in a few seconds, providing a method of treatment for benign and
              malignant tumors.  Due to the penetration capability of ultrasound, HIFU can be
              focused to a deep-seated region of tissue to treat tumors in a non-invasive
              approach.  The intervening tissue layers, where the ultrasound beam is
              unfocused and thus has low intensity, are spared from treatment.  What remains
              to be integrated with this therapeutic modality is a method of targeting and
              monitoring to provide guidance and assessment of the treatment.  The key
              component of a successful non-invasive application of HIFU is real-time
              visualization of the treatment site of HIFU to achieve image-guided
              therapy.

Visualization of HIFU treatment site (focal point of HIFU) can be
              done in real-time, using commercial medical ultrasound imaging systems.  While
              this system allows the determination that ultrasound imaging is capable of
              visualizing HIFU focus, a complete integration of HIFU and ultrasound imaging
              systems is required to investigate the real-time visualization in complex image
              settings and therapeutic requirements.  The integration will be achieved using
              electronically-controlled HIFU and an ultrasound imaging system with
              open-architecture structure.  First Aim is to develop an ultrasound imaging
              system for real-time visualization of HIFU treatment. Second Aim is to
              calibrate and test the integrated system in-vitro (phantom and excised animal
              tissue). Third Aim is to determine the physical and biological mechanisms
              involved in visualization of HIFU treatment site.

The results of the
              proposed project will provide the technological knowledge that would permit the
              development of image-guided HIFU therapy systems.  The research proposed here
              will also provide a knowledge base on the complex interactions of physical
              mechanisms of high intensity ultrasound with biological media.

