Title       : An Embryonic Test Tube to Assay the Function of Dosophila Morphogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0002958

Award Number: 0002958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude Desplan claude.desplan@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Several morphogenetic gradients have been shown to pattern the early Drosophila
              embryo.  Bicoid patterns head, thorax and abdomen through the specific
              activation of zygotic genes that direct proper development along the
              antero-posterior axis.  However at least two other systems hunchback (hb) and
              caudal (cad), appear to also play important roles in the embryo.  These two
              genes may represent the ancestral patterning system of insects whose function
              has been partially taken over by Bicoid in Drosophila.

One of the problems
              in uncovering the role of these genes is the high level of redundancy and of
              cross-interactions among the different maternal systems.  We propose to analyze
              the morphogenetic properties of each system in an embryo that is fully
              responsive to patterning by these molecules, but where all potential
              interactions/redundancy with the other maternal systems have been eliminated.
              Construction of this 'embryonic test tube' requires that we genetically remove
              all maternal patterning systems (by generating flies whose germline is mutant
              for bicoid, hunchback, caudal, nanos, the terminal and dorso-ventral pathways).
               In this background, we will provide artificial gradients for each morphogen to
              be tested.  We will first focus our attention on the role of Bicoid, Hunchback
              and Caudal.  Because of the cross-interactions among these systems, it is still
              unclear whether Bcd has any role on his own, and what the morphogenetic roles
              of Hb and Cad are.  We will also test the ability of Nanos and the terminal
              system to pattern the embryo.  As an extension of this work, we will test the
              role other molecules that have been proposed to act as morphogens, in
              particular the gap genes products as well as secreted molecules such as Dpp, Wg
              and Hh.  The function of these molecules has so far been analyzed in situations
              where an extensive pre-pattern already exists.

This work will provide
              insights into the direct role of critical patterning molecules on cellular
              events that lead to the determination of positional values in the embryo or,
              more generally, in other tissues.

