Title       : Otto Hahn, Max Von Laue, and Science in Postwar Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0002037

Award Number: 0002037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth L. Sime   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Sime
	      
	      Sacramento, CA  95822    916/558-2213

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-02037 - Ruth Lewin Sime (Independent Scholar)  
"Otto Hahn, Max von
              Laue, Science in Postwar Germany"

This project focuses on the activities of
              Otto Hahn (1879-1968) and Max von Laue (1879-1960), two scientists who were
              prominent in the German scientific community before, during, and after the
              Third Reich. Beginning in 1919, both men inhabited the same scientific circle
              in Berlin, both detested the Nazi regime, both emerged from the Third Reich
              with the credentials of "decent Germans," and both took positions of leadership
              in reorganizing and rehabilitating science in Germany after the war. Because
              both men were influential in the postwar period, it is of value to study their
              actions under the Nazi regime;  their scientific work during the war and the
              way they represented it afterward; their work in the postwar period; and the
              imprint they left on the German scientific community.

Hahn assumed the
              presidency of the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft (KWG) (succeeded by the
              Max-Planck-Gesellschaft [MPG]) in 1946, shortly after being awarded the Nobel
              Prize for the discovery of nuclear fission. As a famous scientist and person
              who had been upright under the Third Reich, Hahn became a hugely admired public
              figure in postwar Germany. Laue was also influential in the postwar period,
              first in reorganizing the Max Planck Institute for Physics, and then as the
              director of the Fritz Haber Institute for Physical Chemistry and
              Electrochemistry in Berlin; among colleagues in the Allied countries he was
              regarded as a German of rare courage and integrity. Because the moral authority
              that was accorded to both Laue and Hahn was based on their opposition to the
              Nazi regime, it is important to develop a more detailed picture of their
              actions and behavior in these years: their relationships with other scientists
              and Jewish emitters, the efforts to help Jews who had stayed; the risks and
              difficulties they incurred. For this, their correspondence and other papers
              provide a large and valuable resource.

By the end of the war, Hahn and Laue
              distanced themselves from Nazism. They asserted that German scientific
              excellence was undiminished, that scientists as a group had not given their
              support to Hitler, that scientific institutions had retained their
              independence, and that Germans overall were not responsible for the crimes of
              the Nazi regime. Their views, part of the "forgetting" of the postwar period,
              damaged their relations with colleagues abroad for a time, but it fostered
              cohesiveness at home, and may in part explain Hahn's success as president of
              the MPG. Hahn portrayed the wartime work in his institute as basic research
              that was unrelated to the war effort. The project examines the work of Hahn's
              institute and the extent to which it was connected to military research,
              relying primarily on institutional documents, scientific publications, and
              unpublished scientific reports. Finally, this project includes an examination
              of their public legacy: Hahn's influence on the MPG and his enduring image as
              one of German science's legendary figures; Laue's friendships with great
              scientists, his memory, and his sense of history.

