Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene History of Atlantic Tropical Forest and
               Cerrado in Southeastern Brazil: The Role of Climate, Fire, and Human
               Disturbance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0002346

Award Number: 0002346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-biu Liu kliu1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,5913,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Atlantic forest in southeastern Brazil is one of the most threatened
              tropical forests in the world.  Many aspects concerning the history and ecology
              of this diverse tropical forest are still unknown, even as it is being cleared
              at a rapid rate.  This project will study the history of vegetation changes in
              southeastern Brazil since the middle Holocene in the context of climatic
              changes, fire occurrence, and human disturbance.  The ecologically sensitive
              region in the state of Sao Paulo is occupied mainly by Atlantic seasonal
              tropical forest, but it also contains the southernmost distribution of cerrado
              (Brazilian savanna), which occurs as natural patches interspersed within the
              seasonal forest.  The region has been occupied by native Americans for
              thousands of years, but intensive deforestation over the last 150 years has
              reduced the Atlantic forest into isolated fragments of various sizes.  Three
              lakes within this broad forest/cerrado ecotone and in some of the forest
              fragments will be cored for palynological study.  The sediments will be
              analyzed for pollen and microscopic charcoal to produce detailed records of
              vegetational changes and fire history for the last several millennia,
              especially focusing on the last several hundred years since the European
              contact.  This study will produce paleoecological records on the development of
              the forest/cerrado ecotone in relation to Holocene climatic changes, natural
              and anthropogenic fires, and human disturbance.  It will address questions
              concerning the loss of biodiversity and ecological degradation due to forest
              fragmentation in the Atlantic tropical forest, and it will provide insight into
              key issues in conservation biology and environmental planning in the tropics. 
              This study will also advance the science of palynology in the tropics,
              especially its application in the study of human impacts on tropical
              vegetation.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

