Title       : Logical Empiricism, the Unity of Science Movement, and the International
               Encyclopedia of United Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0002222

Award Number: 0002222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81276              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Reisch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : G,Reisch
	      5246 N. Kenmore Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  60640    773/271-7316

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-02222 - George A. Reisch, Jr. (Independent Scholar) - "Logical
              Empiricism, the Unity of Science Movement, and the International Encyclopedia
              of Unified Science"

This award support research on logical empiricism and
              the Unity of Science Movement. From the 1930s to the 1960s, logical empiricism
              was the dominant program under which philosophy of science became established
              in the U.S. as a branch of academic philosophy. Though their opinions often
              widely differed, logical empiricists shared a commitment to empiricism, to
              logical analysis of knowledge, and to science as the most effective project for
              generating knowledge.

One theme of logical empiricism was the unity of
              science -- the belief that theories in different branches of science were
              interconnected and would continue to unify as science progressed. This belief
              was closely associated with logical empiricist critiques of pseudoscience and
              its goal of reforming academic philosophy as "scientific philosophy" or logical
              empiricism. The unity of science was not only a philosophical thesis about the
              nature of science, however. It also motivated leading logical empiricists to
              collaborate with scientists to further unification within science and
              counteract growing specialization within science. This activity took place from
              1930s and 40s under the rubric of The Unity of Science Movement led by the
              Viennese economist and sociologist Otto Neurath, along with the philosophers
              Rudolf Carnap, Charles Morris.

With support from this award, the Principal
              Investigator is completing research on the Unity of Science Movement by
              examining the collaboration of Neurath, Carnap, and Morris as editors of their
              International Encyclopedia of Unified Science and the series of International
              Congresses for the Unity of Science that they organized. By researching
              archival holdings pertaining to these and other philosophers, the goals of this
              research are to understand these philosophers' conceptions of the unity of
              science; the extent to which their Movement succeeded in popularizing unity of
              science within science and within philosophy of science; and the ways and
              causes by which their movement declined after World War II.

Need for
              understanding this period in philosophy of science is heightened by
              contemporary interest in the opposite theme -- the disunity of science. Some
              philosophers of science today, especially those based in philosophy of biology,
              reject the logical empiricist's thesis of the unity of science as false without
              understanding how the thesis operated as part of this constructive,
              collaborative project. It is also heightened by broader debate about scientific
              literacy (and the question of what counts as a canon of scientific theory and
              achievement) and continuing disputes over the teaching of creationism.

