Title       : Dissertation: The Late Mesolithic Puzzle: Population Decline or Settlement
               Reconfiguraion?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0002858

Award Number: 0002858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Jochim, MS Susan Harris will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to understand changes in
              population size during the Mesolithic period in Southwestern Germany.
              Approximately 10,500 years ago, after the northward retreat of the ice sheets
              Stone Age foragers across most of Europe developed new types of "microlithic"
              stone tools and shifted their focus from hunting large animals (which decreased
              in number as tundra/grassland gave way to boreal forests) to smaller species.
              Archaeologists believe that the specialized adaptations which developed
              culminated in the Neolithic Revolution in which plants and animals were first
              domesticated. During the Mesolithic population apparently increased and this
              put stress on available food sources thus setting the stage for agricultural
              innovation. Within this broad context Southwestern Germany stands as an anomaly
              because apparently some areas were abandoned and others evidence decreased
              population during Late Mesolithic times. MS Harris wishes to determine whether
              this pattern is, in fact, real. Because most researchers in this region have
              focused on well excavated assemblages and ignored more abundant surface sites,
              MS Harris will analyze this under-utilized data class. She notes that
              relatively little attention has been paid to these materials because of the
              difficulties in assigning them to time period. The microlithic tool types which
              characterize the Late Mesolithic normally form only a small percentage of
              assemblages and thus, she believes, relevant surface sites may go unrecognized.
              In preliminary work she has studied well dated materials from securely
              stratified sites and believes that the Early and Late Mesolithic can be
              distinguished not only by typology but also be the technology used to
              manufacture tools. These technological criteria can be applied to sites lacking
              in diagnostic tool types. With National Science Foundation support she will
              further refine this analytic approach. She will then conduct a survey to
              complement prior work in the region and classify sites collected by herself as
              well as others to assign them to time period. With these data she will then
              plot site distributions by age and microhabitat to determine density and trace
              changes over time.

The Mesolithic sets the stage for the Neolithic
              Revolution and the rise of complex society. For this reason it is an important
              area for scientific research and MS Harris work will not only shed light on one
              anomalous geographic region but also, hopefully, provide an analytic approach
              of more general use. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

