Title       : Dissertation Research: Corn Improvement: Scientific Agriculture in Mexico,
               1935-1969
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0002180

Award Number: 0002180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7581               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Beatty beatty@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project explores the relationship between science and
              agriculture in a crosscultural setting, comparing and problematizing the
              assumptions and goals of agricultural scientists from Mexico and the United
              States. It examines the extent to which science has a standardizing influence
              on international agricultural practices and crops. The focus of this
              dissertation is Mexican agricultural research on corn between 1935 - 1969, a
              period which spans the so-called Green Revolution. During this period the
              Mexican agricultural research community declared scientific agriculture to be
              the solution to rural poverty and low agricultural production among subsistence
              farmers in the land reform sector. Little attention has been paid to how
              various groups of scientists adapted their research to achieve their different
              visions of a self sufficient and modern Mexico. Most scholarship and popular
              commentaries on the Green Revolution contribute to one of two theses. One
              thesis states that United States agricultural assistance programs
              inappropriately imposed foreign research and plant varieties on recipient
              nations. The alternative thesis argues that the advances in agricultural
              science that were brought to recipient nations, such as high yielding wheat,
              provided the necessary solution to food problems. This dissertation research
              contributes to our understanding of the international transfer of agricultural
              knowledge in three ways: 1) It follows the research and policies of the
              national agricultural science community at individual and institutional levels,
              2) It traces the changes in scientific methodologies and definitions of
              agricultural science, and 3) It analyzes attempts to develop a scientific
              agriculture in Mexico and the resulting standardization or diversification of
              agriculture. This  careful study of  the research methodologies and the social
              goals of Mexican and United States agricultural scientists will reveal the
              changing role that science actually played in attempting to achieve Mexicans'
              national economic, social, and political goals. It will reveal how Mexican and
              United States scientists negotiated conflicting visions for Mexico's
              agricultural welfare. The researcher intends to demonstrate that the role of
              science in agricultural improvement was not strictly one of standardization;
              rather, the development of scientific agriculture was historically and
              geographically situated. Through a variety of motivations, agricultural
              scientists have contributed to the maintenance of genetic and cultural
              diversity. Through scientists' choices of the disciplines and methodologies
              utilized crop research, scientific agriculture has served a range of social and
              economic goals, from standardization to the conservation of diversity.
