Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Logic of Procedural
               Openness: Democratic Transitions and the Reform of Administrative Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0002288

Award Number: 0002288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Bawn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Since passage of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in the United States,
              many other countries have implemented similar laws.  Administrative procedural
              openness is important for democratic consolidation because its reduces
              arbitrariness and increases predictability in government, increases
              bureaucratic accountability, and allows active citizen participation in agency
              decision making.  The recent passage of APAs in two new democracies, Korea and
              Taiwan, highlights an apparent paradox that is embedded in the passage of all
              APAs.  APAs limit the power of the executive.  So, why would presidents sign
              APAs that are designed to restrict their powers.  In this project, it is argued
              that a president supports an APA when:  (1) her support coalition (either a
              multi-party coalition or a factionalized ruling party) has heterogeneous
              preferences; (2) her ability to appoint cabinet ministers is constrained by a
              constitutional requirement for legislative approval and the legislature does
              not share her preferences; or (3) she is confronted by bureaucrats with
              different preferences and she cannot replace them.  To test these hypotheses,
              statistical and case study analyses of countries with APAs (Korea, Taiwan, the
              United States) and without them (the Philippines) are conducted.  Some of the
              necessary data that support the hypotheses currently exist.  The remaining data
              would be gathered with NSF support.    
