Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Temporal Characteristics and
               Development Processes of Aeolian Sand Steamers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0002471

Award Number: 0002471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Sherman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Aeolian sand streamers, which also are known as sand snakes or windrows, are
              quasi-linear, streamwise concentrations of wind-blown sand.  Streamers commonly
              are observed in natural aeolian sand-transport environments.  Although these
              features have received minimal research attention, they can have significant
              consequences for the theoretical underpinnings and predictive powers of
              contemporary sand-transport models.  Contemporary models treat aeolian sand
              transport as a uniform sheet of sand saltating over the bed surface. This
              description derives from fundamental assumptions regarding the uniformity and
              steadiness of the wind flow as well as assumptions regarding the homogeneity of
              the bed surface.  The frequent occurrence of streamers in nature challenges
              these views and assumptions.  The occurrence of streamers in aeolian
              environments may correspond with phenomena found in fluvial systems, leading
              some scientists to conclude that the spatial characteristics and temporal
              behavior of aeolian sand streamers should reflect theories and models of
              sediment transport in a variety of environments.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project has three main objectives:  (1) to quantify the shape and
              behavior of aeolian sand streamers, (2) to identify their origin, and (3) to
              determine their consequences for current aeolian transport models.  These
              objectives will be addressed through the conduct of a set of field experiments
              at Oceano Dunes State Vehicle Recreation Area in central California.  A variety
              of instruments, including cup-anemometers, hot-wire probes, saltiphones,
              Leatherman-type traps, and video imagery, will be deployed to measure the
              behavior and dimensions of streamers in conjunction with the wind-flow field
              and its characteristics.  Sediment sampling and microsurveys will capture
              characteristics of the bed surface, such as micro-relief and moisture-content
              distribution.  The integration and synthesis of experimental data will yield
              direct information regarding the spatial and temporal characteristics of
              aeolian sand streamers and will allow testing of the various hypotheses
              accounting for their origin.  Comparison among the different types of data also
              will generate insights into how the presence of streamers under natural
              conditions affects contemporary transport models.  This project aims to
              describe and measure a little-studied phenomenon that can have a potentially
              significant impact on current understandings of aeolian systems.  In addition,
              the innovative research strategy and the use of this combination of instruments
              should shed a new light on issues of spatial and temporal variability and about
              the prediction of sediment transport in aeolian geomorphology.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

