Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biomechanical Investigation of African Apes and
               Influences of Positional Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0002686

Award Number: 0002686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7922               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Hunt KDHUNT@UCS.INDIANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research takes advantage of recently published fine-grained
              positional behavior data so that connections between African ape behavior and
              morphology, even at the subspecific level, can be inferred.  Because the
              earliest human ancestors exhibit some ape-like features, a more complete
              understanding of African ape long bone morphology (e.g., humeral and femoral
              shaft shape) is necessary to infer early hominid positional adaptations. 
              Implications of the proposed research extend beyond refining the
              behavior-morphology link in African apes and hominids by offering avenues of
              insight into the structure and function of all mammals.  The proposed
              investigation is timely since the existence of a straightforward relationship
              between positional behaviors and long bone morphology has been debated
              recently.

The PI and student have performed a preliminary analysis using 33
              African ape specimens and revealed links between their behavior and morphology.
               For instance, higher percentages of arboreal locomotor behaviors, such as
              scrambling, correlated with greater long bone circularity (i.e., ratio of
              principle moments of area) at several measured locations.  In order to complete
              data collection from 299 additional specimens, access to museum collections and
              to CT scanning facilities near each of these museum collections has been
              arranged.  In the preliminary analysis, sample trends in shaft morphology
              differed depending on the measure that was used to estimate body mass.  By
              expanding the sample, as proposed here, such apparent discrepancies between
              body mass estimators might be resolved and shaft morphology interpreted.

