Title       : GLOBEC Collaborative Research: Effects of Seasonal and Interannual Variability
               of Zooplankton Populations in the California Current System Using Coupled
               Biophysical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a0002893

Award Number: 0002893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454627             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Powell zackp@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The California Current System (CCS) owes its high phytoplankton productivity to
              wind-driven circulation patterns that bring nutrient?rich waters to the
              surface. These high rates of primary productivity are translated via high
              zooplankton secondary productivity, into high biomass of epipelagic fishes such
              as anchovies, hake, and salmon. Further, spatial patterns of high primary and
              secondary productivity are heterogeneous and appear to be closely linked to
              mesoscale physical structures (e.g., filaments, jets, and eddies). Using a
              series of linked physical/ecosystern/zooplankton models, this study will
              examine the complex interaction of physical and biological processes (diel
              vertical migration and growth efficiency) in the CCS on seasonal and
              interannual time?scales. Major calanoid copepods (e.g., Calanus pacificus and
              Metridia pacifica) and euphausiid species (e.g., Euphausia pacifica and
              Thysanoessa spinifera) that represent critical linkages between primary
              production and salmon populations  will be emphasized. In addition, the roles
              of these processes will be further illuminated through comparative studies with
              other ecosystems located within both similar and dissimilar dynamical
              environments.
The goal of this study is to address the following questions: 
              How does the circulation field impact the distribution and population success
              of major CCS zooplankton species such as C. pacificus, M. pacifica, E.
              pacifica, and T. spinifera?  How do the behavioral and bioenergetic differences
              of these species interact with the circulation field, prey distribution and
              temperature to influence their relative population success?  How does the
              interannual variability of the local environment (e.g., from large?scale
              atmospheric or oceanic fluctuations) modify these distributions and relative
              success of major CCS zooplankton species?  How do physical and biological
              aspects of the CC/Zooplankton System compare to other well?studied ecosystems
              including those of particular interest to GLOBEC (e.g., Georges Bank, Gulf of
              Alaska, and Southern Ocean)?
The results of this study will include the
              developed ecosystem and zooplankton models, applied within regional and
              basin?scale circulation models. The coupled systems will be analyzed under
              seasonal and realistic surface forcing closely tied to CCS process studies.
              Furthermore, a comparative synthesis of physical and biological coupling within
              this and other well?studied GLOBEC ecosystems will begin.

