Title       : Development of High Precision X-Ray Fluoresecence and Instrumental Neutron
               Activation Analysis Techniques Suitable for Intrasite Provenance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0002682

Award Number: 0002682
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Asaro F_Asaro@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Berkeley Lab
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/486-4000

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Frank Asaro and his colleagues will
              continue to develop and test the x-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique for ceramic
              analysis. XRF, in common with several other approaches, determines the
              abundance of trace elements present in ceramics and such data are extremely
              important to archaeological researchers. Trace element frequencies are set by
              both the clay used to manufacture a vessel as well as the tempering material
              included and through analysis of relative abundances it is often possible to
              establish the presence of "wares" - groups of material which share a common
              fabric and thus should be classed together. It is also sometimes possible to
              trace specific wares back to their point of origin through comparison with
              geological collections of clay raw material. Through sourcing studies and
              analysis of ceramics from large numbers of sites archaeologists can gain
              insight into the organization of ceramic production and trade. The movement of
              ceramics also sheds light on economic and political organization. Because
              ceramics played such a crucial role in many prehistoric societies and because
              it is well preserved and abundant in many archaeological sites, it provides a
              central focus of archaeological attention.

Although XRF is not widely used
              for trace element studies, its potential is great. Its cost is relatively low
              and relatively little sample time is required. Were it developed to the level
              of accuracy of other techniques it would greatly facilitate archaeologists'
              practical access to trace element data. In this NSF award, Dr. Asaro and his
              colleagues will pursue several goals. They will work to improve the technique
              itself and focus on increasing the precision of measurement for a number of
              elements, especially Fe and lower Z elements. They shall use pottery groups
              from archaeological sites in the Galilee and Yucatan and raw materials from
              both areas as test cases and apply both XRA and INAA techniques. Compositional
              data will be evaluated using a battery of statistical methods. It will be
              determined if high-precision XRF or INAA, or both methods together are capable
              of distinguishing closely similar pottery compositional groups from individual
              sites in these two diverse areas.

