Title       : US-Oman Cooperative Research: Modeling of Heterogeneous Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a0002022

Award Number: 0002022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Loper loper@gfdi.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1325,5928,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Loper

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research project by
              Dr. David Loper, Director, Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Institute, Florida State
              University, Tallahassee, Florida and an Omani team led by Dr. Ibrahim Eltayeb,
              Department of Mathematics and Statistics, College of Science, Sultan Qaboos
              University, Al-Khodh, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.  The purpose of the research
              teams is to develop conceptual, mathematical, and laboratory models of
              transport in karstic aquifers such as found in Florida and Oman.  In Florida
              and Oman fluid flow and containment transport is dominated by the presence of
              correlated inhomogenities such as karstic conduits and fractures.  In Florida
              conduits predominate, while in Oman both types of inhomogeniety are present. 
              In this project it is intended to extend the Floridan-conduit model to include
              fractures.  While the precise structure of the heterogeneities in the
              subsurface cannot be known with certitude, and thus an accurate or true
              "prediction" is impractical, improvement can be made in risk estimates in a
              statistical sense. 

Scope:  The research area of flow and transport in a
              heterogeneous medium is an important topic with societal impact related to
              toxic waste from agriculture and industry.  The problem of analysis and
              prediction of groundwater flows is important to the study of both water
              resources and water quality.  Good mathematical models of such flows are
              extremely important to those studies.  Both the Florida State University and
              Omani groups are capable of obtaining useful and important results, and for
              both Florida and Oman, the issues of water resources and water quality are
              quite important.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              internatinal scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  Funding for
              this project is provided by the Division of International Programs and the
              Division of Earth Sciences.
