Title       : Parameterization Errors in Numerical Simulations of Stably-Stratified
               Atmospheric Boundary Layers Using CASES-99 Observations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a0002093

Award Number: 0002093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Poulos gsp@co-ra.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Branko Kosovic  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : NorthWest Res Assoc Inc
	      14508 NE, 20th Street
	      Bellevue, WA  980093027    425/644-9660

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the dynamics of the atmospheric boundary layer is crucial to
              better understanding of both weather and climate.  A numerical study of the
              evolution of a stably stratified atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) will be
              carried out using a large-eddy simulation (LES) technique and a mesoscale
              model.  This study will combine numerical simulations and observations from a
              recent field program - CASES-99.  Numerical simulations will complement
              observations in providing more detailed information about stable boundary layer
              (SBL) processes: turbulence transport and mixing of momentum, heat, and
              moisture.

The goals of the research are: 1) to conduct long-term,
              high-resolution simulations of canonical, strongly stratified nocturnal
              boundary layers (NBL); 2) to verify the results of these simulations using an
              extensive observational data base; and 3) to develop and test more accurate
              parameterizations of SBLs for large-scale simulations.

Underlying
              deficiencies in current atmospheric turbulence and surface layer
              parameterizations result in their failure to represent accurately global
              intermittence under strong stably-stratified conditions.  The hypothesis that
              the failures of parameterization arise from their inability to account for
              nonlinear effects such as breaking gravity waves and Kelvin-Helmholtz billows
              will be tested.  Parallel LES and mesoscale codes will be used on a massively
              parallel processor to resolve all the dynamically relevant scales of motion
              from several meters (small inertial range eddies) to several tens of kilometers
              (energy containing eddies).  Special attention will be given to represent
              accurately interactions between gravity waves and shear associated with
              low-level jets and conditions under which global intermittence occurs.  By
              resolving a large fraction of turbulence eddies as well as gravity waves it
              will be possible to reduce uncertainties and biases introduced by turbulence
              parameterizations in mesoscale models.

