Title       : Japan JSPS Fellowship: Collaborative Studies on Meson Photo and
               Electroproduction from Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0002714

Award Number: 0002714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Loretz                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Laith J. Aburaddad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L,Aburaddad
	      Research Center for Nuclear Phys
	      Osaka, FL  323105657    668/798-945

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
Program Ref : 0000,5983,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0002714
Aburaddad

The proposed research by Laith J. Aburaddad will examine
              the processes of meson photo and electroproduction from nucleons and nuclei
              using fully relativistic formalisms whether in the elementary process or in the
              nuclear structure.  Computational methods will be used to explore the complex
              the elementary processes of meson photo and electroproduction from free
              nucleons.  These processes are highly complex, and their study is
              experimentally challenging but theoretically rewarding.   At a technical level,
              this work will address the nature of fundamental forces joining subatomic
              particles, and of several astrophysical processes such as supernova explosions
              and neutron star structure. 

This award supports a two-year Japan Society
              for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Laith J.
              Aburaddad at the Research Center for Nuclear Physics (RCNP) at Osaka
              University, Japan.  Aburaddad will work with Professor Hiroshi Toki, Chairman
              of the Nuclear Theory Group, on a project entitled, "Collaborative Studies on
              Meson Photo and Electroproduction from Nuclei."  The computational studies in
              the proposed project will contribute to an understanding of the nature of
              fundamental forces joining subatomic particles, and of several astrophysical
              processes such as supernova explosions and neutron star structure.  Useful
              contributions to the field are likely, and the exposure of the awardee to a new
              research setting will be intellectually stimulating.  The proposed work will
              benefit through collaboration with the Japanese host laboratory, where
              Aburaddad will have access to the necessary experimental systems, equipment and
              expertise.
***


