Title       : Dissertation Research: Global Standards, Local Cultures: The Politics of
               Standard-Setting on the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0002199

Award Number: 0002199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Woodhouse woodhouse@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technical standards-those protocols, rules, and codes that specify how a given
              group of technologies operate and interoperate-play a key role in the
              development of technology. This dissertation research project will study the
              design and implementation of technical standards on a global scale. Using a
              case study approach, the project will trace the evolution of "P3P"-the Platform
              for Privacy Preferences Project-a computer standard that is currently being
              developed for the World Wide Web. The designers of P3P claim it is a
              "policy-neutral" standard: an objective solution that can implemented anywhere,
              independent of local context. The research project will test this claim by
              examining the extent to which local social, political, and cultural concerns
              affect the design and implementation of the standard. Through a combination of
              interviews, participant observation, and document analysis, this project will
              address three core questions: (1) How do social concerns shape the design of a
              particular standard? (2) How do social values and assumptions affect its
              implementation in different cultural environments? (3) How does a given
              standard, developed within a particular design context, become a "global
              standard"? Informants will be drawn from three levels: the P3P working group;
              the standards organization that is responsible for developing P3P; and
              "external" actors (technologists, policymakers, and privacy advocates) who have
              contributed to, supported, criticized, or otherwise shaped the development of
              P3P. Interviews will be conducted in the U.S. and internationally, allowing for
              comparative analysis across diverse cultural environments. By looking beyond
              the immediate "designers" of P3P to the broader organizational and social
              contexts of standards-making, this project will examine standardization not as
              the work of a single technical group or standards organization, but rather as a
              global phenomenon, one that binds geographically distant localities together as
              a given standard is implemented in multiple sites around the world. By
              following the development of P3P as it moves across social, political, and
              cultural boundaries, this project will investigate how local cultures shape
              global standards and how technical standards are implicated in broader
              processes of global political-economy. In this way, a study of technical
              standards offers a lens through which scholars can investigate the evolution of
              technology and the building of sociotechnical order.
