Title       : Creating the Nanogate for Experimental Verification and Development of Flow and
               Particle Behavior in Sub-Micron Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0002934

Award Number: 0002934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander H. Slocum slocum@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Labinis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Brenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Barbastathis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Nanogate is a mechanism that creates and precisely maintains nano-meter
              level channel openings.  This is accomplished by anchoring a cantilever beam at
              one end, then pivoting about a fulcrum surface; this creates an opening between
              the beam and an anvil.  As part of an NSF exploratory research grant,  a
              prototype was constructed from simply machined parts.  In the prototype, 1
              micron edge displacement of a 50mm silicon wafer pivoted abound a 15mm diameter
              anvil resulted in a 50nm gap opening.  A diamond turned Nickel plated aluminum
              structure with 10nm surface finish is currently made for testing; the resulting
              small annular gap from the new design will allow  control of gas flow rates on
              the order of 1e-12 moles/sec.  This research will further develop the Nanogate
              mechanism and use it to precisely meter molecular flows and study the physics
              of such flows.

This work will result in a new class of instrumentation tools
              which will enable fundamental experimentation of basic physical phenomena
              related to fluid flow in very small gaps.  Examples of questions that may be
              answered  are:  (1)How do molecules behave when a single layer is pulled apart
              to create force/displacement data? and   (2) Why does apparent viscosity
              increase when the gap gets smaller and how does the boundary behave when one
              fluid pushes another?   The answers to these questions and the enabling
              instrumentation that are proposed to be developed will have profound influence
              on areas of high technological importance such as the life sciences, in
              particular biophysics and biochemistry, energy handling systems such as
              microengines and micropumps, and new, more accurate metrology/calibration
              procedures.
