Title       : U.S.-Hungary Theoretical Physics Research: Strongly Coupled Coulomb Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0002200

Award Number: 0002200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor J. Kalman gabor.kalman@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5916,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 0002200
Kalman


This U.S.-Hungary project between Gabor Kalman of
              Boston College and Zoltan Donko of the Research Institute for Solid State
              Physics and Optics, Budapest, examines Strongly Coupled Coulomb Systems (SCCS)
              which are characterized by a significant ratio of the Coulomb interparticle
              potential energy to the kinetic energy of the particles.  The strong coupling
              effects can take place both in the electronic and ionic components and one
              finds them in settings such as inertially confined plasmas, astrophysics,
              condensed matter systems, mesoscopic matter, and laser and particle beams for
              thermonuclear fusion.  Specifically, this U.S.-Hungarian team intends to
              address layered systems (electronic or ionic bilayer, modeled by two quasi
              two-dimensional layers of charged particles) and dusty plasmas (liquids and
              crystal).  

Kalman and his group bring a strong theoretical underpinning to
              the work while Donko contributes expertise with molecular dynamics (MD)
              simulations that will be utilized as an "experimental" check for the
              theoretical aspects of this study of SCCS.   Their collaborative research plan
              features computation of pair correlation functions, dynamic structure
              functions, and transport coefficients. The MD simulation work serves two
              purposes by providing: 1) an independent source of data for quantities obtained
              through theoretical calculations, making a comparison between theoretical and
              MD results possible; and 2) information on physical quantities for which a
              theoretical model is not available.  If successful, results should improve our
              fundamental understanding of SCCS and serve as a check for theoretical
              predictions related to material properties and phase changes. 

This project
              in theoretical physics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence.   

