Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Political Impacts of Flooding in the
               Tensas Basin of Louisiana, 1865-1930
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0002427

Award Number: 0002427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4915               (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur F. McEvoy amcevoy@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              When people hear the term "natural disaster," emphasis usually is given to the
              natural processes that have produced an extreme event like a flood, earthquake,
              or severe storm.  What makes these events disasters, however, often is not
              simply the physical damage resulting from natural processes but the harm caused
              to vulnerable social and economic systems.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project examines the role of the environment in the reconfiguration of
              political and social relations in the U.S. South after the Civil War through an
              analysis of the experience of flooding from 1865 to 1930 in the Tensas River
              Basin of Louisiana.  The Tensas Basin consists of all or a portion of six
              parishes in the northeastern part of the state, and until the early-twentieth
              century, Mississippi River flooding was a common occurrence there.  Today we
              have a good sense of how flooding shaped and reshaped the physical terrain in
              the lower Mississippi River valley, but the social and political repercussions
              of the repeated flooding remain largely unexplored.   This study brings
              environment and politics together by focusing on three interrelated sets of
              questions.  Those questions have to do with the construction and enforcement of
              social relationships, the restructuring of relations among government
              institutions, and the local implementation of social policy.  This project
              involves analysis of written texts, a statistical analysis of a small portion
              of the basin's residents and landowners, and a reading of the physical
              landscape.  The written primary sources consist of government documents,
              newspapers, manuscript collections, maps, photographs, and published books,
              scientific reports, and articles.  Statistics will be collected from census,
              tax, conveyance, and plantation records.  An underlying assumption of this
              project is that flooding created another arena for human conflict.  Rather than
              communities being united as they resisted and recovered from floods, this study
              will show that flood policies (both prevention and relief) divided people, that
              flooding upset social relations so that people struggled over how to reorder
              their world, and that how people experienced nature and what they thought about
              it were affected by race, class, and gender.  This project will advance our
              understanding of the social construction of natural disaster, the process of
              social categorization through public policy, and the place of environment in
              U.S. political history.  In addition, a study of the Tensas Basin of Louisiana
              will provide insights that might frame studies in other places, providing
              valuable new insights into the ways that human actors and institutions
              anticipate and respond to extreme natural events.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

