Title       : Experimental Economics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0002633

Award Number: 0002633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine S. Krause kkrause@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1327      SBE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Krause
0002633

The experimental lab at the University of New Mexico has been
              an integral part of the research infrastructure in the Department of Economics
              since installation of the lab in 1992. The department specializes in applied
              microeconomics, and the experiment lab has supported this research in a variety
              of substantive areas. A main focus of lab-based research has been to inform
              policy. This research has addressed issues in the fields of environmental
              economics, resource valuation, provision of public goods, and the effects of
              institutional structures on economic behavior. In addition to being a valuable
              faculty research resource, the lab has provided many graduate students with
              opportunities to work on large projects as well as to develop their own
              experimental research agendas. 

Computer technology has advanced enormously
              since the original lab was installed. One goal of this proposal is to allow
              faculty and graduate students in the department to continue the kinds of
              inquiries that were supported by the original lab. A second goal is to provide
              the necessary equipment to accommodate new experimental research projects. The
              equipment described in this proposal would provide an accessible, up-to-date
              computerized platform from which a variety of economic experiments could be
              run. Many of the projects described in the proposal are extensions of work
              performed in the original lab. Some of the projects open entirely new lines of
              inquiry. An up-dated lab would enhance the value of those projects by enabling
              the researchers to take advantage of the vast improvements in technology that
              have occurred in the last seven years.

While most of the computer equipment
              in the lab needs replacing, the room itself and the furnishings are adequate to
              accommodate new computers. Installation of new computers will not require any
              new wiring, air conditioning or furnishings. The department has
              long-established procedures in place for managing experimental lab use.
              Therefore, the installation described in this proposal would take advantage of
              significant existing assets to establish a modern facility that would
              accommodate a wide variety of experimental research projects.

