Title       : Relating Field Data to Accelerated Life Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0002669

Award Number: 0002669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice E. Smith aesmith@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Wayne Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EEC-0002669
Smith

This project brings together two NSF I/UCRC's to improve
              accelerated life testing (ALT) of vehicle electronics.  The Center for Advanced
              Vehicle Electronics (CAVE) of Auburn University with partner with the Quality
              and Reliability Engineering (QRE) Center of Rutgers University and Arizona
              State University to investigate the relationship between wear, degradation and
              failure of vehicle controllers as experienced in the field with that expected
              by the results of ALT conducted in the laboratory.  DaimlerChrysler Electronics
              of Huntsville, Alabama supplies the test bed.  Vehicle electronics are subject
              to stress due to temperature, humidity, cycling and other environmental
              hazards.  The materials that comprise the controllers are susceptible to the
              effects of corrosion and oxidation.  The solder that connects the controller
              components can crack due to fatigue and creep under high temperature and
              thermal cycling stresses.  These failures affect the performance of the vehicle
              from slightly to severely.  The research of this project will develop a general
              methodology for specifying accelerated life tests so that they result in an
              accurate characterization of the degradation and failures that will be
              experienced in the filed.  The failure mechanisms for the assembly materials in
              field units will be investigated in the development of the accelerated life
              tests.  ALT standards, which new units must pass prior to marketing, will be
              adequate without being overly conservative, potentially allowing new designs
              and new materials to be used in vehicle electronics.

