Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI: Perceptual Grouping Effects on Perceived Lightness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0002620

Award Number: 0002620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Bonato bonato_f@spc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Peter's College
	      2641 Kennedy Boulevard
	      Jersey City, NJ  073065943    201/915-9028

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The human visual system perceives shades of gray with remarkable accuracy
              despite large changes in the intensity of the illumination and the brightness
              of surrounding surfaces. For example, a middle gray piece of paper will
              generally appear middle gray regardless if it illuminated by a bright light or
              a dim light. The change in illumination results in retinal images that are also
              very different, yet in most cases the paper is perceived as middle gray.
              Lightness contrast and other errors have been studied in an attempt to
              understand more fully the visual system's design and logic in determining
              shades of gray. Simultaneous lightness contrast (SLC) has been one of the most
              widely studied of these errors. SLC is illustrated by placing a gray target on
              a white background and a physically identical gray target on a black
              background. The target on the white will appear darker than the target on
              black. Models attempting to explain SLC can be grouped into two main
              categories: 1) models that treat SLC as a residual byproduct of low-level
              retinal processes, namely, lateral inhibition, and 2) models based on
              perceptual grouping processes that must take place above the retinal level in
              the visual pathway. Perceptual grouping models are not well defined in terms of
              physiological structuresand functions. The main goal of the proposed project is
              to more fully explore the roles perceptual grouping processes play in
              determining perceived surface color. The research will focus on three novel
              paradigms recently discovered in the PIs' lab. One set of experiments will
              involve a variation of SLC in which two gray targets appear to move across
              their respective backgrounds. Another set of experiments will require the
              observer to fuse gray targets presented to one eye with backgrounds presented
              to the other eye. In a third set, the observer will judge the lightness of
              sequentially presented targets in an effort to understand the effect of the
              perceived gray shade of one surface on the perceived gray of a subsequently
              viewed surface. Experiments will test whether these recently discovered
              phenomena are primarily the results of retinal processes or perceptual
              processes that occur at a higher level in the visual system. 

	The results
              of these experiments will contribute to a better understanding of the
              mechanisms underlying these effects, their location, and the interaction
              between subsystems involved in determining perceived surface color. In short,
              the search field for neurological mechanisms important for perceived surface
              color will be narrowed. Models based on perceptual grouping may be better
              operationally defined in terms of neurobiology. This research will contribute
              to the fields of perceptual psychology, neuropsychology and artificial
              intelligence.

