Title       : Uncovering Mechanisms of Behavior: A Study of Two Insect Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0002051

Award Number: 0002051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra M. Perez sperez@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animals face myriad problems in the field. They must find food; they must find
              shelter; they must survive unfavorable environmental conditions. This research
              addresses the evolutionary solutions that have been selected in insects to
              solve these problems at the behavioral and physiological levels. Work to date
              has examined the behavioral and physiological adaptations that allow the
              monarch butterfly to avoid its worst problem, namely a harsh northern winter,
              by heading south in a well-known autumn migration. The butterflies' inducible
              migratory response "turns on" only in those butterflies that experience autumn
              conditions. The first goal of this monarch project is elucidating the
              behavioral and physiological adaptations that have evolved as part of this
              model insect's long distance migration. The second major goal of this project
              is to use molecular techniques to address the separateness of the major
              populations of monarchs described in North America. These populations have been
              described in the literature as (a) the East Coast population that extends from
              the Atlantic Ocean to the Rocky Mountains, (b) the tiny South Florida breeding
              population and (c) the California population seen along the West Coast. Genetic
              similarity or differences between the different sets of butterflies collected
              at each of six sites will give us a sense of how closely related they are to
              each other and how much genetic transfer is occurring between sites. These
              measures will indirectly give us an understanding of the migratory and mating
              behaviors that underlie the genetic patterns. These are behaviors that have
              remained undescribed until now because the traditional ethological techniques
              have been unable to provide the information.
