Title       : Dissertation: Midden Formation and Post-Depostional Alteration of Ceramics in
               Kalinga, Philipines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0002904

Award Number: 0002904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11965              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Longacre longacre@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Longacre MS Margaret Beck will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will examine ceramic use, discard and
              post-discard alteration of pottery manufactured by Kalinga speaking peoples of
              northern Luzon, Philippines. The groups in this region live in villages of
              50-90 households and support themselves largely irrigated rice farming. Two
              such villages continue to produce ceramic vessels for cooking, drinking water
              and food storage despite the increasing availability and popularity of metal
              and plastic containers. Thus they offer the opportunity to examine the use of
              an artifact class which has been employed by humans for over 10,000 years and
              which constitutes an important category of material excavated from many
              archaeological sites. MS Beck's work builds on a series of projects conducted
              in the region by both Dr. Longacre and a series of prior graduate students. The
              primary goal of her research is to see how well-known patterns of use
              alteration on modern Kalinga ceramics are altered or disguised during burial
              within a Kalinga archaeological site. Because ceramics are altered during use,
              archaeologists can study such characteristics as abrasion on the inside and
              outside of vessels or charring in an attempt to reconstruct function. However
              both cultural and natural processes can affect vessels and vessel fragments,
              potentially altering or obscuring the evidence of use. Post-use alterations
              must be correctly identified before use alteration can be evaluated. While MS
              Beck will examine vessel use, her work will focus on the factors which affect
              ceramics after their discard. She will study the process of trash midden
              accumulation and excavate discarded ceramics of varying age. Four basic classes
              of ceramic modification will be studied: 1. "Acid leaching" or iron leaching;
              2. removal of exterior and interior carbon; 3. abrasion; and 4. fragmentation
              and dispersion. Natural alterations of vessel fragments will be reproduced
              experimentally to better understand and predict the conditions under which they
              occur. 

Because ceramics were widely used prehistorically and preserve well
              in many archaeological contexts, they constitute a significant class of
              artifact recovered during archaeological excavation. Some projects yield
              literally tons of sherds and therefore researchers wish to extract the maximum
              possible amount of information from them. MS Beck has recognized that post
              discard processes can significantly complicate and bias this process and her
              research will provide insights and guidelines of widespread archaeological use.
              The project will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

