Title       : The Nature and Function of Sound Codes During Sentence Reading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0002024

Award Number: 0002024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albrecht Inhoff inhoff@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weimin Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia M. Connine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The meaning of a word is independent of the sensory origin of the language
              signal, and comprehension scores for spoken and visual text presentations are
              nearly identical in college-age readers.  The current research examines one
              specific hypothesis, which we refer to as the universal access hypothesis,
              according to which a modality-independent sound code is used to retrieve a
              word's meaning.  Our work differs from the vast majority of prior work in this
              area in content and methodology.  The research examines whether a relatively
              abstract phonemic code is used to retrieve word meaning, which could be
              obtained by some type of grapheme-to-phoneme conversion process, or whether an
              acoustically detailed speech-based phonetic code is used.  A novel method is
              used to present a spoken word to the reader while a specific visual target word
              is viewed.  Phonemic and phonetic properties of the spoken word are manipulated
              and the effects of these manipulations on eye movements during target viewing
              are recorded. According to our universal access hypothesis, phonetic and
              phonemic sound properties of the spoken word should influence visual target
              recognition during reading, in so far as they have been shown to influence
              spoken word recognition. Results from the proposed work could provide insight
              into the source of reading impairments which are often accompanied by
              inadequate phonemic or phonetic skills.


