Title       : Dynamics of Langmuir-Blodgett Mono-Molecular Film Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a0002150

Award Number: 0002150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramon L. Cerro rlc@che.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishnan K. Chittur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0002150
Cerro, R./ U. of Alabama

Highly ordered organic films,
              one molecule in thickness, continue to be one of the fastest growing areas of
              applied nano-science.  A few important areas of applications for
              nano-technology include nano-biosensors, nano-chemical sensors, nonlinear optic
              devices, and bio-resistant/bio-compatible protective coatings.  The oldest
              method for manufacturing ultra-thin organized chemical layers is the
              Langmuir-Blodgett technique.

The Langmuir-Blodgett technique, however, ahs
              not been used on an industrial scale for the manufacturing of nano-technology
              devices due to the apparent inability to control the hydrodynamic variable
              needed for reliable thin film deposition.  Most of the problems associated with
              the Langmuir-Blogett techniques for thin film deposition can be traced back to
              the complex dynamics of the gas-liquid -solid moving contact line.  We discuss
              in this proposal how recent experimental and theoretical advances on the
              dynamics of moving  contact lines can be used to develop a fundamental
              knowledge can be used in turn to provide a physical model of the deposition
              process that will pave the way for developing faster industrial- scale methods
              to manufacture ordered thin films.

The development of faster, cheaper and
              reliable L-B deposition processors will impact some of the most active areas in
              nano-technology, such as the manufacture of MEMS, and the development of
              extremely sensitive chemical-detecting or bio-detecting devices.

This
              proposal is submitted in similar versions to the NSF by the university of
              Alabama in Huntsville and to UK's Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
              Council (EPSRC) by Leeds University.  The main strength of this proposal is to
              collaborative team approach that will be used to analyze the experimental and
              theoretical aspects of this research and on the collective expertise brought
              into the proposal by the groups at the USA and UK.    

