Title       : Support a Workshop on Marine Microbial Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a0002871

Award Number: 0002871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19908              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Craig Cary caryc@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is clear that the technological power of high throughput sequencing has
              revolutionized our capabilities to examine the biochemical intricacies of
              organisms at the genomic level.  This is best represented by the remarkable
              achievement of fully sequencing the human genome two years earlier than
              projected.  Projects are now underway to fully sequence the mouse, maize, rice
              and numerous other biomedically important microbial genomes.  In addition,
              during the last five years we have seen over 25 microbial genomes fully
              sequences with over 95 currently underway.  Most of these organisms are of
              biomedical importance.

Over the past 15 years we have begun to understand
              more about the diversity, distribution, and evolution of free-living bacteria. 
              Environmental microbiology, like its sister fields, has greatly benefited from
              the rapid development in molecular biological technology.  Numerous microbial
              phylogenetic studies from a range of environments have revealed that less that
              1% of the bacteria have been successfully cultivated.  While we now know
              something about what individuals make up these unique microbial communities, we
              have very little information about what they are doing or are capable of doing.
               The recent development of high throughput genomic sequencing technology and
              microarray expression screening provides us with the opportunity to discover
              the metabolic capacity of bacteria that have eluded cultivation and to better
              understand how bacteria interact under the constraints of their environment. 
              

The field of marine environmental genomics is in its infancy but has the
              potential to unleash an unprecedented wave of information critical to
              understanding microbial systems in the marine environment.  Advancements in
              this area are currently suppressed due to the lack of accessibility to the
              current technology.  The technology required is extremely costly and is
              certainly out of the range of the individual investigator.  Here the scientists
              will convene a task group of investigators from the marine microbial arena to
              discuss the direction the community should take in microbial genomics. 
              Inclusion of industrial components to this workshop is essential in hopes that
              a partnership could be forged that would provide continued access to the
              developing technology. 

