Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: High-Resolution Climate and Land-Use Records
               from Cave Stalagmites and County Gazetters for China Over the Last 2,000 Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a0002433

Award Number: 0002433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Brook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major concern of contemporary scientists is distinguishing global
              environmental changes associated with natural variations in climate from those
              that resulting from human activities.  Land-use and land-cover changes are
              among the most important changes instigated by humans, but studies of these
              changes generally have been limited to the last 10 to 30 years, a very short
              period compared with the history of human activity.  An urgent need therefore
              exists for high-resolution climate data over the last few thousand years and
              for information on land-use and land-cover changes over the same time period. 
              This doctoral dissertation research project will explore the degree to which
              cave stalagmites can provide both high-resolution climate and land-use data for
              the areas near and above caves, thereby allowing a more accurate assessment of
              the role of humans in environmental change.  Working in Guizhou Province of
              south central China, a region dominated by karst features, including many caves
              with speleothems.  The doctoral candidate will study stalagmites from areas
              that still have natural vegetation cover and that have not been affected
              directly by human activities, particularly agriculture.  Stalagmite annual
              layer thickness, gray-scale, stable isotope, and UV laser-induced luminescence
              proxy measures of climate will be taken and compared with meteorological
              records drawn from county gazetteers, which provide meteorological information
              for periods of more than 2,000 years.  These comparisons will be used to
              determine which variables best reflect variations in rainfall and temperature. 
              Appropriate proxy measures then will be compared with gazetteer data dealing
              with extreme climate events, such as floods and droughts, hail, freezing of
              rivers and lakes, and snow.  Preliminary studies of one stalagmite have
              identified variations in summer rainfall and shown evidence of major floods
              back to ca. AD 1430.  Investigations also will be made of stalagmites from
              caves in agricultural areas, particularly locations for which there have been
              significant changes in land use at a known times in the past, as determined
              from satellite images, aerial photographs, historical maps, and interviews with
              local residents.  This part of the project will aim at identifying whether
              information about land use and land cover above the caves can be determined
              from speleothem records, thereby lengthening the periods over which land uses
              can be inferred back in time beyond reliable historical records.  In addition
              to providing valuable information about relationships among climate, land-use,
              and natural vegetative processes over long periods for southern China, the
              project will make significant methodological contributions by assessing the
              degree to which cave deposits can be used to provide high-resolution climate
              and land-use and land-cover data.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

