Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Ancient mtDNA Analysis on the Columbia Plateau:
               Implications for a Proto-Algonquian Homeland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0002187

Award Number: 0002187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11220              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Smith dgsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Interest and research in the peopling of the Americas and post-colonization
              population movements of Native Americans have experienced resurgence among
              anthropologists.  This is in part due to advances in molecular biological
              technology that have allowed many long-standing hypotheses, based on
              archaeological and linguistic evidence, to be addressed for the first time
              using genetic evidence.  Within the last decade, advances in automation of the
              Polymerse Chain Reaction (PCR) amplification have complimented the development
              of methods for the extraction and analysis of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from
              prehistoric bone, allowing researchers to genetically characterize ancient
              Native American populations.
     Archaeological and linguistic evidence
              suggest that prehistoric population movements in North America were widespread
              and common.  Therefore many contemporary Native American populations occupy a
              different geographical region from their ancestors.  NAGPRA (Native American
              Graves Protection and Repatriation Act) bases repatriation of unearthed Native
              American bones on cultural affiliation and geographic location.  Unfortunately,
              many Native American prehistoric remains are found with no cultural artifacts
              and therefore cannot be accurately repatriated.  Genetic testing and analysis
              of modern and ancient Native American populations will allow accurate
              repatriation of Native American remains, even if a tribe's ancestral population
              migrated to their current location from a long distance away.  Based on
              linguistic and archaeological evidence, Edward Sapir and Peter Denny argue that
              the ancestors of the majority of Native Americans in the Eastern U.S.
              (Algonquian speakers) are located in the Pacific Northwest and migrated to
              their current location approximately 4000 ybp.  Native Americans belong to one
              of five matrilines (haplogropus A,B,C,D,or X) and these matrilines can be
              identified through restriction or sequence analysis of the mitochondrial
              genome.  The distribution of these matrilines varies among Native American
              populations but appear to be regionally and temporally stable.  The frequency
              of these matrilines in a population can distinguish among Native American
              tribes.  Native American populations of the Pacific Northwest are almost
              entirely haplogroups B and D while populations in the Northeast are mainly
              haplogroups A, C, and X.  This project proposes to identify the mtDNA
              haplogroup distribution of ancient populations (2500 ybp and 6500 ybp) in a
              region of the Pacific Northwest that has cultural affinities with the Eastern
              U.S.  Because the haplogroup frequency distribution of the populations in the
              Pacific Northwest and the Eastern U.S. differ so greatly, identification of
              ancestor/descendant relationships among these ancient populations is favorable.
               This research will also address issues concerning the peopling of the
              Americas, migration theory, and regional prehistory in western North America.

