Title       : University of North Dakota Geoscience Digital Image Library (GeoDIL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0002997

Award Number: 0002997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexter Perkins dexter_perkins@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0002997
Perkins

The primary goal of this project is to create a University
              of North Dakota (UND) Geoscience Digital Image Library (GeoDIL).  This library
              will follow the mission outlined by the Digital Library for Earth System
              Education (1999): it will "serve educators and students of all types, at all
              grade levels, and in all locations  ".  Users will access the system via a
              standard point and click Web page interface.  GeoDIL will intuitively easy to
              use, both for the public and librarians.  It will contain an archive of 10,000
              high-quality, well-documented images after two years.  A sophisticated search
              engine will allow users to browse the library and to load selected images into
              virtual carousels for viewing at remote locations.  Educators and researchers
              around the globe will have access to a wealth of well-documented visual
              information that otherwise would most likely be unavailable to them.  GeoDIL
              will be a resource for educators at all levels.  It will be a visual learning
              environment that provides an opportunity for excitement to K-16 students and
              instructors.  They will use it to explore the Earth, to make connections
              between different processes and materials, and to develop ideas about the Earth
              system.  It will be especially useful for small schools or colleges that do not
              have well-developed teaching materials.  GeoDIL will support research by
              facilitating virtual field trips and by providing fundamental information and
              field data to people stuck in a library or laboratory.  GeoDIL will also allow
              the public to explore geology and selected Earth system phenomena in a way not
              previously available.  The library will enhance scientific and technological
              understanding and permit better understanding of the Earth system's science. 
              GeoDIL will consist of an ODBC (Open Database Connectivity) compliant
              relational database with a custom-designed World Wide Web interface.  The
              database will be invisible to all users.  Much of the initial project activity
              will be database creation and interface software design.  A second goal of this
              project is to design this Web-based interactive library so that it can serve as
              a model for others.  Technical information about GeoDIL (hardware, software,
              system requirements, etc.) will be available for people engaged in other
              digital image projects.  GeoDIL will be one of the first "rooms" in
              comprehensive federated digital libraries, as they are developed.  We will
              design it to be consistent with guidelines developed by DLESE and other
              community library efforts.  It will connect seamlessly with the Geoscience
              Digital Library and other comprehensive libraries.  This project is a joint
              project between the UND's Department of Geology, Energy and Environmental
              Research Center, and the Center for Aerospace Sciences.  UND is supporting this
              effort by providing $75,000 in matching funds.

