Title       : The Application of a Finite Element-Based Large Increment Method for Nonlinear
               Structural Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0002936

Award Number: 0002936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amjad Aref aaref@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary F. Dargush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              We present a new approach based upon the flexibility method to solve nonlinear
              structural problems using a large increment method (LIM).  The idea is built
              upon using a nonlinear material model without the need for linearization and a
              step-by-step approach.  This is accomplished by separating the physical
              equations from the equilibrium and compatibility equations, and utilizing the
              theory of the generalized inverse of a matrix.
The proposed work consists of
              four main research initiatives to address the areas of investigation.  The
              first initiative involves formulating the LIM within a finite element
              framework.  Although emphasis will be placed on structural framing elements,
              formulations for plate and shell elements will also be developed.  With this in
              place, the method will then be extended to incorporate inelastic behavior. 
              Both time-dependent and thermally-dependent constitutive models will be
              considered.  The third initiative relates to the extension of LIM to large
              displacement and large deformation problems. Finally, the fourth research
              thrust concerns development of the method for parallel computation.  We
              emphasize that the methodology proposed is inherently suitable for parallel
              computations.

Since this represents a new approach for solving structural
              problems, there are significant  technical challenges that must be met to
              accomplish the research objectives.  However, the potential contribution is
              significant.  One immediate application of LIM in civil engineering would be
              for analysis of 3-D frame structures undergoing plastic hinge formation at
              extreme loads.


