Title       : Dissertation Research: Science as "Useful Knowledge:" The Society for the
               Diffusion of Useful Knowledge and Science Popularization in 19th C. Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0002166

Award Number: 0002166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Broman thbroman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project examines the diversity of meanings of utility
              in nineteenth century Britain as exhibited by the producers and readers of the
              Penny Magazine of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK). It
              will attempt to prove that there was a diversity of ideologies concerning the
              utility of science held by the SDUK committee members, authors, publishers,
              provincial members, as well as working class readers. It will also show that
              the idea of what constituted the utility of science varied depending on the
              media (magazine, mechanics' institutes, and serial publications) used by the
              SDUK to promote public education. The number and diversity of undertakings of
              the SDUK from mechanics' institutes to almanac publication reflect the various
              ways in which the SDUK attempted to promote and extend its vision of useful
              knowledge. Science was a key element of many of the SDUK ventures, thus making
              the SDUK one of the central agents for the popularization of science in the
              first half of the nineteenth century. At the heart of science popularization
              was the idea that science is useful in some way to either the popularizers, the
              audience or both. How science would be useful for different groups was a
              controversial issue. Analyzing the unique attributes of the Penny Magazine as
              the medium for the exchange of ideas about the utility of science forms the
              most innovative contribution of this dissertation research project. The
              researcher argues that the concept of utility had different meanings within
              different media due to both media format and intended audience. Frequency of
              publication, length of articles, and cost of printing combined with concerns
              over the potentially unlimited readership to determine the contents of the
              Penny Magazine. In trying to attract and keep a wide and varied audience, the
              Penny Magazine had to balance education with entertainment and readers'
              expectations with the SDUK's intentions. The communications circuit of the
              Penny Magazine - Brougham, Knight, the SDUK publications committee, authors,
              provincial SDUK distribution outlets, and readers - embodied all of the
              various, and sometimes conflicting, ideas of the utility of science. By
              examining this circuit, this dissertation research project will expand
              historians' understanding of utility in the nineteenth century and will show
              the importance of media in expressing the diversity of ideologies surrounding
              the utility of science. The main sources for this project will be the SDUK
              publications, all available in the U.S., and the extensive SDUK archives at the
              University College of London. This archive contains all financial, editorial
              and organizational records, as well as all incoming and outgoing
              correspondence. The researcher will also make use of the Brougham archives,
              also located at University College of London. In order to understand the
              meanings of utility for provincial members of the SDUK and to complete her
              comparison of the Penny Magazine to mechanics' institutes, the researcher will
              make use of the local archives in Manchester, Leeds and possibly other cities.
