Title       : Comprehensive Analyses of Antifreeze Capacities in Arctic and Northern Cods at
               the Protein and Encoded Levels, and the Molecular of the Cod Antifreeze
               Glycoprotein Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0002654

Award Number: 0002654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Hing C. Cheng cdevries@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The twenty-four or so cod species of the Arctic and northern cool-temperate
              oceans belonging to the family Gadidae include many of the most commercially
              important cod fishes. Five of these species are known to have an antifreeze
              glycoprotein (AFGP) that is important for their survival in their various
              cold-water habitats. Most of the cod AFGP studies were conducted during
              1975-1985, and provided basic information on the protein structure and seasonal
              changes in AFGP levels in some of the five known AFGP-bearing cods. None of the
              other cods that may encounter freezing conditions have been examined for
              possible presence of an antifreeze function, and no information at all on the
              cod AFGP function at the molecular level was available until 1997 when the
              first AFGP gene sequence and structure from the Arctic cod Boreogadus saida
              were reported with a high AFGP coding capacity in this most-northerly species.
              Thus the AFGP systems of the different cod species are far from being
              thoroughly understood. This project proposes to conduct comprehensive
              characterizations and analyses of the AFGP system of the different gadids using
              contemporary techniques. The overall goal is to assess their respective
              freeze-avoidance capacities at both the protein (AFGP protein structures and
              production) and molecular (AFGP genes  and gene families and their
              transcription) levels, and how these relate to the differential physiological
              demands imposed by their diverse habitats which span a range of latitudes and
              environmental severity. The AFGP systems of the cods will be contrasted among
              the cod species, and with the constitutive high capacities in their south-polar
              counterparts, the Antarctic notothenioids, which are unrelated perciform fishes
              that make a near-identical AFGP to survive in the world's most thermally stable
              and coldest marine waters at the opposite pole. A key question in the field of
              antifreeze research is where these novel antifreeze proteins came from. The PIs
              have previously determined the evolutionary origin and molecular mechanism that
              produced the Antarctic notothenioid AFGP gene which played a crucial role in
              the survival and organismal success of these fishes in the frigid Antarctic
              waters. Through molecular analyses, the second major goal of the project is to
              decipher the origin and evolutionary history of the cod AFGP gene, that had led
              to the remarkable 'bipolar' evolutionary convergence of similar AFGPs in two
              unrelated fish groups.

Ten different marine gadid species, one of which
              includes two genetically distinct populations, will be examined. Specific areas
              of studies include: (1) comparative analyses of blood AFGP levels, protein
              structure and heterogeneity between and within cod species from different
              latitudes and habitats to determine the influence of environmental severity on
              antifreeze production; (2) determination of the circannual AFGP production
              cycles (AFGP protein levels and transcription of mRNA) of three high-latitude
              cods and their relationship to the temporal variations in environmental
              conditions specific to each of their habitats; (3) determination of the encoded
              capacity for AFGP production in different cods by analyzing the complexity of
              their AFGP gene sequences, structures, the organization of these genes in the
              genome, and the size of the gene family; (4) characterization of the
              distribution of AFGP expression in different tissues and non-vascular fluid
              compartments to determine all possible lines of defense against freezing in the
              cods; (5) determination whether hitherto unexamined gadids (6 different
              northerly distributed species) have an antifreeze protein through detection for
              both blood antifreeze activity and presence of AFGP-like sequences in their
              genome; and (6) deciphering the origin and the evolutionary process of cod AFGP
              gene.

