Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Sprawl in the Front Range, Colorado:
               Consequences for Above-Ground Net Primary Productivity and Carbon Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0002428

Award Number: 0002428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Wessman wessman@cses.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Urban and agricultural areas significantly modify the surface of the earth and
              thereby alter the storage and fluxes of water, energy, and nutrients in
              "unplanned experiments."  Alterations to ecosystem processes such as
              above-ground primary productivity (ANPP) and carbon storage comprise an
              important part of these urbanization experiments.  Although studies of land-use
              and land-cover change explore the consequences of human actions upon ecological
              processes, rarely do these studies include the kinds of land cover that
              predominate in urban and suburban areas.  In addition to the problems of global
              environmental change, urbanization presents a unique opportunity to explore the
              effect of pattern on process and scale dependencies.  The connection is
              important in urban systems because many ecological consequences result from
              changes in pattern as natural areas are converted into a patchwork of
              agricultural, built, and landscaped units.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will explore ecological and biogeographic dimensions of urban and
              suburban land-use and land-cover change in the Front Range of Colorado.  The
              Front Range constitutes the largest area of human settlement adjacent to the
              Rocky Mountains and is comprised of a matrix of urban, agricultural, and
              grassland cover types.  The project will focus on the following questions: 
              What are the integrated effects of urban, suburban, and agricultural
              environments on ANPP?  How does the C-storage of urban, suburban, agricultural,
              and grassland areas compare?  How does the spatial arrangement of man-made and
              natural systems influence these processes at a variety of scales?  Cover-type
              specific values for ANPP and C-storage will be acquired from a combination of
              field measurements and existing data sets.  Extensive data sets exist for
              grassland, agricultural, and riparian cover types.  These will be combined with
              field data collected in urban and suburban cover types.  Measurements include
              aboveground primary productivity, C storage in vegetation, and C storage in
              soils.  Pre- and post-classification change detection analyses will be
              performed to calculate the location, amount, and rate of land-cover
              transformation in the 20th century.  The data obtained from field work and
              archival research will be combined with the classified maps, spectral mixture
              analysis, and change detection products in order to estimate regional ANPP and
              C-storage through time.  The regional estimations will also be examined for
              spatial and scale relationships.  By studying the productivity and C-storage of
              vegetation and soil in urban and suburban cover types, this study will allow
              the quantification of ANPP and C-storage as they vary across natural and
              anthropogenic cover types.  A time series of the regional estimates will
              illustrate how an increasingly developed landscape modifies ecosystem
              productivity and C-storage.  The spatial analyses will add to the understanding
              of the proposed ecological principle that pattern affects ecosystem process. 
              An assessment of adjacency effects of man-made environments upon natural
              systems will demonstrate the extent to which development affects a region. 
              This project will quantify how productivity and carbon storage have been
              changed in Colorado's Front Range as the prairie has been transformed into a
              sprawling metropolitan area.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

