Title       : Climatic Response and Environmental Impact of Anthropogenic Forcing on the
               Multi-component Tropical Atmosphere/Ocean/Vegetation System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a0002937

Award Number: 0002937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Meacham                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $634730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhengyu Liu zliu3@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Kutzbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. Colin Prentice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The PIs will use a fully coupled atmosphere-ocean-land surface biosphere model
              to investigate the response of the tropical climate system to an increased
              concentration of CO2. They will study feedbacks among the atmosphere, ocean and
              land surface biophysical processes in the tropics and determine how the
              multi-component interaction affects the structure of the climate trend
              fingerprint. They will also investigate how global warming affects climate
              variability, such as El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and Tropical Atlantic
              Oscillation (TAO). They will assess the impact of the change of tropical
              climate and climate variability on the tropical continents. In the Pacific
              region, the focus is  on ocean-atmosphere interactions, while in the Atlantic
              region, the focus is on land-ocean-atmosphere interactions.

The PIs will
              couple the NCAR CSM (T31 version) with the Lund-Potsdam-Jena (LPJ) land surface
              biosphere model. While maintaining the major climatic features of the standard
              NCAR CSM, the CSM-T31 is much more computationally efficient than the T42
              version. The LPJ is an efficient dynamic vegetation model that can be used to
              simulate climate-biosphere interactions. This computationally efficient
              atmosphere-ocean-land biosphere model will be used to study the changes of both
              the climate mean state and climate variability at interannual to interdecadal
              time scales, as well as the impact of these changes on terrestrial ecosystems.
              The work is important because it will enhance understanding of the coupled
              land-atmosphere-ocean climate system on interannual to interdecadal scales. 
