Title       : Support for a Network of U.S. and European Research Scholars to Address Salient
               Transport Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0002695

Award Number: 0002695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Black   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The rapid transformation of cities and other forms of settlement throughout the
              world has dramatically altered the ways people live, work, and interact with
              the human and natural environments.  Since 1997, U.S. scientists and engineers
              supported by NSF and other federal agencies have been working with European
              counterparts supported by the European Science Foundation (ESF) to identify and
              begin addressing issues associated with contemporary transportation systems. 
              This award will continue that effort, providing core support to facilitate
              continued involvement of U.S. researchers in activities underway through the
              auspices of ESF and the European Community.  This effort will follow on the
              successful conference on Social Change and Sustainable Transport (SCAST) held
              at the University of California-Berkeley in Spring 1999.  This project will
              create a U.S. thematic network to complement a recently developed Network on
              European Communication and Transport Activity Research (NECTAR).  Working
              together, the U.S. and European networks will identify salient problems of
              mutual interest and establish preliminary research designs to undertake
              research on those problems.  Periodic workshops and seminars will be held, with
              establishment of a program to facilitate exchanges of graduate students being
              another project thrust.  Although the U.S. researchers involved in this next
              stage initially will be drawn largely from the ranks of those who have
              participated in past collaborative efforts, the U.S. leaders of the network
              will actively work to identify additional individuals who can contribute to and
              benefit from involvement in collaborations with European counterparts.

