Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Reserarch: Understanding Household Spatial Transformation
               in the Quexil-Petenxil Basins, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0002831

Award Number: 0002831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Rice drice@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Don Rice, Mr. Kevin Schwarz will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at sites
              located on the Quexil Islands and the Quexil and Petenxil Basins in the Lake
              Peten Itza region of Guatemala. The sites date to the Late Classic (600-800 AD)
              and Early Postclassic (1000-1250 AD) and contain a series of small buildings
              each likely related to individual domestic units. Mr. Schwarz will conduct
              broad areal excavations to expose the entire plan of each structure and to
              determine the distribution of ceramics and other cultural material within.
              Through analysis of these data it will be possible to gain insight into not
              only  specific activities which were conducted but also the basic social
              organization of the responsible units. Ethnographic studies of recent and
              current day Mayan peoples as well as ethnohistoric data indicate that domestic
              organization varies by ethnic group and that it is possible to determine such
              affiliation through the analysis of material remains. Mr. Schwarz wishes to
              examine the degree of population continuity over time and whether new peoples
              entered this region at the end of the Classic or Postclassic
              periods.

Archaeologists believe that the Mayan civilization reached its apex
              during the Classic period when large impressive temples and other ceremonial
              structures were constructed. Individual polities incorporated large numbers of
              people who were hierarchically structured to make available the large amounts
              of labor needed for such public works. In the Late Classic and Post Classic
              periods, a "collapse" occurred. Large centers were abandoned and population
              disaggregated into smaller units. In the Peten region settlements were located
              on peninsulas, islands and other easily defensible areas and this indicates
              considerable social unrest. It is uncertain in this region whether the change
              was due primarily to internal dynamics or resulted in part from the appearance
              of new ethnic groups. Through the analysis of settlement type and its change
              over time Mr. Schwarz will address this issue. This research will produce data
              of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

