Title       : Collaborative Research: Studies on the Physiological Ecology of Hydrothermal
               Vent Chemoautotrophic Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0002464

Award Number: 0002464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Childress childres@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1319,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Vent fauna is a largely ancient fauna of global distribution in the deep?sea. It
              has limited taxonomic affinities to most deep?sea communities, and yet it has
              affinities to the faunas of deep?sea hydrocarbon seeps and other seep
              environments. Deep?sea hydrothermal vents are one of the major ecosystem types
              on the earth, but probably the least known. The high biomasses of these
              communities largely reflect the ability of a few invertebrate/bacteria
              symbioses to oxidize reduced chemical species (sulfide or methane) from the
              vents using oxygen from the surrounding deep?sea water to power primary
              production.  The allegation that vent communities are highly productive is
              often seen in the literature based on the high biomasses estimated, the rapid
              establishment of vent communities and the rapid growth of some vent animals.
              However, there are currently no well?founded estimates of primary production by
              the symbioses at any hydrothermal vents. The central objective of this study is
              to quantify the major vent symbioses' chemical interactions with the vent
              fluids and the abundances of those symbioses in such a way that primary and
              secondary production and other chemical exchanges can be modeled for entire
              assemblages of symbiotic animals. This involves determining the range of
              production and exchange rates of the symbioses and the relations between
              environmental conditions and those rates. Environmental data will then be used
              to estimate in situ rates for entire assemblages at single points in time and
              over the lifetime of vent sites. This consists first of the Childress group
              expanding its study of the rates of exchanges to a range of sizes of all the
              major autotrophic symbioses. Complementing this, the Fisher group will
              characterize and sample sites at 9'50'N on the EPR so that the biomass,
              organism abundance and organism sizes are documented and size/weight
              relationships are developed. These data will enable the estimating of
              production in entire symbiotic assemblages and they can also be used with
              existing photographic datasets to estimate biomasses at other EPR sites which
              have been photographically documented and for which chemical datasets exist. 
              The results will greatly increase the understanding of the nature of the
              interactions between the vent animals and their chemical environments and
              enable the first solid estimates of production and other exchanges by the
              symbiotic components of vent communities, making a major contribution to the
              understanding of the functioning of vent and other chemoautotrophically
              supported ecosystems.
