Title       : Engineering Analysis of Cerebral Microcirculation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0002945

Award Number: 0002945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. Hudetz ahudetz@mcw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Medical Col of Wisconsin
	      8701 Watertown Plank Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532263548    414/257-8296

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0002945
Hudetz
The goal of this proposal is to determine if the distribution
              of red blood cell (RBC) flow in the cerebral cortical capillary network is
              altered during functional activation of the brain cortex and if nitric oxide
              (NO) from neuronal NO synthase participates in this response.  The investigator
              hypothesis is that a change in distribution of RBC flow rates toward a more
              homogeneous perfusion in the capillary network occurs during neuronal
              activation and is significant for the maintenance of tissue oxygen supply. The
              investigator further hypothesize that nitric oxide (NO) from neuronal (Type I)
              NOS is critically involved in RBC flow regulation at the single capillary
              level.  These hypotheses will be tested using a cross-disciplinary approach. 
              Experiments will be performed by direct observation of the cerebral cortical
              capillary circulation in vivo using fluorescence video-microscopy in rodents. 
              RBC velocity, RBC supply rate (RBC flux) will be measured from sequential video
              images.  Three-dimensional architecture of the capillary network will be
              reconstructed using computer software developed in the investigator's
              laboratory. Neuronal activation will be performed by physiological stimulation
              of the whisker barrel cortex and by transcranial electrical stimulation. 
              Changes in distribution of RBC perfusion in the capillary network upon neuronal
              activation will be assessed.  The postulated role of neuronal NO in the
              regulation of intranetwork RBC flow distribution will be tested using models
              with pharmacological inhibition of NO synthase (NOS) systems, NO donors and in
              mice with targeted disruption of the neuronal NOS (nNOS) gene.  Mathematical
              modeling of oxygen transport from capillary segments based on measured RBC flow
              data will be performed to estimate the significance of capillary flow
              distribution changes for O2 transport during functional activation. These
              studies will advance our knowledge of the fundamental cellular mechanism of
              neuronal activity-blood flow coupling at the microvascular level which is
              essential to better understand both normal neurobiology and the underlying
              mechanism of functional brain imaging.
 


