Title       : Preventing Core and Interlayer Buckling Defects in Wound Rolls During
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0002868

Award Number: 0002868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Wickert wickert@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Flat continuous strips of sheet metal, paper, polymers and other thin materials
              (referred to as "webs") are generally transported under tension and at high
              speed during  production.  Stages of web processing include thickness reduction
              in rolling mills, slitting, coating, printing, and laminating.  These materials
              are wound onto, transported, and stored in the form of large multi-ton rolls. 
              Improvements in their production are restricted to a large degree by mechanics
              problems associated with precisely moving and winding webs without introducing
              significant defects.  This research project focuses on reducing the
              stress-induced damage associated with wound roll production.  In the presence
              of unfavorable stresses, rolls of material and the cores onto which they are
              wound can buckle locally or entirely.  At best, such defects are viewed by
              customers as a sign of poor quality, and at worst, they require the entire roll
              to be scrapped.  Failure modes describe complete mechanical instability and are
              often termed V-buckling, sag collapse, starring, and spoking.  A predictive
              model is being developed for the stress field within wound rolls which accounts
              for realistic complicating effects that have not previously been studied. 
              

The research identifies the roles played by such manufacturing process
              parameters as tension, speed, roll width, web and core material properties,
              surface roughness of the web material, core stiffness, and mandrel or core
              chuck design.  The results are being used to guide the development of
              engineering solutions for controlling and improving the stability and quality
              of wound rolls during their production.

