Title       : Collaborative Research: Analysis of Metal Chelators in Marine Systems by HPLC
               with Derivatization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0002538

Award Number: 0002538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155350             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Moffett jmoffett@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0002538


Almost all biologically active trace metal cations
              in seawater are complexed by organic ligands, and complexation is believed to
              exert an important influence on the geochemistry and biological availability of
              these elements, many of which are critical micronutrients.  However, there is
              little, if any, information on the structures of these compounds, or any
              definitive information on sources and sinks, though biological sources have
              been inferred on the basis of their distributions and binding characteristics. 
              Some researchers have been successful in isolating and identifying chelators
              produced by cultures of marine bacteria and phytoplankton, namely Fe
              siderophores and phytochelatins that strongly complex Cu.  In this study, the
              PIs will develop sensitive assays for Fe and Cu chelators using liquid
              chromatography coupled to a selection of highly promising derivatization
              schemes to measure these compounds directly in seawater at nanomolar levels.  
              This is a novel approach, based on the observation that many of these ligands
              contain functional groups that form analytically useful adducts with
              derivatizing agents that can be separated from other materials.  The objective
              of the research is to determine if these compounds are important ligands in
              seawater, and the assays will serve as a basis for modified protocols to look
              for structurally similar compounds.   The long term goals of the project is to
              develop useful analytical protocols that will be used widely in the field to
              answer questions about the factors that control metal complexation in seawater,
              and their relationship to ecosystem-scale processes. 


