Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Large Woody Debris in a Midwestern
               Low-Energy Stream: Implications for Stream Naturalization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0002450

Award Number: 0002450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9274               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Rhoads b-rhoads@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              When examining the factors that influence the geomorphic structure and dynamics
              of stream channels, attention tends to focus on interactions between water and
              sediments.  A number of external factors can influence these fluvial dynamics,
              however, including plant material that falls into and along stream beds. 
              Although increasing attention is being given to the impact of biota on stream
              dynamics and related channel morphology, most research has been done in
              locations where fast-moving streams flow through non-urban areas.  The overall
              goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to advance the
              understanding of the interactions between large woody debris (LWD) and the
              geomorphic structure and function of low-gradient meandering streams.  The
              project will explore process-based interactions between LWD storage and
              transport, organic matter retention, and a variety of fluvial processes,
              including sediment transport, three-dimensional flow structure, and bar form
              development, and it will to inform stream naturalization efforts by developing
              a set of management guidelines about LWD that are consistent with extant
              biotic-fluvial processes.  Specific research questions to be examined in this
              project include:  (1) How is LWD spatially distributed within a meandering
              stream?, (2) What geomorphic and hydrologic factors affect the dynamics of
              woody debris in this type of fluvial system?, and (3) How do woody debris
              obstructions affect bed material characteristics, local patterns of erosion and
              deposition, three-dimensional flow structure, and organic matter standing stock
              at the scale of individual meander bends?  The project design and methodologies
              will be informed by research on three-dimensional flow in meander bends,
              bedform and planform development in meandering streams, and the influences of
              LWD on stream ecosystems.  Field data are will be collected in a 600-meter
              meandering section of Poplar Creek, a tributary of the Fox River in Kane County
              in northeastern Illinois.  This study site is located directly upstream of a
              straightened reach that is the focus of a de-channelization project that will
              attempt to re-establish a naturally functioning meandering system with diverse
              in-stream morphology and habitats.  Among components of the field study are
              characterization of land-use change within the watershed, GIS-facilitated
              analysis of historical changes in channel position at the research site, and
              analysis of available historical hydrologic data.  Special attention will be
              given to process-based field investigations focusing on LWD dynamics and
              organic matter retention throughout the 600-meter reach and interactions
              between LWD obstructions and geomorphological processes within three meander
              bends.  This research project will contribute to the general understanding of
              the geomorphological dynamics of meandering streams, especially process
              interactions between biotic and abiotic components of these systems.  This
              improved understanding will provide a more reliable framework of knowledge on
              which to base stream naturalization plans for low-energy meandering streams
              with abundant LWD.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

