Title       : Acquisition of 200keV FEG Cryo-Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0002805

Award Number: 0002805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Egelman egelman@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay C. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl E. Creutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhifeng Shao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julianne J. Sando  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

0002805
Edward H. Egelman
University of Virginia
Acquisition of
              200 KeV FEG Cryo-Electron Microscope

	Electron microscopy (EM) is an
              extremely powerful technique for studying the structure of macromolecular
              complexes, such as protein polymers, protein-DNA complexes and viruses. 
              Significant advances in electron microscopy have been made in specimen
              preparation, instrumentation and image.  These advances make it possible to use
              an electron microscopic to determine the three-dimensional structure of a
              protein.  In addition, they also allow for lower-resolution studies that are
              complementary to those obtained by such techniques as x-ray crystallography and
              nuclear magnetic resonance.
	A 200 KeV Field Emission Gun cryo-electron
              microscope, manufactured by Philips/FEI, will significantly enhance the
              research programs of a group of six investigators at the University of Virginia
              Medical School.  This microscope will have a highly coherent electron source
              that will allow for resolutions much higher than obtainable with conventional
              instruments.  The microscope will be equipped for the imaging of
              frozen-hydrated specimens, maintained in the microscope at liquid nitrogen
              temperatures.  It will also have image acquisition capabilities, using a CCD
              camera, that will allow for on-line image analysis.
	The projects that will
              take advantage of the increased resolution provided by this instrument are: 1)
              studies of F-actin, and complexes of F-actin with actin-binding proteins; 2)
              studies of protein-DNA complexes, particularly helical recombination filaments
              such as RecA/Rad51/UvsX, and ring helicases such as rho, DnaB and T7 gp4; 3)
              studies of the icosahedral Herpes Simplex virus capsid; 4) studies of
              Ca2+-dependent membrane binding proteins such as annexin, using two dimensional
              crystals formed on lipid monolayers; 5) studies of Protein Kinase C isozymes
              using two dimensional crystals formed on lipid monolayers; and 6) studies of
              ion channels, such as VacA hexamers, using cryo-EM of two-dimensional crystals
              to complement ongoing studies with Atomic Force Microscopy.   Many of the
              projects have already produced results that are at the limit of reliable
              resolution obtainable by conventional TEM of negatively stained specimens.  The
              new instrument will not only enhance these individual research programs, but
              will greatly strengthen the environment for structural biology at the
              University of Virginia and the training of graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows.  


