Title       : Planning Grant for BioMolecular Interaction Technology Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0002962

Award Number: 0002962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Butcher                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Laue Tom.Laue@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries play a vital role in maintaining
              and promoting a healthy population, and constitute a major sector of the US
              economy.  These industries have evolved from the empirical treatment of disease
              to a sophisticated approach for drug development which requires a deeper
              understanding of the biochemistry of life processes.  As a consequence, the
              accurate description of biomolecular interactions has become a central element
              in understanding disease mechanisms, and now is an essential ingredient for
              devising safe and effective pharmaceuticals.  A variety of instruments and
              methods are used to characterize biomolecular interactions.  One group of these
              technologies, used physical first principles for their analysis.  These first
              principle techniques could be used to address a great many needs in the
              pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries than they currently do.  Meanwhile,
              the development of prototype instruments and methods for characterizing
              molecular interactions is being pursued in the academic world.

While some of
              these developments have been commercialized, others, mostly due to their
              limited market size, have remained prototypes in academic laboratories.  These
              prototypes, while suitable for addressing academic questions, are not optimized
              for industrial uses, and are housed in laboratories that do not provide the
              level of security required by industry.  Consequently, a barrier to technology
              transfer has developed.  The formation of an NSF Industry/University
              Cooperative Research Center is an ideal mechanism for overcoming this barrier
              and advancing the field of molecular interaction science.

