Title       : Environmental Change in Namibia During the Last 130,000 Years From Cave
               Speleothems, Tufas and Fluvial Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0002193

Award Number: 0002193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328938             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Brook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Southern Africa, and indeed the Southern Hemisphere in general, lacks the
              paleovegetation and absolute temperature and rainfall data needed for
              refinement of current biome and General Circulation Model simulations.  Namibia
              presents a unique set of opportunities to develop long records of vegetation,
              temperature, and rainfall.  The abundant caves and speleothems of the country
              are the key to how this can be achieved, with large waterfall tufas and thick
              ancient fluvial/aeolian sediment sequences playing supportive roles.  The
              proposed research, which involves scientists from Namibia, Botswana, South
              Africa, and the U.S.A., will study Holocene environmental change in Namibia
              during the last 130,000 years from cave speleothems, waterfall tufas, and
              sequences of ancient fluvial/aeolian sediments.  The project will include
              extensive field sampling, sample dating, staple isotope and other chemical and
              element measurements, and regression analysis to link ground water fluctuations
              with climate conditions.  The research will compare the newly collected
              climatic records with archaeological data for Namibia, and for other parts of
              southern Africa, to evaluate human-environmental relationships during the
              Holocene.  The new data will also be used to compare with records of El Nino
              frequency to assess its variations during the Holocene.

The sparse coverage
              of terrestrial data in the Southern Hemisphere restricts the kind of detailed
              data-model comparisons on which the global climate modeling relies.  The
              research will provide new medium- and high-resolution vegetation, temperature,
              and rainfall data for southern Africa for the last 130,000 years, thus filling
              a major gap in the terrestrial paleoenvironment record for southern Africa. 
              This would be the longest such record for the subcontinent and the longest
              records in the world.  The data developed will be crucial to accurate global
              climate modeling, and the comparison with the records of El Nino frequency will
              help improve our understanding and modeling of El Nino recurrence and intensity
              in the present.

