Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of Exotic Pine Plantations on Paramo
               Grasslands in the Ecuadorian Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0002352

Award Number: 0002352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Veblen Thomas.Veblen@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5926,9169,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The introduction of exotic species has had significant impacts on a broad range
              of ecosystems throughout the globe.  While ecologists, biogeographers, and
              other scientists continue to develop and refine broader theories regarding
              interactions among biotic, physical, and human systems when humans introduce
              new species to a region, these theoretical developments have been fueled by the
              careful analyses of the dynamics of ecosystem change in specific locales.  This
              doctoral dissertation project will examine the ecological impacts of Monterey
              pine (Pinus radiata) plantations in alpine grasslands in the Ecuadorian Andes. 
              The project will address how pine plantations are affecting a high-elevation,
              equatorial ecosystem that plays an important role in regional and local
              hydrology and in which soil carbon storage is high.  The focus of the research
              will be on changes in soil properties and in water retention, especially the
              changes in soil physical and chemical properties associated with exotic pine
              plantations as compared to adjacent grasslands.  Attention also will be given
              to assessing how these properties change with plantation age.  The general
              hypothesis is that pine plantations will cause changes in chemical, physical,
              and biological processes in soils, which will be reflected in altered physical
              and chemical properties of the soil.  These changes are anticipated to become
              more severe as plantations age, possibly leveling off at later stages of stand
              development.  In order to examine these questions, a chronosequence of pine
              plantation plots will be compared to control plots of native grasses.  Random
              sampling of surface soils will be conducted as well as sampling in soil pits,
              where zero-tension lysimeters will also be installed.  Analyses will made of a
              range of variables, including total carbon, available phosphorus, total and
              available nitrogen, pH, bulk density, soil moisture content, and water
              retention, as well as dissolved carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus in the
              solution samples.  The theoretical context for this research draws on Jenny's
              state-factor approach, which states that the soil or any soil property is a
              function of five soil-forming factors:  climate, biota, topography, parent
              material, and time.  In order to analyze the role of any one of these factors,
              the others must be held constant or minimized.  The characteristics of the
              study site allow for an assessment of soil properties as a function of
              vegetation type (pines vs. grasses) and as a function of time of occupation by
              the exotic vegetation.  Research on the impacts of pine plantations on the
              carbon and water cycles is particularly necessary in regions like the tropical
              Andes.  These types of studies in these locales are especially important
              because the fragility of the ecosystems being altered may be much greater than
              lower-elevation and temperate systems that have been studied more intensively. 
              If carbon losses from these soils are greater than the rates of carbon
              sequestration following the introduction of tree plantations, policies aimed at
              decreasing atmospheric carbon concentrations may have the opposite effect.  The
              potential for drying out of these soils under plantations could also have
              profound impacts for the provision of water to lower elevations.  This project
              will provide a better understanding of impacts of pine plantations at the
              ecosystem level, information that is important for policy makers and landowners
              who will make decisions about land uses.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

