Title       : Three Topics in Trade Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0002042

Award Number: 0002042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kala M. Krishna kmk4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal covers research on three topics in international trade.  The
              common link among the three parts of this proposal is the focus on policy
              issues. The first part develops a model of quality, where quality is seen as
              the probability of being satisfied by the good. This work has implications for
              a number of issues in international trade and industrial organization. In
              standard models of quality, consumers choose to buy one product or another. In
              contrast to this, it is assumed that a consumer purchases a product knowing
              that it may fail to "deliver". If the product delivers, the customer leaves the
              market with the product. Otherwise, the customer gets nothing and may wish to
              reenter the market. Higher quality is merely a higher probability that the
              product delivers. This possibility of re-sampling is the primary innovation in
              this model. The model has a number of interesting predictions on pricing,
              profits and market structure. It also suggests directions for research which
              provide some new insights into the role of trade policy and the role for
              government regulation.
The second part looks at the effects of Rules of Origin
              (ROOs) in Free Trade Areas (FTAs).  A good is eligible for zero tariffs in the
              FTA only if it originates there. ROOs specify conditions which have to be met
              for such origin to be granted. In earlier work, joint with Anne Krueger, the
              author looked at the hidden protection inherent in ROOs and how differences in
              the way that ROOs are specified affect the outcome. The model used was one with
              constant returns to scale. As a consequence, the results are best interpreted
              as long run ones. However, in policy circles, much of the interest is in the
              short to medium run which is the focus of the work proposed here. The work will
              shed new light on the effects of FTAs on wages and investment.
The third part
              focuses on how differences in implementation of migration policies affect
              outcomes and how the implementation procedures of different countries interact.
              The work will help understand how differences in U.S. immigration policies and
              those of other countries affect the composition of immigrants to the U.S. as
              well as how changes in immigration rules in the future could affect the trade
              and wage patterns in the U.S.

