Title       : The Economic Foundations of Venture Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0002011

Award Number: 0002011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manju Puri puri@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Hellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Venture capital is a rapidly developing, new form of financial intermediation. 
              It is commonly believed to have a significant impact on the development of
              entrepreneurial companies.  Yet relatively little is known about how this
              economic institution works.  This empirical line of research seeks to obtain a
              better understanding of the economic foundations of the venture capital
              industry.  It asks some fundamental questions about the economic role of
              venture capital, as well as the organization of venture capital industry
              itself.  The research is motivated by a set of theoretically driven questions. 
              The empirical work consists of identifying rich enough data that then allows
              for a careful empirical analysis of these questions.

The proposal includes
              three closely related research projects on venture capital.  The first project
              is concerned with the question of whether venture capitalists play a role over
              and above those played by traditional financial intermediaries.  It asks
              whether venture capitalists play a role in professional ization of startup
              companies, including the development of human resources in startup companies. 
              It examines not only whether venture capitalists can play a supportive role in
              the development of human resources, it also looks at the control exercised by
              venture capitalists, especially in terms of replacing the original founders
              with professional managers as CEOs.  The second project examines the structure
              of venture capital organizations themselves.  It asks to what extent existing
              financial intermediaries, i.e., banks, are well-suited to engage in venture
              capital.  It empirically investigates whether bank-owned venture capital firms
              have different investment patterns relative to their counterpart private
              individual venture capital funds.  The third project examines the economic
              determinants of venture capital fund performance.  In particular, it will
              investigate how different investment strategies as well as the intensity of
              managerial incentives translate into differential performance
              patterns.

Overall, this research contributes to a better economic
              understanding of venture capital.  As such it is important to the fields of
              corporate finance and financial intermediation.  Venture capital is one of the
              most important new forms of financial intermediation.  It differs substantially
              from traditional financial intermediaries and suggests new paradigms for
              thinking about financial intermediation.  It is also relevant to our
              understanding of the theory of the firm, examining what roles financiers can
              play in the development of new companies.  Finally, it is of importance to
              public policy.  Policy makers across the world are seeking for ways to promote
              the venture capital industry.  Understanding the role of banks in venture
              capital, for example, is important, especially since banks are the main
              financial institutions in many developing and developed countries. 
              Understanding the economic determinants of venture capital fund performance is
              also critical for a better understanding of what policies are more effective in
              the promotion of venture capital.

