Title       : Next-Generation Subsurface Sensor For Complete and Accurate Assessment of
               Pavements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0002912

Award Number: 0002912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cam V. Nguyen cam@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
PI's Name:		Cam Nguyen
Institution:		Texas A&M University
Proposal
              Number:	0002912
Proposal Title:	Next-Generation Subsurface Sensor for Complete
              and Accurate Assessment of Pavements
Project Abstract:

This project aims to
              research an innovative subsurface sensor capable of simultaneously deep
              penetration and excellent range and azimuth resolutions for fast, reliable, and
              accurate assessment of pavement structures, such as measuring layer thickness
              and depth of bedrock, detecting voids and foreign objects, and inspection of
              thick concrete pavements. The new sensor will be based on the principles of
              pulse compression and synthetic array antenna, a unique combination for
              achieving both deep penetration and fine resolutions.  The sensor will be
              realized using microwave integrated circuits for small size, low cost, and high
              performance.  Three major tasks will be conducted: research and development of
              an innovative subsurface sensor, fabrication of laboratory test specimens and
              field test sites, and test and evaluation of the new sensor.  Currently, there
              is no system available to civil engineers that can simultaneously provide very
              deep penetration and excellent range and azimuth resolution capabilities needed
              for complete and accurate nondestructive evaluation of pavement structures. 
              The proposed sensor has these capabilities, and hence will provide
              unprecedented solutions to pavement problems that currently cannot be solved
              with existing sensors. It will therefore lead to significant performance
              improvements in the evaluation of pavements - not to mention important cost
              reduction in pavement monitoring, maintenance, and rehabilitation activities.
              This research will also pave the way for future research and developments of
              further advanced sensor technologies for civil engineering research.  The
              research proposed will therefore have a strong impact on a number of current
              and future applications of civil engineering using sensor technologies.


