Title       : U.S.-Hungary Research on a Cross-Continental Study of Controls on Soil Carbon
               and Nitrogen Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0002956

Award Number: 0002956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Lajtha lajthak@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5916,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              INT 0002956
Lajtha


This U.S.-Hungary research project involves a long-term
              study of controls on soil organic matter formation or "Detritus Input and
              Removal Treatments" (DIRT) at three established sites in the United States and
              one in Hungary.  Kate Lajtha of Oregon State University serves as the U.S.
              principal investigator in cooperation with her Hungarian counterpart, Janos
              Atilla Toth of Kossuth University in Debrecen.  The goal of DIRT is to assess
              how rates and sources of plant litter inputs control the accumulation and
              dynamics of organic matter and nutrients in forest soils over decadnal time
              scales.  The U.S.-Hungarian research team intends to examine processes at
              multiple levels in the soil to explore the chemical and biological
              interconnections that lead to formation of humic materials over long time
              spans.  Of special interest is the stabilization and retention of soil organic
              carbon (C) and inorganic and organic nitrogen (N) because soil organic matter
              decomposition processes appear to influence global carbon sequestration.

The
              Hungarian Sikfokut long-term ecological research site that joins the U.S.-based
              effort via this project is a temperate deciduous oak forest located in Eger,
              Hungary.  It brings a European site to the effort that has vegetation similar
              to participating eastern U.S. forest sites, yet one that exhibits significantly
              higher nitrogen inputs.  Thus, cooperative research with Hungarian counterparts
              at Sikfokut offers a unique opportunity to test hypotheses in a structurally
              similar system with extreme N input and forest floor chemistry.  The planned
              collaboration has three foci: a) an analysis of the controls on N dynamics and
              leaching; b) analysis of carbon dynamics due to interacting mechanisms of
              formation, stabilization, destabilization; and c) field soil respiration
              measurements.  Results are expected to shed new light on the pathways of N and
              C sequestration and loss, across a large climatic and pollution history
              gradient.

This cross-continental study of soil dynamics fulfills the program
              objectives of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
              States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.  

