Title       : Biosynthesis of Yeast Intronic snRNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9419007

Award Number: 9419007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurille J. Fournier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419007  Fournier  Many of the small nuclear RNAs in eukaryotes are associated
              with the nucleolus.  Several of these RNAs have been shown to be involved in
              processing of ribosomal RNA precursors and the others are assumed to have roles
              in ribosome biogenesis as well.  A subset of the nucleolar snRNAs in
              vertebrates have the interesting property of being encoded in introns of
              protein genes.  These 'intronic snRNAs' are produced by processing of
              precursors that contain both mRNA and snRNA.  This discovery established a new
              biosynthetic pathway for snRNAs and raised several interesting questions about
              the processing scheme involved and the basis for this unique coding
              arrangement.  The proteins encoded at the same loci as the intronic snRNAs are
              all linked to ribosome synthesis or function and this suggests that the coding
              arrangement may provide some functional benefit.  Our laboratory has discovered
              that the yeast S. cerevisiae also contains intronic snRNAs. This finding shows
              that intronic snRNAs are widely conserved phylogenetically and opens the way
              for new approaches to studying their synthesis and function.  The intronic
              snRNAs discovered include a homolog of vertebrate U18 and two RNAs unique to
              yeast (snR38 and snR39). Yeast U18 and snR38 are encoded in genes for EF-l( and
              EF-l(, both subunits of translation elongation factor-one.  SnR39 is derived
              from a gene for ribosome protein L8.  The goals of this research are to define
              the RNA structural requirements for processing of an intronic snRNA, and to
              characterize the activities involved in the processing of intronic snRNAs. 
              These issues will be addressed with a combination of genetic and biochemical
              strategies, exploiting the special advantages yeast offers for in vivo studies
              and genetic manipulation.  %%%  Many of the small nuclear RNAs in eukaryotes
              are associated with the nucleolus.  Several of these RNAs have been shown to be
              involved in processing of ribosomal RNA precursors and the others are assumed
              to have roles in ribosome bioge nesis as well.  This research will focus on the
              synthesis of yeast intronic snRNAs, a subset of the nucleolar snRNAs that are
              encoded in introns of protein genes.  These 'intronic snRNAs' are produced by
              processing of precursors that contain both mRNA and snRNA.  This discovery
              established a new biosynthetic pathway for snRNAs and raised several
              interesting questions about the processing scheme involved and the basis for
              this unique coding arrangement.  The proteins encoded at the same loci as the
              intronic snRNAs are all linked to ribosome synthesis or function and this
              suggests that the coding arrangement may provide some functional benefit.  This
              research will focus on the synthesis of the intronic snRNAs in yeast.  ***
