Title       : Collaborative Research: Development of RADAP-II Radar Database for the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9419103

Award Number: 9419103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Witold F. Krajewski witold-krajewski@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anton Kruger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Saffle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419103  Krajewski    The main goal of the proposed work is to develop a radar
              database for use by the hydrological and meteorological community.  The data
              are from digital RADAP-II radars operated by the National Weather Service and
              which are being phased out and replaced by the new NEXRAD technology,
              complemented by the raingage networks.  The database will consist of high
              quality radar-based rainfall estimates based on several WSR-57 and WSR-74S
              radars equipped with RADAP-II digital processors, operated by the National
              Weather Service (NWS).  The data base will include rainfall estimates at
              temporal scale that range from instantaneous to daily accumulations, and a
              spatial scales of 4 km by 4 km, 15 km by 15 km, and 50 by 50 km.  In order to
              obtain rainfall estimates from radar data, several processing steps are
              required.   First, removal of anomalous propagation (AP) echoes will be done
              with a modified Gaussian classification approach.  Range correction is required
              to remove systematic errors due to range effects.  Radar reflectivity to
              rainfall rate (Z-R) conversion based on raindrop size distributions is applied
              to achieve physically-based data, and polar to rectangular coordinate
              conversion is carried out followed by removal of advection effects. 
              Accumulation calculations and bias removal complete the estimation procedure.  
              The final step is to perform an error propagation analysis of the preceding
              steps.  The work planned under the proposal includes three main elements: (1)
              development of a quality-controlled radar reflectivity database;  (2) providing
              estimates of rainfall based on the radar data; and (3) developing procedures
              for uncertainly propagation and providing estimates of error variance for the
              above rainfall products.  The quality of the proposed products would be greatly
              enhanced if a combined radar-raingage analysis was conducted.  This is due to
              significant gaps in the temporal coverage by the radar data caused by various
              technical difficulties as well as the potential rad ar calibration problems. 
              On the other hand, the radar data will be helpful in clarifying certain quality
              control problems in the raingage data, and in estimating the error structure of
              the raingage-based estimates, particularly the error component due to a spare
              spatial sampling by the raingage network.   The main product of our research
              will be grided analysis of rainfall based on combined radar and raingage
              observations, complemented by a quantitative assessment of its uncertainty. 
              This analysis will be performed for the Arkansas River Basin with a particular
              focus on the ARM/CART experimental site in Oklahoma and Kansas.  Essential
              elements of the project will be development of conceptual design for data
              analysis, simulation studies of error propagation, and independent
              cross-validation of our products.
