Title       : Physiological Mediation of Apoptosis During Avian Ovarian Follicle Atresia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9419613

Award Number: 9419613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Johnson johnson.128@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419613  Johnson    This proposal describes studies to evaluate physiological
              mechanisms that mediate normal cell death (a process called apoptosis or
              programmed cell death) within preovulatory ovarian follicles of the domestic
              chicken.  Although in most animal species follicle atresia (the death and
              resorption of nonviable follicles) occurs in greater than 95% of ovarian
              follicles present within the ovary at the time of hatch (or birth), relatively
              little is known about events within follicle cells that are associated with the
              initiation of follicle death.  Dr. Johnson was among the first to determine
              that ovarian follicle atresia in the hen, as well as in mammals, is mediated
              via the process of apoptosis thus providing for the first time an early
              endpoint to facilitate studying causative effects.  Among the physiological
              factors now known to be associated with cell survival/cell death in a variety
              of mammalian and avian tissues are members of the bc1-2 gene family (a family
              of genes related to Ced genes previously characterized in the worm,
              Caenorhabditis elegans).  The fact that these genes are so highly conserved
              during the process of evolution points to the importance of their function in
              maintaining cell viability or, alternatively, inducing cell death.  Thus,
              results from the studies outlined will have implications for better
              understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms which regulate ovarian
              follicle selection and physiological follicle death in nonmammalian species. 
              Moreover, the data should more generally provide information related to the
              regulation and mechanisms responsible for physiological cell death in all
              tissues from vertebrate species.  ***
