Title       : Request for a Multi-user Automated DNA sequencing machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9419673

Award Number: 9419673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell L. Sogin sogin@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Caron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Hobbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Waterbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a group proposal to acquire an automated DNA  sequencing machine for
              shared use by investigators at  the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Woods
              Hole  Oceanographic Institution. The equipment to be purchased  includes a DNA
              sequencing machine and an auxiliary  workstation for analyzing data produced by
              the  sequencing machine.    Comparative molecular biology has transformed
              studies of  evolution, ecology, biogeography and biodiversity into 
              experimental sciences. Using measures of similarity for  ribosomal RNAs,
              microbiologists can measure genetic  differences between members of the same
              species or  reconstruct phylogenies for organisms that span the  largest
              evolutionary distances. Mitochondrial gene  sequences provide quantitative
              genetic tools for  biogeography studies in both microbial and multicellular 
              systems. With the advent of polymerase chain reaction  techniques, almost any
              gene family can be incorporated  into biodiversity investigations. For any one
              of these  enterprises, the major expense in terms of financial and  human
              resources is that required to determine DNA  sequences. Numerous research
              projects in the Molecular  Evolution Program, the Ecosystems Center at the
              Marine  Biological Laboratory and the Biology Department at the  Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution rely upon  comparative analyses of ribosomal RNA
              sequences,  mitochondrial genes or other nuclear coding regions.  Despite
              excellent computational facilities for  integrating results of these studies,
              no automated  equipment is available for sequencing DNA in the Woods  Hole
              Scientific Community. If laboratories at the Marine  Biological Laboratory and
              the Woods Hole Oceanographic  Institution are to remain competitive in studies
              of  molecular evolution/systematics, molecular ecology and  emerging programs
              in biodiversity, they must have access  to shared instrumentation for rapid,
              automated DNA  sequence determinations. The principal benefit will be a 
              dramatic reduction in human resources required for DNA   sequence analyses. In
              addition, this multi-user  instrument will further encourage interdisciplinary 
              approaches to studies of molecular ecology, biodiversity  and molecular
              systematics/evolution.    Five of the laboratory's represented in this
              application  will form a consortium to sequence ribosomal RNAs from 
              prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Their research objectives  include studies of
              molecular systematics, molecular  ecology, biodiversity, and biogeography.
              Through the  common administration and use of this instrumentation,  it will be
              possible to share many costly reagents  including a library of primers for
              rapidly sequencing  rRNA coding regions from both prokaryotes and  eukaryotes.
              Other groups will use the machine to study  structure and functional
              constraints in coding regions  such as cytochrome P450, actins, and receptors.
              Most of  these projects represent existing collaborations within  the Woods
              Hole Scientific Community. The automated  sequencer will also be available to
              visiting scientists  in the Woods Hole Scientific Community including summer 
              investigators at the Marine Biological Laboratory and  the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution.
