Title       : On-Line Voltage Stability and Transient Stability Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9419458

Award Number: 9419458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adly A. Girgis adly1@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9419458  Girgis       The mail objectives of this research are to develop new 
              methods for on-line voltage stability and transient stability.   Load
              forecasting and the optimal estimation of voltage phasors,  generator frequency
              deviations, and their rate of change will be  the basic information for the
              development.  Based on these  values, a static index and a transient index will
              be developed  for voltage instability prediction and transient stability 
              detection, respectively.  During normal operating conditions, the  static index
              for voltage instability is calculated, and its  future values are predicted. 
              Once the system enters a transient  state, the transient index, which is for
              transient instability  detection, will be computed.       Load flow solutions
              are considered as the intersections  between a space and a space curve.  The
              angle, between the  gradient vector of a space surface and the tangent vector
              of a  space curve at an operating point, may be considered as the  static index
              for voltage instability.  Its closeness to 90  degrees may indicate the
              proximity of the operating point to the  voltage collapse point.  The
              directional derivatives of the bus  injection power in the space surface
              equation, in the direction  of the tangent vectors of the space curves, are
              possible  candidates for weak bus identifications.  The proposed indices  are
              available for the voltage phasors and the load flow Jacobian.   To predict
              voltage instability, the voltage instability index may  be computed based on
              the future load and its corresponding load  flow solutions.  By comparing the
              voltage instability index for  the current operating condition with the index
              for the predicted  load, one may conclude if the system will become close to or
              away  from the voltage collapse point.       If the system is in transient
              state, the unstable mode will  be detected primarily.  The predicted generator
              angle difference  in the post disturbance period is proposed for this purpose. 
               Once the unstable mode is pred icted, the high dimensional power  system model
              may be aggregated into a low order model.  The  kinetic energy of this
              aggregated low order system is proposed as  the transient index for transient
              in stability detection.  ***
