Title       : Collaborative Research: Quaternary Paleoclimatic Evolution of the Larsen Basin,
               Offshore Seymour Island, Eastern Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9419232

Award Number: 9419232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Davies   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin B. Lagoe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  This award supports a collaborative study of Quaternary glacial 
              marine deposits of the Larsen Basin.  These sedimentary deposits  are uniquely
              suited for study of the Modern environmental setting  and recent paleoclimatic
              evolution of the northeastern Antarctic  Peninsula continental shelf, an area
              thought to exhibit  pronounced sensitivity to climatic changes. Microfossils
              from  these deposits and their stable isotope compositions provide  information
              on varying oceanographic conditions, ice mass extent,  and sediment dispersal.
              Questions to be answered include:  1)  What are the faunal and isotopic
              responses to glaciation,  both proximal and distal to the variety of small and
              medium ice  masses in the area?  2)  What is the relationship between physical
              evidence of ice  position, as expressed in sediments and seismic data, and the 
              faunal and isotopic signatures thereof?  3)  To what extent is an environmental
              model of the highly  variable interglacial Modern shelf applicable to
              describing and  understanding late Quaternary environments representative of 
              different climatic regimes? Preliminary results of a pilot study  using surface
              and cored sediments indicate that foraminiferal  assemblage composition and
              stable isotope ratios record highly  variable Modern and late Quaternary
              environmental conditions.  However, data are needed from a larger number of
              cores to  reconstruct the Antarctic Peninsula late Quaternary environmental 
              history. Methods to be employed in this research are  foraminiferal and
              palynological analyses, foraminiferal carbon  and oxygen isotope ratios, and
              carbon-14 measurements.       The primary research objectives of the proposed
              one-year  project are as follows:  1) Provide the first study for the Antarctic
              Margin Project for  drilling in shallow water depths offshore of Seymour
              Island.  The  proposed work would serve to provide a sound environmental 
              framework of the Quaternary deposits from which to interpret the  Cenozoic
              record; 2) Establish the first Qua ternary stable isotope  chronostratigraphy
              for Antarctic continental shelf sediments;  3) Document and interpret
              Quaternary climatic fluctuations,  including proposed Holocene warming
              episodes, as they are  preserved in the sediments, biota, and stable isotopic
              records,  and reflect variations in local and regional ice buildup,  physical
              and chemical oceanography, and sediment source areas.  This research represents
              an important contribution to  international global change studies.
