Title       : Theoretical Models for Photoisomerization Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9419102

Award Number: 9419102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196243             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Frederick jhf@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor John H. Frederick at the Chemistry Department of the University   of
              Nevada, Reno is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program at NSF to study vibrational spectroscopy   and excited state
              molecular dynamics. The work supported under this grant   is focussed on light
              induced reactions that form isomers, different   stable geometries, in several
              gas phase molecules. The molecules that are   being studied are representative
              of a class of molecules which have   conjugated pi-systems. The first step in
              the studies is to use a   combination of experimental data and ab initio
              theoretical data to   construct descriptions of the interaction energy
              surfaces. Then, the   dynamics of excitation from the ground to the first
              excited state and   de-excitation back to the ground state are studied using
              both   quasiclassical and quantum mechanical methods. These studies may lead to
                methods to control the way in which the reactions proceed and the amounts  
              of different isomers which are formed.   The photochemistry of molecules with
              conjugated pi-systems is of central   importance for many natural processes,
              such as vision and photosynthesis,   and for organic conductors. Many molecules
              in this class have been   extensively studied by experimentalists and by
              theorists and much is   known about the properties of these systems. However,
              the dynamical   mechanisms by which photochemical transformations occur are
              still not   fully understood. The work under this grant is addressing this
              missing   link.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
