Title       : RUI: Structure and Function of an Alternatively Spliced, B-Cell-Specific,
               Transcription Factor, PAX-5
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9419067

Award Number: 9419067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patty Zwollo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta R. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              94109067  Zwollo  B-cell-specific activating protein (BSAP) is thought to play
              important roles in the transcriptional regulation of several B-cell-specific
              genes, including (CD19, CD20, V(pre-B) IgH, Ca, and blk.)  BSAP is encoded by
              the Pax-5 gene, a member of the Pax gene family of homeodomain class
              transcription factors.  In this project, the molecular nature of Pax-5 gene
              transcripts and proteins will be investigated in mouse spleen and B-cell lines.
               Preliminary results have revealed that at least two alternative splicing
              products are present within the murine B-cell population.  The presence and
              structure of those, and any additional alternatively spliced Pax-5 isoforms in
              vivo will be investigated.  To study the structure/function relationships of
              the different Pax-5 isoforms, the following basic questions will be addressed: 
              1) What is the structure of the different isoforms?  2) How do the different
              isoforms effect in vivo transcription?  3) Can the different isoforms interact
              with their DNA target, the BSAP-binding site?  4) When are the different
              isoforms present during B-cell development ?  5)  Which areas on the Pax-5
              isoforms are involved in protein-protein interactions?  These studies will
              increase our  understanding of the functional roles that Pax-5 plays during
              B-cell development, as well as contribute to the elucidation of the mechanisms
              coordinating cell proliferation and differentiation throughout B-lymphocyte
              development.  %%%  B-lymphocytes or B-cells are responsible for producing
              circulating antibodies in response to antigen stimulation and are an essential
              component of the immune response. B-cell-specific activating protein (BSAP) is
              thought to play important roles in the transcriptional regulation of several
              B-cell-specific genes.  BSAP is encoded by the Pax-5 gene, a member of the Pax
              gene family of homeodomain class transcription factors.  In this project, the
              molecular nature of Pax-5 gene RNA transcripts and proteins will be
              characterized in mouse spleen and B-cell  lines, and the structure/function
              relationships of the different Pax-5 gene products will be determined. These
              studies will increase our  understanding of the functional roles that Pax-5
              plays during B-cell development, as well as contribute to the elucidation of
              the mechanisms coordinating cell proliferation and differentiation throughout
              B-lymphocyte development.  ***
