Title       : The Roles and Interactions of the Red Clover Necrotic Mosiac Virus Capsid and
               Movement Proteins in Cell-to-Cell and Long Distance Movement.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9419700

Award Number: 9419700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Lommel steve_lommel@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Giesman-Cookmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9418700  Abstract    How plant viruses move from the initially inoculated
              cell to  neighboring cells and eventually systemically to cause  disease is not
              understood.   Red clover necrotic mosaic  virus (RCNMV) has been developed as a
              model system to study  plant virus movement.  To understand the mechanisms of
              both  cell-to-cell and long distance movement, a series of  genetic,
              biochemical and cell biology experiments are  designed to address the following
              questions:  How does the  movement protein (MP) facilitate viral spread from
              cell to  cell?  Where within the cell does the MP appear to act?  Can 
              fuctional domains be distinguished in the MP?  What are the  roles of the MP
              and capsid protein (CP) in long distance  movement of the virus? I s virion
              formation requried for  long distance movement? Do the movement and capsid
              protiens  interact with one another to achieve long distance movement?  What if
              any, host factors interact with the MP and/or CP to  cause a systemic
              infection?  The approaches to answer these  questions are outlined in the
              following three objectives: 1)  Generate and characterize alanine scanning
              mutants of the  RCNMV CP. 2) Analyze wild-type and mutant RCNMV MP behavior  in
              transgenic plants. 3) Identify host factors that  facilitate viral cell-to-cell
              and/or long distance movement  and characterize the interactions between MP,
              CP, and host  factors.       A series of CP alanine scanning mutants will be 
              constructed and analyzed for CP expression, virion  formation, and their
              ability to facilitate long distance  movement.  Transgenic plants will be
              generated expressing  the wild-type and mutant MPs.  These will be used to 
              determine the subcellular localization of MPs as well as for  complementation
              experiments.  Wild-type and mutant CPs and  MPs over-produced in E.coli will be
              microinjected into  various plant cell types and assayed for the ability to 
              modify plasmodesmata and transport macromoleucles from one  cell type to
              another.  The hypothesized interactions betw een  MP and CP will be assessed
              genetically, biochemically, in  gel shift assays, by the yeast two hybrid
              system, and/or by  mutational analysis.  cDNA expression libraries from RCNMV 
              systemic host plants will be screened for a host factor(s)  that specifically
              interacts with the MP using the yeast two  hybrid system, lgt11 colony
              hybridization, or affinity  chromatography.       Results from the proposed
              expeirments will afford a  better understanding of the mechanisms by which
              plant  viruses move and ultimately cause disease.  They will also  serve as a
              basis for studying how plant viruses usurp normal  host functions to achieve
              infection and how plants  communicate from cell to cell.  The identification of
              host  factors involved in viral movement will provide insights  into
              protein-protein interactions, host specificity, and the  structure and function
              of plasmodesmata.  %%%  This proposal seeks to understand how plant RNA viruses
              move  from cell to cell.   There are several players in the  process, a protein
              called movement protein (MP) , the  protein which comprises the coat of the
              virus to make up the  capsid (CP), and the exquisitely organized channels
              between  plant cells which traverse the cell wall of adjacent cells,  the
              plasmodesmata.  Previous work in the Lommel  lab has  shown that changes in the
              amino acid sequence (through site-  directed mutagenesis) of the movement
              protein incapacitate  viral spread from cell to cell.  It has also been shown
              that  CP mutations change the ability of the virus to move over  long
              distances, e.g., from leaf to leaf.  There is a  postulated interaction of CP
              with MP and the nature of that  interaction will now be explored through
              controlled  mutagenesis of CP, followed by analyzing  cell to cell  movement
              and by determining the nature of the interaction of  CP with mutant and wild
              type MP.  The nature of the  interaction of these proteins with host proteins
              will also  be determined, since it is hypothesized that some host  protein is
              involved in lo ng distance transport. The nature  of cell-to-cell transport in
              plants is one of the main  questions confronting plant cell biologists
              currently and  typifies the field in that incremental increases in our  basic
              knowledge will lead to potentially large pay-offs in  both fundamental
              (plasmodesmatal action) and applied (plant  disease resistance) areas.  ***
