Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Excited-State Structure and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9419714

Award Number: 9419714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Mathies rich@zinc.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professor Richard A. Mathies of the University of California at   Berkeley will
              conduct a series of investigations to determine the ground   and excited-state
              nuclear dynamics and structural changes that occur in   condensed phase
              photochemical and photobiological reactions and thereby   understand their
              molecular reaction mechanisms.  The mode-specific   nuclear dynamics that occur
              immediately after excitation of a   photochemically active system will be
              determined by measuring and   analyzing absolute laser resonance Raman
              vibrational scattering   intensities.  Picosecond time-resolved resonance Raman
              and absorption   spectroscopy will be used to study the kinetics of
              ground-state   photoproduct formation and the structures and relaxation of
              ground-state   photochemical intermediates.  The following studies will be
              pursued. 1)   Photochemical ring-opening, ring-closing and 1,7 hydrogen shift
              reactions   of cyclic polyenes; 2) the response of protein environment in  
              bacteriorhodopsin and in phycobiliproteins to the electronic  
              excitation/photoisomerization of their bound chromophoric prosthetic   groups
              will be studied; 3) the photoexcitation of visual pigment   rhodopsin will be
              investigated; 4) the photochemical electron transfer   reaction in bacterial
              photosynthetic reaction centers, and 5) the   mechanism of photochemical
              excitation of tetrapyrrole chromophore in   phytochrome, the light sensing
              pigment in plants, will be examined.  These investigations probe the basics of
              the interaction between light   and photo-biologically active materials and
              will contribute to our   understanding of the fundamental processes which take
              place in animate   and inanimate living systems.  The overall goal of this
              research is to   find general principles about how chemical reactions occur in
              condensed   phase photochemical systems  at room temperature.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
