Title       : Acquisition of a 500 MHz-11.75 Tesla Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1995  
File        : a9419409

Award Number: 9419409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Crews phil@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony L. Fink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn Millhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pradip K. Mascharak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Konopelski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,9189,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The UC Santa Cruz Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry requests  funds to
              purchase a 500 MHz- 11.75 Tesla Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  spectrometer. The
              central instrumentation lab in our Department of  Chemistry and Biochemistry
              provides analytical support for the  researchers of the UCSC chemistry and
              biochemistry community. It is  managed by a full-time staff person who provides
              maintenance, training  and advisory services. One 250 MHz NMR spectrometer and
              one 300 MHz NMR  spectrometer are housed in this laboratory and these
              instruments are  used on a round-the-clock basis. While our department does not
              have a  500 MHz instrument, a triple channel 500 MHz spectrometer, purchased 
              from a Markey Foundation grant, is housed in the UCSC Center for the  Molecular
              Biology of RNA. Unfortunately, essentially no time is  available on it for
              general chemistry use.    In this application we outline the benefit that will
              be derived from  the acquisition of an NMR spectrometer with state-of-the art 
              capabilities. Overall, this equipment will support the education and  training
              of more than 10 postdoctorals, 33 graduate student researchers  and 10
              undergraduates who are involved in the programs of six core  research groups. A
              comparable number of postdoctoral and student  researchers are affiliated with
              the programs of another six secondary  user research groups. The six projects
              of the primary users include:  Structural Characterizations of Exotic Marine
              Sponge Natural Products  (Organic Chemistry Prof. Crews), Structural Studies of
              Partially-Folded  Intermediate States of Proteins (Biochemistry Prof. Fink),
              Synthesis of  Complex Molecules (Organic Chemistry Prof. Konopelski), Designed 
              Analogues of Metallobleomycins (Inorganic Chemistry Prof. Mascharak),  Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance of Peptide Helix Conformations (Physical  Biochemistry Prof.
              Millhauser), and NMR Studies of Lense Transparency  (Physical Biochemistry
              Prof. Schleich).The secondary user research  groups include those involved in
              the follo wing subject areas: three  organic, one bioinorganic, one marine
              chemical toxicology, and one  biological NMR.    Our faculty has continued to
              keep abreast of developments in NMR  technology. Two of the investigators of
              this proposal (Crews and  Schleich) have extensively obtained and used 500 MHz
              data in their  research. Three others (Konopelski, Millhauser, and Mascharak)
              each  include examples of actual 500 or 600 MHz data in their research 
              descriptions. We desperately need to have a more rapid turn-around time  for
              two-dimensional (2D) experiments.. Neither of the two instruments  in the
              central lab can satisfy the desire to carry out contemporary 2D  NMR
              experiments. These two instruments have very limited INVERSE  detection
              capabilities because both lack the necessary probes and  associated hardware
              for such detection. In addition, the reduced  sensitivity at both 250 MHz and
              300 MHz make the inverse detection  method much more difficult to
              satisfactorily implement. We need access  to rotating frame experiments. As
              will be noted in the proposal, many  important 2D-NMR rotating frame
              experiments such as TOCSY, ROESY,  HMQC-TOCSY or T-ROESY are not available to
              our researchers. Overall,  such a limited capacity does not allow us to rapidly
              obtain  sophisticated NMR data which is a must in structure studies of complex 
              organic, biochemical, and bioinorganic compounds. The additional  obvious major
              problem is that signals can not be resolved when large  clusters of protons
              overlap for the increasingly complex molecules  being studied by our
              researchers.    In summary, the instrument we seek will make it possible for
              our  student and faculty researchers to increase their productivity. The use 
              of this new instrument will be overseen by James Loo, who has been the 
              Chemistry NMR lab manager since 1980.
