Title       : Acquisition of a Gas Phase Infrared Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9419402

Award Number: 9419402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47811              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Bowers 6026217166  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rene Feyereisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9184,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The project focuses on seeking new chemistry among the natural  defensive
              strategies of plants and insects in order to develop  biorational methods for
              insect control. Thus, research is heavily  focused on the analysis of micro
              amounts of volatile compounds from  plants and insects. Currently, separations
              of volatile compounds by  capillary gas chromatography and electron impact
              ionization of eluting  compounds yielding interpretable fragmentation patterns
              is the method  of choice for these studies. In addition, infochemicals involved
              in  insect-plant interactions (i.e., defense, alarm, recruitment, host 
              selection, repellent, attractant, communication etc.) are often present  at low
              levels as components of a complex mixture containing numerous  isomers. Thus,
              their characterization requires, in addition to  separation and mass
              fragmentation, an additional discriminatory  mechanism to identify isomeric
              compounds that cannot reliably be  identified from fragmentation data alone.
              The ability to interface a  gas-phase infra-red (IR) detector with the GC/MS
              instrument adds the  essential capability to detect and identify many isomeric
              structures  that are presently refractory to identification by fragmentation 
              pattern alone. An IR interface would not only improve the  identification of
              minute quantities of closely related analytes but do  so as a part of the
              existing GC/MS analytical process. Capillary gas  chromatography linked with
              Fourier transform gas-phase infrared  spectroscopy and mass spectrometry meets
              the need for such difficult  micro analyses.         Because each analysis
              requires identification of a dozen or more  compounds, searchable libraries,
              containing the fragmentation patterns  of thousands of known compounds, are an
              absolute necessity. Upgrading  the software data system to accommodate MS-DOS
              will permit access to an  enormous resource base of compoundq that will vastly
              enhance structure  characterization. Similarly, interaction with the data
              systems  developed by colleag ues engaged in similar studies will allow sharing
               of information and research results.         The existing GC/MS hardware has
              been very well maintained and is  in excellent condition. However, the present
              data system depends  entirely upon a Pascal based system which is wholly
              incompatible with  modern data systems that utilize MS DOS exclusively. The
              language  impasse prevents linkage with an IR interface and prevents 
              communication with colleagues. Equally, the computer language obstacle 
              prohibits use of the new, expanded fragmentation libraries now  available.     
                 The inability to discriminate among isomers by analysis of their 
              fragmentation patterns is very frustrating and requires time consuming 
              analysis `y alternative techniques. The addition of an IR interface to  the
              existing instrument will go a long way toward resolving isomeric  components
              without additional investigative procedures. In addition to  its inability to
              distinguish between geometric isomers of natural  products such as eugenol and
              isoeugenol MS alone cannot differentiate  between cis and trans isomers of
              terpenoids and related structures. On  the other hand infrared spectroscopy
              provides very useful information  for discrimination among isomeric composites.
              Currently, the  identification of isomeric compounds through comparison of
              their GC  retention times on a variety of phases with those of authentic 
              standards is necessary. Gas phase infrared is often able to  differentiate
              between isomers of related compounds and combined with  mass spectroscopy will
              greatly facilitate identification of new natural  products for which standards
              are unknown. Selected infrared wavelength  detection, available on the proposed
              instrumentation, will also allow  selective monitoring and searching for
              compounds of desirable classes,  such as the phthalides, in plant extracts
