Title       : Electrostatics Mediates the Membrane Binding of Src, a Myristoylated Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9419175

Award Number: 9419175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419175  McLaughlin  The overall objective is to understand the molecular
              mechanism by  which proteins containing myristate, a 14 carbon acyl chain, 
              interact with biological membranes.  The proposal focuses on Src  (the product
              of the v-src oncogene, v-Src, and its cellular  homolog, c-Src, are known
              collectively as Src); the working  hypothesis is that membrane binding requires
              both the hydrophobic  insertion of the NH2-terminal myristate into the bilayer
              and the  electrostatic interaction of a cluster of adjacent basic residues 
              with acidic lipids.  There are four specific projects. 1)  Developing a simple
              model that describes the synergistic effect of  myristate and basic residues on
              the binding of Src to phospholipid  membranes and testing this model by
              measuring the membrane binding  of myristoylated and nonmyristoylated peptides
              corresponding to the  NH2-terminal region of Src. 2) Confirming that the basic
              residues  in the NH2-terminal region of Src are responsible for the 
              electrostatic component of protein-membrane interaction by  measuring the
              membrane binding of native v-Src and c-Src as well as  mutant and chimeric
              versions of these proteins. 3) Measuring the  effect of phosphorylation by C
              and A kinases on the membrane  binding of both Src and corresponding peptides.
              4) Constructing a  molecular model of a phospholipid bilayer and the
              NH2-terminal  region of Src, then using the nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann
              equation  to calculate theoretically the electrostatic component of the 
              binding.  The project is significant because membrane binding is  crucial to
              the function of Src.  The biophysical principles that  emerge should be
              applicable to some other myristoylated (e.g.  MARCKS) and farnesylated (e.g.
              K-Ras) proteins.  %%%  The overall objective is to understand the molecular
              mechanism by  which proteins containing myristate, a 14 carbon acyl chain, 
              interact with biological membranes.  The proposal focuses on Src  (the product
              of the v-src oncogene, v-Src, which functions to  transfor m cells, and its
              cellular homolog, c-Src, which is involved  in control of the cell cycle, are
              known collectively as Src); the  working hypothesis is that membrane binding
              requires both the  hydrophobic insertion of the NH2-terminal myristate into the
               bilayer and the electrostatic interaction of a cluster of adjacent  basic
              residues with acidic lipids.  These are four specific  projects. 1)  Developing
              a simple model that describes the  synergistic effect of myristate and basic
              residues on the binding  of Src to phospholipid membranes and testing this
              model by  measuring the membrane binding of synthetic peptides. 2) Confirming 
              that the basic residues in the NH2-terminal region of Src are  responsible for
              the electrostatic component of protein-membrane  interaction by measuring the
              membrane binding of native v-Src and  c-Src as well as mutant and chimeric
              versions of these proteins. 3)  Measuring the effect of phosphorylation by C
              and A kinases on the  membrane binding of both Src and corresponding peptides.
              4)  Constructing a molecular model of a phospholipid bilayer and the 
              NH2-terminal region of Src, then calculating theoretically the  electrostatic
              component of the binding.  The project is significant  because membrane binding
              is crucial to the function of Src and the  biophysical principles that emerge
              should be applicable to other  myristoylated proteins.      ***
