Title       : Dynamics of Extended Non-Equilibrium Systems: Hysteresis, Electromigration, and
               Defect Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1996  
File        : a9419506

Award Number: 9419506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9419506  Sethna  Collective behavior emerging on long length scales will be 
              explored in three systems.  First, the investigator will  study
              disorder-induced nucleation of bursts associated with  certain hysteresis loops
              and investigate innovative  applications to magnetic recording which result. 
              Second,  the dynamics of large, mobile voids will be studied  analytically and
              using realistic simulations of bulk  aluminum and copper.  This work will help
              understand failure  present in microfabricated devices with high current 
              densities.  Third, chaotic states in two-dimensional systems  described by
              partial differential equations whose  topological defects move in a chaotic,
              turbulent manner will  be studied.  More general coarse-graining methods will
              be  used to investigate phase transitions and the effects of  boundaries, and
              to understand the nature of noise in these  systems.  %%%  For many systems,
              even though the underlying physics of the  interactions of the individual
              particles is complex, on a  large scale rather simple laws can often be found. 
              Three  examples of such systems that are forced to be far from  equilibrium
              will be investigated theoretically.  First,  certain systems, such as magnets,
              behave differently  depending on whether a parameter (such as an external 
              magnetic field) is increased or decreased.  Such systems  will be investigated
              and these results will be applied to  magnetic recording.  Second, the movement
              of voids (pockets  of air) in materials such as aluminum and copper will be 
              investigated using equations and computer simulations, with  a goal to better
              understand failure in microfabricated  devices with high currents flowing
              through them.  Third, the  behavior of chaotic noise and defects will be
              investigated  in certain classes of two-dimensional systems, such as  fluids
              that are forced to flow and heart muscle walls.  ***
