Title       : LTREB: The Population and Community Dynamics of Desert Winter Annuals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a9419905

Award Number: 9419905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275590             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Lawrence Venable venable@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the dynamics of Sonoran Desert annual plants in
              order  to determine how these plants adapt to unpredictable environments. 
              Desert annuals have been used to  study community dynamics in highly variable
              environments yet the dynamics of seed germination and  dispersal, considered
              primary determinants of persistence and coexistence are not well known.  This 
              research will continue and extend a 12 year data set on the population and
              community dynamics of  desert winter annual plants at the Desert Laboratory of 
              the University of Arizona (formerly the  Carnegie Desert Research Laboratory
              founded and in continuous operation since 1903).   Since the  production of
              long-lived dormant seeds is considered to be an important feature permitting
              desert  annuals to persist though unfavorable conditions they will determine
              the fraction of seeds the seed  bank germinating each year and construct
              depletion curves for both natural and experimental seed banks  in the field. 
              Also, field experiments will be conducted to measure seed dispersal distances. 
              Field  and laboratory germina tion experiments will describe seed dormancy
              mechanisms.  Finally, species  responses to weather variation will be
              constructed and used in computer simulations of the evolution  of dormancy and
              dispersal and variance-mediated species coexistence.    Understanding the
              dynamics of  desert annuals will improve our knowledge of desert ecosystems,
              since annuals represent a major and  highly variable component of primary
              productivity on which the desert animals depend.  Deserts  worldwide are
              undergoing shifts in geographic boundaries.  Since annual plants respond
              quickly to  weather shifts, the long-term monitoring of desert annuals should
              also provide a unique assessment of  the biotic impacts of global warming and
              climate change.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
