Title       : Antarctic Lake Ice Microbial Consortia: Origin, Distribution and Growth
               Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9419413

Award Number: 9419413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $561048             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Priscu ubijp@gemini.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans W. Paerl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. McKay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419413     Priscu  The permanent ice cover of antarctic lakes within the
              McMurdo dry  valleys provides a habitat for viable microbial consortia 
              consisting of cyanobacteria and eubacteria.  This microbial  assemblage, which
              is concentrated in a liquid water lens  associate with a layer of rock debris
              at mid-ice depth,  presumably grows only during a period when the ice cover in
              not  completely frozen ( 190 d y-1).  Despite the potential importance  this
              assemblage may have with regards to overall ecosystem  dynamics, it has never
              been studied with respect to its origin,  distribution and ecological
              significance.  It is hypothesized  that (1) viable microbial consortia exist in
              the ice covers of  all dry valley lakes, (2) the microorganisms originate from 
              terrestrial mat communities, (3) the rock debris and associated  microbial
              layer persists at mid-ice depths owing to a balance  between solar energy
              absorption and upward advection from surface  ablation and bottom ice freezing,
              (4) primary production by ice  cyanobacteria contributes a significant amount
              of new production  to the lake ecosystem, (5) microbial growth rates are low
              but are  higher than rates of ice turnover, (6) the nitrogen pool  associated
              with the microbial assemblage results from N2 fixation  and (7) bacterial and
              cyanobacterial interactions within the  assemblage are commensualistic.  These
              hypotheses will be  addressed through a combination of geographical sampling, 
              physical ice modeling, molecular identification using probes for  16S rRNA and
              nitrogenase, and physiological assays.  A majority  of this work will focus on
              the assemblage found in the east lobe  of Lake Bonney which has been
              tentatively characterized.  This  project, which will be the first to examine
              the antarctic lake  ice microbial assemblage, will yield important new
              information on  carbon and nitrogen dynamics within the McMurdo dry valleys and
               will complement numerous studies of sea ice microbial  communities.
