Title       : Sequences and Structures Involved in Replication and Recombination of TCV RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1995    
File        : a9419303

Award Number: 9419303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419303  Simon  Turnip crinkle virus (TCV) genomic and subviral RNAs will be
              used to study sequences and structures involved replication and recombination. 
              The advantages of TCV include: transcripts produced in vitro from cloned cDNA
              of genomic and numerous subviral RNAs are biologically active in plants and
              isolated plant cells (protoplasts); plant extracts containing
              template-dependent RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity can transcribe
              RNA from both (+)- and (-)-strand TCV subviral RNA templates; numerous chimeric
              RNAs have been characterized that are the products of recombination between the
              genomic and subviral RNAs.  RNA recombinants associated with TCV have one of
              three motifs at the 3' crossover point (unlike other virus recombinants), one
              of which is absolutely required for normal accumulation of the virus in plants
              and protoplasts, suggesting a link between recombination and virus replication.
               Preliminary results have led to numerous intriguing questions:  What is the
              connection between replication and recombination at a particular region in the
              TCV genomic RNA?  Is the sequence or structure of a stable TCV RNA hairpin
              important for recombination/replication?  What are the sequences/structures
              required for transcription by the RdRp and is there a commonality with the
              crossover sites?  Is there a connection between in vitro synthesis of a
              larger-than-full-length product using (-)-strand satellite template and
              recombination?  What is the identity of the major smaller-than-full-length
              product in the same reactions, whose size varies in an unusual manner after
              deletion of various portions of the template?  To begin answering these and
              other related questions, the following experiments will be performed: (1) The
              region involved in replication and recombination in the TCV genomic RNA will be
              studied by genetic manipulation and structural determination.  (2) Cis-acting
              sequences/structures of TCV satellite RNA C that are required for transcription
              of (+)-and (-)-strands in vitro wil l be determined by further deletions of
              terminal and internal sequences, structural determinations, and modification of
              putative structural elements.  (3) The connection between recombination and
              synthesis of  larger-than-full-length product in vitro will be tested by using
              templates where the structure in the region is maintained but specific
              sequences, known to affect recombination, have been altered.  (4)  The 150 base
              smaller-than-full-length product will be cloned and the mechanism of its
              synthesis determined.  Studying the sequences/structures that are recognized by
              the TCV RdRp during initiation of transcription or re-initiation of
              transcription following a crossover event, should lead to a better
              understanding of the process viral RNA replication.  %%%  Turnip crinkle virus
              is an icosahedral virus with and monopartite RNA genome that infects a broad
              range of dicot plants.  The 4054 base genomic RNA encodes the viral replication
              and encapsidation functions.  Turnip crinkle virus genomic and subviral RNAs
              will be used to study the RNA sequences and structures involved in viral RNA
              replication and recombination.  As a model system, turnip crinkle virus has
              technical advantages including the ability to produce biologically active viral
              RNAs by in vitro transcription of cloned DNAs, the ability to prepare plant
              cell extracts that have functioning viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, the
              enzyme responsible for virus RNA replication.  These experiments will greatly
              increase our understanding of the molecular mechanism of RNA-dependent RNA
              polymerase mediated replication and recombination characteristic of several
              plant RNA viruses.  ***
