Title       : Acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance Biosensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1994  
File        : a9419428

Award Number: 9419428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Marians K-marians@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Rothman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Massague  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerard Hurwitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franz-Ulrich Hartl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Identifying and understanding the basis for interaction of  biologically
              significant molecules forms one of the cores of  modern biology.  Associative
              phenomena such as those between  cells, receptors and ligands, regulatory
              subunits and  catalytic subunits, inhibitors and activators with enzymes,  and
              individual components with  macromolecular complexes are  fundamental to
              cellular function.  Instrumentation to study  these interactions has constantly
              evolved.  Application is  made here to for the purchase of a BIAcore from
              Pharmacia  Biosensor, one of the newest generation instruments for the 
              interacting molecules.    The BIAcore uses surface plasmon resonance (SPR) to
              assess  changes in refractive index very close to a gold surface.  By coating
              the gold surface with a hydrophilic dextran  matrix, specific ligands can be
              immobilized on the sensor  chip using various alternative chemistries.  Binding
              of  biomolecules form solution in a flow cell to the ligand can  then be scored
              by SPR.  The BIAcore allows real time  analysis of the binding interaction,
              permitting the  derivation of both kinetic and thermodynamic constants and, 
              because the change in refractive index is directly  proportional to the change
              in absorbed mass, allows  determination of the stoichiometry of the interaction
              as  well.  Covalent coupling of the ligand to the sensor chip  allows
              convenient regeneration and, combined with the use of  a flow call, also allows
              the study of sequential binding  interactions.  The BIAcore is remarkably
              sensitive, usable  measurements can be made with as little as little as 50 l of
               a 0.1 nM soluation of the molecule of interest.  The system  is fuly automated
              and computerized and therefore capable of  sustaining a high through-put.   
              The PI, four CO-PI's, and three major users will use the  BIAcore to analyze
              molecular interactions that are crucial  to cellular processes as diverse as
              DNA replication and  protein trafficking.  Studies are proposed to investigate:
               i) the protein-protein int eraction between primase and DnaB  (the replication
              fork, ii) how various eukaryotic  replication fork components associate, iii)
              how type 1  topoisomerases bind to DNA, in) the protein-protein  interactions
              required for molecular chaperones of the heat-  shock protein families to
              assist in protein folding, v) the  protein-protein interactions required for
              proper recognition  during vesicular transport in the cell, vi) the effects of 
              ligand binding on homo and heterodimerzation of vitamin D3  and retinoid
              receptors, vii) the extent to which binding  affinities and specificites of
              cadherin extracellular  domains contribute to cadherin-dependent cell
              recognition,  and viii) the protein-protein interactions that are crucial  to
              TGF- signal transduction.
