Title       : A New Structure-Based Approach to Generation Control and Frequency Regulation in
               Response to Slow Load Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9419353

Award Number: 9419353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chanan Singh                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marija D. Ilic ILIC@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9419353  Ilic       This project uses an already conceived structure-based 
              modeling approach which does not require the assumption on weak 
              interconnections, and it also naturally lends itself to inclusion  of devices
              which control the line flows directly.  The salient  features of this approach
              which allow for such significant  generalization of the present approaches are
              briefly summarized  in this Proposal, and are further supported by several 
              publications.       Conceptually, the proposed approach allows for extracting 
              minimum order models directly relevant for various levels of a  very large
              scale dynamical system, much in the spirit of the  Coordination Theory for
              multivariable systems.  The modeling and  control concepts developed recently
              by the PI and her team offer  simple ways of supporting this mainly qualitative
              theory in terms  of explicit, low order models directly relevant for specific 
              levels of a complex system.       Using vertical separation principle under the
              assumption of  stable and fast dynamics at the lowest level, relatively low- 
              order-discrete-time models are extracted at both secondary  (subsystem) and
              tertiary (interconnected) system levels.  A  direct mapping between these
              models and the physical processes  captured are illustrated in this Proposal as
              applied to the real  power generation control problem for frequency regulation
              in a  multi-utility environment.       The main objective of this project is to
              apply this approach  towards further development of a systematic framework for
              next  generation Load Frequency Control (LRC) / Automatic Generation  Control
              (AGC) of the electric power systems.  Particular emphasis  is on accommodating
              the open access operating mode evolving among  the utilities in the United
              States.  ***
