Title       : Structures and Dynamics of DNA-binding Protein Motifs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9419049

Award Number: 9419049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur G. Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419049  Palmer  Protein motifs recognizing specific DNA sequences are
              ubiquitous  components of proteins that regulate gene expression; consequently,
               explication of  the molecular basis for specific recognition is  necessary for
              development of a molecular theory of cellular  transformation.  The long term
              goal of the research is to elucidate  quantitatively the dynamical and entropic
              aspects of DNA  recognition by protein domains.  The initial phase of this
              research  will use NMR spectroscopy to characterize the conformational and 
              dynamical properties of the GCN4 bZip homodimer, in the presence  and absence
              of DNA.  In the bZip classes of transcriptional  activators, the basic domain
              recognition helices are stable only in  the presence of DNA.  Dynamical
              features of DNA-recognition are  hypothesized to include: (i) surface exposed,
              presumably mobile,  side chains in the free protein are buried in the major
              groove of  the DNA upon complexation, (ii) low energy deformation of the DNA 
              upon protein binding implies increased conformational flexibility  of the free
              DNA at the site of the deformation, (iii)  conformational changes in the
              backbone of the protein may be  necessary to accommodate the  -helix into the
              major groove of the  DNA, and (iv) ancillary amino acid residues that interact
              with the  minor groove or phosphate backbone may be disordered in the absence 
              of DNA and ordered in the complex.  The (nascent) structure and  conformational
              dynamics of the GCN4 bZip domain in the absence of  DNA will be characterized
              using J-coupling measurements and spin  relaxation techniques, including
              homonuclear NOESY and ROESY  experiments, and heteronuclear R1, R2, R1p, and
              NOE experiments.  In  the presence of DNA, spin relaxation experiments will be
              used to  obtain information on the dynamical properties of the complex that  is
              complementary to the existing crystallographic structural  results.  Comparison
              of the dynamical properties of the free energy  of DNA binding from
              configurational entropy of  individual amino  acid residues.  %%%  Proteins
              that bind to specific DNA sequences are critical for  regulation of gene
              expression.  Explication of the molecular basis  for sequence-specific
              recognition is crucial to a fundamental  understanding of cellular
              transformation.  In the past, the three-  dimensional structures of DNA-binding
              proteins in the absence and  presence of DNA have been studied to determine the
              interactions  between the protein and DNA that confer sequence specificity. 
              The  main hypothesis of the present research is that internal motions of  the
              proteins and DNA (i.e. time-dependent changes in the structures  of the
              molecules) also are important in modulating sequence-  specific recognition. 
              The hypothesis will be tested for the DNA-  binding domain of the protein GCN4,
              a member of class of proteins  called bZip transcriptional activators.  GCN4 is
              an ideal candidate  for testing the above hypothesis, because the portions of
              the  protein that recognize the DNA molecule are presumed to be  disordered
              (with large amplitude motions) in the absence of DNA and  rigid (with small
              amplitude motions) in the presence of DNA.   Nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy (NMR), which analyzes the  properties of atomic in very strong
              magnetic fields, will be used  characterize the dynamical properties of GCN4.  
               ***
