Title       : Multiple High-resolution Records of Geomagnetic Field Reversals from
               Plio-Pleistocene Sediments in Confidence Hills, Death Valley, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9419041

Award Number: 9419041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99441              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Kirschvink kirschvink@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kirschvink   9419041   Recent high-resolution studies of geomagnetic reversals
              have generated heated debate concerning whether or not their transitional
              Virtual Geomagnetic Pole positions (VGPs) fall along two preferred longitudinal
              bands, one centered over the Americas and an antipodal one over Australasia. 
              If these preferred bands are indeed real, it would suggest control of the
              transitional field geometry by geological structures at the core/mantle
              boundary.  However, alternative interpretations of these data include the
              suggestion that the banding is an artifact of the process through which the
              sediments acquire their remanent magnetization, and/or an artifact of the
              non-random distribution of sampling sites.  Resolution of these questions will
              require the detailed study of additional high-resolution records of geomagnetic
              reversals, particularly from sites located within the preferred longitudinal
              bands where data are scarce.  Work conducted previously on the Plio-Pleistocene
              lake sediments in the Confidence Hills of southern Death Valley, California,
              has provided multiple, high-resolution records of the top and bottom reversals
              of the Olduvai event.  In addition, tectonic deformation of the strata make it
              easy to distinguish the present field direction form the characteristic
              directions, and allow a classic paleomagnetic 'fold test' to be conducted on
              the transitional directions.  These results demonstrate that the two reversals
              are quite different -- the lower Olduvai is consistent with confinement of the
              intermediate VGP directions to the Australasian regions whereas VGPs from the
              upper Olduvai lie 90 degrees away from these bands.  The PI will extend this
              detailed study and comparison to reversals associated with the Reunion and
              Jaramillo subchrons.  This is the only way in which a sufficient quantity of
              fully reliable data can be acquired, and should provide a critical test of the
              longitudinal confinement hypothesis.  ****
