Title       : Support for the Collection of Genetic Resources, Louisiana State University
               Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9419909

Award Number: 9419909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Sheldon fsheld@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Hafner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Louisiana State University Museum of Natural Science (LSUMNS) Collection of
              Genetic Resources is probably the largest and most active collection of wild
              vertebrate frozen tissues in the world.  It contains nearly 40,000 specimens
              and over 100,000 samples of frozen tissues and extracts (e.g., DNA, proteins,
              and antisera).  In the last five years, the Collection has given more than
              2,000 samples of frozen tissues to researchers form 10 countries.  During the
              same period, more than 80 publications and theses relying on LSUMNS tissues and
              extracts have been produced.  In the years to come, demands for tissues and
              tissue extracts are expected to rise substantially as more and more researchers
              turn to comparative molecular methods and as the LSUMNS Collection grows and
              becomes better known as a repository and source of genetic materials. 
              Improvements in molecular technology and methodology will cause an increase in
              specimen requests form systematists and population geneticists (currently the
              Collection s main users), and will lead to greater interest in the Collection
              form nontraditi onal sources -- ecologists,  behaviorists, wildlife managers,
              epidemiologists, and other comparative molecular biologists.  Already, the
              Collection is feeling an impact particularly from bird ecologists and
              behaviorists  interested in an historical (phylogenetic) perspective from which
              to interpret their copious life-  history data.  The LSUMNS Collection must
              meet this expected increase in demand.  The Collection is  growing rapidly as a
              result of the Museum s aggressive program of collection and soliciting tissues 
              and tissue extracts.  This program is intended not only to increase holdings
              but also to salvage and  centralize tissues and genetic extracts that might
              otherwise be scattered and unavailable to the  research community.  This
              project will support repairing, replacing, and adding new ultracold freezers 
              and their alarms and backup systems.  It will also assist in storing and in
              preparing and mailing of  frozen specimens to researchers at other
              institutions.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
