Title       : The Role of Population Density and Resource Limitation in Predator/Prey-Mediated
               Life History Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9419823

Award Number: 9419823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Reznick gupy@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9419823  REZNICK   One example of a prediction from life history theory is
              that high adult mortality rates will select for individuals that mature and
              reproduce earlier in change will carry costs, such as reduced life span or
              reduced reproduction late in life.  This cost is offset by an increase in the
              probability of successful reproduction early in life, since the odds of living
              to an advanced age in the face of a high mortality rate are poor.  The theory
              of life history evolution thus also makes predictions about the evolution of
              aging and life span.   Because the properties and assumptions that underlie the
              theory are very general, the predictions are also general and will apply to a
              diversity of organisms, including humans.  They also provide important insight
              in areas such as fisheries management, since a consequence of such resource
              exploitation is an increase in mortality rates.  Such increases will inevitably
              select for undesirable features in exploited populations, such as earlier
              maturity at a smaller size.   Dr. Reznick has shown that fish from high
              predation localities have mortality rates that are twice as great.  They also
              mature at an earlier age, smaller size, and produce more offspring than those
              from low predation localities.  These results are all consistent with
              theoretical predictions.  Four experiments in progress are evaluating these
              traits by either adding predators to low predation sites or introducing prey
              from high predation sites to low predation sites that previously lacked them. 
              Progress to date indicates that these traits are as predicted.  When combined
              with other data, such as estimates of generation time and the heritability of
              these traits, it is also possible to evaluate the potential rate of change in
              nature.  It is clearly far greater than previously thought, in large part
              because such prior inferences were based primarily on the fossil record.
