Title       : Essential Features of the Peptidyl Transferase Center in theYeast Mitochondrial
               Ribosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9419340

Award Number: 9419340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Mason tmason@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mason  9419340  The forrnation of peptide bonds in the peptidyl transferase
              center  (PTC) of the large nbosomal subunit is the primary catalytic  activity
              of all ribosomes. An important objective in the field of  ribosome research is
              to understand the structure and catalytic  mechanism of the PTC. The sequence
              and structure of the large  subunit ribosomal RNA (LSU rRNA) in the PTC are
              very highly  conserved in nature, and there is abundant evidence supporting the
               possibility that rRNA acts as a ribozyme in catalyzing the PT  reaction.
              Current thinking favors a structural role for the  r proteins in maintaining
              the conformation of active sites in the  rRNA, although a catalytic role for r
              proteins has not been ruled  out completely. Using the yeast mitochondrial
              ribosome as an  experimental system, the current project has focused on the 
              molecular genetic analysis of mitochondrial homologues of four  bacterial PTC
              proteins (L2, L3, L16 and L27) and an rRNA ribose  methyltransferase (Pet56p)
              that catalyzes the formation of  2' O methylguanosine at a universally
              conserved G nucleotide in the  PTC of LSU rRNAs. The importance of modified
              nucleotides in rRNA is  suggested by models of the E. coli ribosome in which
              the majority  of the approximately 24 modified nucleotides are clustered around
               the mE~NA tRNA peptide complex in the functional center of the  ribosome.
              Three of the modifications in the 23S rRNA of E. coli are  ribose methylations
              at highly conserved nucleotides in the PTC of  domain V. The retention of three
              modified nucleotides in the  otherwise minimally modified mitochondrial LSU
              rRNA points to a  fundamental role for these particular modifications in
              ribosome  assembly or function or both. Indeed, pet56 mutants fail to  assemble
              54S ribosomal subunits. A largely molecular genetic  approach will be used to
              study the functional requirement for  Gm2251 in yeast mitochondrial ribosomes.
              A strategy based on  functional complementation of E. coli mutants by yeast
              PET56 will  be used to i dentify the gene for the bacterial homologue of
              Pet56p.  These studies will provide new information about the structure, 
              function and assembly ofthe principal catalytic center ofthe  ribosome.     %%%
                Linking amino acids through peptide bonds is the fundamental  reaction of
              biological protein synthesis. This reaction takes place  in the peptidyl
              transferase center (PTC) of the large ribosomal  subunit and is thought to
              occur by the same catalytic mechanism in  all cells. An important objective is
              to understand the respective  roles ofthe ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and ribosomal
              proteins in the  structure and catalytic activity of the PTC. Current thinking 
              favors a structural role for the ribosomal proteins in maintaining  the
              catalytic active sites in the rRNA, but there is only a  rudimentary
              understanding of the underlying molecular architecture.  There is a functional
              requirement for nucleotide modification in  the PTC. Recent results have shown
              that the addition of a methyl  (CH3) group to the sugar of a specific G
              nucleotide is an essential  step in the formation of the PTC in yeast
              mitochondrial ribosomes.  This G nucleotide is conserved in all ofthe known LSU
              rRNAs. The  well studied E. coli ribosome contains ca. 24 modified nucleotides,
               all clustered around the the functional center of the ribosome. In  contrast,
              the yeast mitochondrial ribosome has only three modified  nucleotides, each
              identical to one of the modifications in the PTC  of E. coli LSU rRNA. The
              presence of only three modified  nucleotides in a functional LSU rRNA
              underscores the potential  importance of these particular modifications. The
              major objective  of this research is to understand why the addition of a single
               methyl group is so crucial in a huge macromolecular complex  containing a
              >3,000 nucleotide long rRNA and approximately 40  ibosomal proteins. Overall,
              these studies will provide new  information about the principal catalytic
              center ofthe ribosome.  ***
