Title       : Optical Systems and Optoelectronic Packaging Based on Batch-Processed
               Microactuated Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1996 
File        : a9419112

Award Number: 9419112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam Yin Lau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9419112  Lau  A revolutionary, yet practical, approach to optoelectronic
              packaging which abandons traditional methods based upon permanent, precise
              placement of optical components inside the module will be investigated.  In the
              new approach, microactuators are included inside the adaptively-packaged module
              to provide for continuous optimization of the alignment of optical components. 
              The control signals fed back to the microactuators are derived from monitoring
              one or more key performance parameters of the system.  In addition to the
              obvious benefit of this design, this new approach actually reduces the
              manufacturing cost because it replaces the active monitoring/alignment
              procedure now performed on each module individually on the manufacturing floor
              (often manually), by batch-manufacturing procedures.  The precise alignment
              needed for high-performance modules will be accomplished automatically in the
              field under electronic servo control.    The work represents a joint effort
              between the optoelectronics group and the sensors and actuators group at the
              University of California at Berkeley.    The goals of this projects are: (1)
              development of silicon surface-micromachined technology for fabrication of
              alignment structures which possess the motion range, accuracy, and optical
              properties needed for adaptive optoelectronic packaging; (2) rigorous testing
              of these structures in regard to their optical properties, mechanical
              integrity, and environmental robustness; (3) demonstration of a simple
              optoelectronic module, specifically a pigtailed laser module, as a tool
              investigate issues related to adaptive packaging; (4) demonstration of
              high-performance, high-functionality optical subsystem, namely, a
              continuously-tunable narrow -linewidth external-cavity diode-laser, for
              investigation of the ultimate potential and limits of adaptive optoelectronic
              packaging.    Successful development of this technology will lead to a great
              reduction in production costs of sophisticated and high-functionality optoelect
              ronic components and subsystems, presently available only as high cost, and
              sometimes laboratory-bound, bench-top instruments.  This development is
              essential in order for optical and optoelectronic systems to make wide and
              lasting impact on the communication and computing infrastructures.  ***
