Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Area Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9419866

Award Number: 9419866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lukasz Lebioda lebioda@psc.psc.scarolina.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome D. Odom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Lovell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Bruce Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Financial support is requested for acquisition of an X-ray  area detector to
              be used with an existing rotating anode  generator Rigaku RU-200. Recent
              advances in image detection  technology have made area detector diffractometers
              the  instrument of choice for X-ray data collection for crystals  of
              macromolecules. Indeed, the proliferation of these  instruments is the major
              reason for the recently observed  rapid increase in the number of protein
              structures  published annually. There is no X-ray area detector in the  State
              of South Carolina.          Our present selection of the detector is R-AXIS II
              produced  by Rigaku and marketed by the Molecular Structure  Corporation. The
              resulting facility will be operated as  X-ray Diffraction Laboratory of
              Institute of Biological  Research and Technology at the University of South 
              Carolina. The facility will be used primarily for the  crystallographic
              structure determination of biological  macromolecules. Immediate applications
              include studies of a  series of enzymes: chloroperoxidase/dehalogenase, 
              formyltetrahydrofolate synthase, transcarboxylase, enolase, 
              glutaminase/asparaginase, prostatic acid phosphatase, and  thymidylate
              synthase. We will also study the  bioincorporation of tellurium into proteins
              in the form of  derivatized amino acids telluromethionine and 
              tellurotryptophane.    Recently, area detectors are frequently used also in
              "small  molecules" crystallography. With Mo K radiation, they  routinely
              provide data sets as good as conventional  diffractometers but in much shorter
              time. For large "small  molecules" such as metal cluster complexes with organic
               ligands, area detectors, even with Cu K radiation, offer  important
              advantages. We would like to use the area  detector to collect data for the
              structure analyses of  metal clusters with large unit cell dimensions and poor 
              stability in the X-ray beam.          The Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry offers  graduate course CHEM745 "Introductory Crystallography" 
              every second year.  In Spring 1993 the enrollment was 10  students. The area
              detector diffractometer will be used to  train students in state-of-the art
              data collection  techniques.
