Title       : Borane Initiators and Borane Containing Polyolefins; Synthesis and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9419305

Award Number: 9419305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tze Chiang Chung chung@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9419305  Chung  A broad range of functional polymers and graft copolymers,  with
              polypropylene (PP), ethylene-propylene copolymers, and  polyisobutylene
              backbones, have been synthesized by using a  borane approach.  Most of them
              would be very difficult to  obtain by other existing methods.  The key
              advantages of the  borane approach  are (a) the stability of borane groups to 
              transition metal catalysts, such as Ziegler-Natta and  metathesis catalysts,
              (b) the solubility of borane groups in  the hydrocarbon solvents used in the
              polymerization  reactions (both are essential to ensure the effective 
              incorporation of borane groups in polyolefins under  conventional reaction
              conditions) and (c) the versatility of  borane groups which can be transformed
              to a remarkable  variety of functionalities.  In addition, the borane groups 
              in polymer can be selectively auto-oxidized to polymeric  radicals, which are
              then used as a active sites for graft  polymerizations.  A broad range of
              polyolefin graft  copolymers, with polyolefin backbone and functional polymer 
              side chains, have thus been obtained.  The successful  results in the borane
              approach will now be used in four  related areas:  (1)  "living" radical
              polymerization using  oxidation adducts of borane moieties as the initiators;
              (2)  a synthetic route to prepare borane-group terminated  polyethylene (PE)
              and polypropylene by using Ziegler-Natta  catalysts and borane chain transfer
              agents; (3)  the  utilization of borane-terminated polyolefins to prepare 
              diblock copolymers that have a polyolefin block, such as PE  and PP, and a
              functional polymer block; (4)  the extension  of the functionalization
              chemistry to metallocene "single-  site" catalysts which will allow us to
              effectively  incorporate borane groups in polyethylene.  The resulting  linear
              low-density polyethylene with various functional  groups, such as -OH, -NH2 and
              halides, will be a both  scientifically interesting and potentially
              commercially  important material.  %%%  Overall, the goal  is not only to
              extend the borane approach  to broader polymer compositions and structures of 
              functionalized polyolefins, but also to widen the role of  borane reagents in
              polymer chemistry.  These uses of borane  reagents in polymers may provide us
              with new tools to  control polymerization processes and to obtain polymer 
              structures which can not be obtained by other existing  methods.
