Title       : Analysis of extragenic suppressors of the lemA/gacA global regulon in
               Pseudomonas syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9419023

Award Number: 9419023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D K. Willis dkwillis@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419023  Willis  During the previous period of NSF support, this laboratory
              genetically identified the Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae gacA gene as the
              cognate response regulator for the lemA environmental sensor. Within bean
              pathogenic P. syringae pv. syringae strains such as B728a, this regulatory pair
              controls lesion formation, and the production of the toxin syringomycin and the
              production of protease. Based on the PI's studies and the work of others, it is
              now apparent that the lemA/gacA regulatory pair are conserved within several
              species of Pseudomonas. Functional homologs have been identified within P.
              fluorescens, P. vindiflava, P. cichorii, and P. aeruginosa. The number of
              systems for which lemA/gacA regulatory system appears to be operative is
              increasing, indicative of a fundamental global regulatory network in these
              bacteria. Dr. Todd Kitten, during his research funded by the NSF Plant Biology
              Program, isolated a number of extragenic suppressors within NPS3136, a
              lemAI::Tn5 derivative of B728a. From a screen of 43,000 colonies of EMS
              mutagenized NPS3136, he identified 53 mutants that were restored for protease
              production. Dr. Kitten is currently analyzing cosmids carrying wild-type genes
              that restore either protease or syringomycin production to SUP27. The PI will
              continue his genetic study of lesion formation on bean in two ways. First, his
              laboratory will screen a genomic library of the suppressor mutant SUP27 for
              cosmid clones that restore lesion formation to NUVS1. Restoring clones will be
              analyzed for copy number or extragenic suppression. Second, it will continue
              its characterization of the lesion-defective mutant KW3815. This strain is
              defective in lesion formation but not protease or syringomycin production.
              KW3815 was isolated from a screen of over 6000 Tn5-generated mutants of B728a
              for loss of lesion formation on bean pods.  The PI has established that the Tn5
              insertion is causal to the lesion minus phenotype of KW3815 and has  isolated a
              restoring clone from a B728a gen omic library. The restoring gene will be
              sequenced and reporter fusions constructed to determine if the mutated gene in
              this strain is a member of the lemA/gacA regulon.  In his  continuing analysis
              of the lemA/gacA regulon, the PI will use reporter fusions to identify
              additional gacA-regulated genes.   His lab will introduce random Tn5-lacZ
              insertions into a B728a gacA mutant and screen for the production of 
              (-galactosidase on plates containing X-GAL. Blue and white colonies will be
              separated and subsequently transformed via plate mating with a cosmid clone
              containing the wild-type gacA gene. Those colonies that express (-galactosidase
              (turn blue) in the presence of a functional gacA gene will be assumed to
              contain an insert in a gene that is positively regulated by lemA/gacA. Those
              colonies that lose the ability to produce (-galactosidase will be assumed to
              contain an insertion within a down regulated gene. All gacA regulated insertion
              mutants will be screened for loss of protease or syringomycin production and a
              reduction in lesion forming ability on bean.  Using a DNA fragment containing
              the promoter region of the lemA-regulated gene tblA as a probe, Southwestern
              analysis revealed a DNA, binding protein that is regulated by the lemA and gacA
              genes. As part of this project, the PI will isolate the DNA binding protein
              using biotin labeled probe DNA and streptavidin linked to paramagnetic beads.
              Antiserum will be prepared to the purified protein and will be used to identify
              the gene encoding the DNA binding protein from a (gt11 expression library.  %%%
               This research helps to explain how a bacterium that causes disease in plants
              responds to signals produced by the plant.  Understanding this process could
              help prevent diseases in plants.  ***
