Title       : Kinin Peptide Receptors that Influence Mosquito Diuresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9419990

Award Number: 9419990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia V. Pietrantonio   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Hayes  (Principal Investigator former)
              James Y. Bradfield  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419990  Hayes      This project is basic biological research has practical
              implications for improving the human condition.  The cells that compose an
              animal must communicate with each other to coordinate their actions to make the
              individual functional as an organism.  There is a fundamental molecular
              language that exists for cells to "talk" with one another.  The "words and
              sentences" of that language are different molecules and one of the most often
              used types of molecules are the peptides.  These are small fragments of
              molecules called proteins that are the direct products of gene expression.  The
              "ears" that cells have to hear the molecular language are called receptors. 
              Rather than using human or vertebrate subjects as a model for our research, Dr.
              Hayes has turned to a pest that plagues humans from their beginning, the
              mosquito.  The female mosquito must consume two-and-a-half times her body
              weight in blood to have the protein to make eggs.  During this feeding, she
              must rapidly eliminate the massive weight of the excess salt and water not
              needed for making eggs.  The brain, the nervous system, the "crop", the
              "stomach", the "kidneys", the "intestines", and the rectum must "talk" and
              coordinate to keep the animal alive and deal with this challenge.  Some of the
              molecular messenger peptides that are used allow the cells of these tissues to
              "talk" with one another.  Analogs of these peptides will be used to understand
              the parts and shapes of the molecules that carry these messages.  This
              understanding will be used to design and make molecular tools to specifically
              tag the receptors.  The molecular tools, called photoaffinity labels, will also
              be used to isolate genes that code for the receptor proteins for structure
              determination.  Knowing the important structures for the "message" (i.e. the
              peptide) and the "ears" (i.e. the receptor) are critical to break the general
              code for communication between cells.  Understanding the general aspects of the
              language is already providing a foundation f or the design of human and
              veterinary pharmaceuticals, plus future, effective, environmentally safe
              pesticides that do not harm human beings.  ***
