Title       : Ultraviolet Radiation Induced DNA Damage in Bacterioplankton in the Southern
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9419037

Award Number: 9419037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wade H. Jeffrey wjeffrey@uwf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of West Florida
	      Alternate 90
	      Pensacola, FL  32514    904/474-2000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1318,9169,9177,9178,OSIE,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9419037     Jeffrey  There is now strong evidence that ultraviolet radiation is 
              increasing over certain locations on the Earth's surface.  Of  primary concern
              has been the annual pattern of ozone depletion  over Antarctica and the
              Southern Ocean where ozone levels have  declined as much as 74% compared to
              pre-ozone hole events.   Reduction of ozone concentration in the stratosphere
              has been  shown to result in an increase levels of ultraviolet radiation.   The
              impact of increased ultraviolet radiation due to ozone  depletion upon
              phytoplankton and primary production has received  extensive interest, while
              the effects on bacteria have been  largely overlooked.  It is apparent from
              previous studies in both  the Southern Ocean and elsewhere that bacteria play a
              vital role  in mineralization of nutrients and provide a trophic link to 
              higher organisms.  The objectives of this study are identify DNA  damage in
              bacterioplankton resulting from ultraviolet radiation  and as a function of
              ozone depletion, relate the intensity of the  induction of DNA repair genes
              (recA) to the extent of damage, and  estimate the effect of the stress on
              carbon fluxes through  bacterial assemblages.  Sensitive new advances in
              molecular  biology to identify photoproducts and examine the induction of 
              cellular DNA repair mechanisms will be coupled with traditional  approaches for
              measuring bacterial biomass and production.   Pyrimidine-pyrimidone (6-4)
              photoproducts and cyclobutane dimers  are the unique photoproducts created by
              ultraviolet radiation.   These DNA lesions may be identified using
              radioimmunoassays.  The  recA gene is wide spread and highly conserved among
              bacteria.   Because of the pivotal role of this gene in repairing damaged  DNA,
              its concentration and activity will be used as a direct  assay of the bacterial
              response to DNA damage.  With measurements  of bacterial biomass, production
              and growth efficiency, subtle  effects on bacterial carbon fluxes will be
              estimated.  The  results will provide information  on the amount of UV induced 
              molecular damage and repair mechanisms in planktonic populations.   Both
              ultraviolet-A radiation and ultraviolet-B radiation create  cellular damage,
              while only ultraviolet-B radiation is enhanced  as a result of ozone depletion.
               Through simultaneous analysis of  DNA damage and the induction of the recA
              gene as a general  response to damage, the effect of ultraviolet-B radiation
              will be  contrasted with other mechanisms of DNA damage.  Additional 
              information will be provided on the effects on total production  and further
              elucidate the interactions of bacteria and  phytoplankton production in the
              Southern Ocean.
