Title       : A Novel Signal Peptide-Based Protein Translocation System in the Thylakoids of
               Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9419287

Award Number: 9419287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Cline kcline@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419287  Cline    "Signal peptide" targeting sequences mediate protein 
              translocation across several evolutionarily related  membranes, ranging from
              the endoplasmic reticulum of  eukaryotes to the cell membrane of bacteria. This
              proposal  is concerned with the characterization of the  novel protein 
              transport machinery found in chloroplast thylakoids which is  unique in that
              translocation is driven only by a pH  gradient. Because proteins targeted to
              the thylakoid lumen  are synthesized outside the chloroplast in the cytosol, 
              there are two membrane systems which much be passed, the  outer double membrane
              system and the the thylakoid membrane  itself.  The signal which targets the
              proteins past the  outer double membrane system is cleaved from the protein, 
              revealing the second part of the signal peptide which then  interacts with the
              thylakoid protein transport machinery, or  translocase.  The objectives of the
              proposal are to purify the  translocase,  identify the pore complex associated
              with the  translocase, assess  the use of this pore by proteins which  can use
              other translocases not driven solely by a pH  gradient and vice versa, 
              determine the location of the  machinery on the thylakoid membrane system, and
              explore the  possibility that such translocases might occur in E. coli.  %%% 
              Contemporary signal peptide-based transport systems have  evolved from an
              archetypal mechanism.  Yet each system has  unique methods for targeting,
              initial insertion, and chain  translocation, which are reflected by specific
              components  and translocation requirements.  In this context, it is  expected
              that one thylakoid system, with its singular  dependence on a pH gradient, has
              evolved a simpler, possibly  more efficient mechanism for translocation. 
              Results of this  study should provide insight into the mechanism of pH 
              gradient-driven translocation mechanisms.  It will also  provide tools to
              explore the relationship between envelope  and thylakoids during the early
              developmental stages of  thylakoid forma tion.  The work proposed will have
              impact on  our knowledge of the mechnanism and evolution of protein 
              translocation across membranes in general.  ***
