Title       : RUI: Gill Na+/H+ Exchange in Marine Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9419849

Award Number: 9419849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Claiborne jb@gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9419849  Claiborne      The long range goal of this project is to understand how
              marine fish are able to use their gills to accomplish many of the same tasks
              that are performed by the kidneys in mammals.  The fish gill is a multi-purpose
              organ.  Analogous to the lungs in land-dwelling animals, the gills allow the
              fish to breath oxygen and excrete carbon dioxide.  Further, the gills perform
              functions of the liver and kidneys as they eliminate toxic metabolic waste
              products like ammonia and acid.  Also analogous to the kidneys, the gills
              assist the fish by regulating the levels of salts within the blood of the
              animal.  Little is known about the actual cellular mechanisms which take place
              within the gill tissue.  Dr. Claiborne has hypothesized that some saltwater
              fish may take in salt (sodium) from the surrounding water to excrete excess
              acid from within the body.  The species which have this ability may then be
              able to live in a wider range of salt water environments, from the open ocean,
              to dilute estuaries.  This proposal will study these gill mechanisms in two
              different species of marine fish, the sculpin, and the toadfish.  His
              preliminary findings suggest that the sculpin may not be able to excrete
              sufficient acid when external salt levels are too low.  In contrast, the
              toadfish can regulate acid levels in a wide range of saltwater concentrations. 
              Thus, by comparing the acid excretion mechanisms in these two species, it will
              be shown whether the gills play a role in determining the environmental
              salinity range in which a fish species can live.  Further, since these cellular
              mechanisms within the gills are very similar to those currently being studied
              in the mammalian kidney, new insights into the physiology of the kidney and
              other organs may also be elucidated.  ***
