Title       : Neuroendocrine Regulation of Crustacean Molting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9419916

Award Number: 9419916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Douglas Watson rdwatson@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419916  Watson    The primary objective of the proposed research is to define
              the action of molt-inhibiting hormone (MIH) in the regulation of crustacean
              growth and development.  The crustacean carapace (exoskeleton) is restrictive
              to growth. Therefore, as crustaceans develop, they must periodically shed
              (molt) the old carapace and replace it with a new and larger version.  The
              processes of growth and molting are driven by steroid hormones (ecdysteroids)
              secreted by paired endocrine glands, the Y-organs.  The secretion of
              ecdysteroids by Y-organs is regulated by a neuropeptide hormone, MIH.  MIH is
              produced by a cluster of neurosecretory cells (the X-organ) located in neural
              ganglia of the eyestalks. Thus, a generally accepted model suggests MIH
              inhibits Y-organs during much of development, and a molting sequence ensues
              when MIH secretion declines. Despite the central importance of MIH in
              regulating crustacean development, little is known about its structure and
              function.  In particular, there is a glaring lack of information about MIH gene
              expression and secretory cycles.  Our lab has recently cloned a cDNA encoding
              MIH from the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus. Using the cloned cDNA as probe,
              recombinant DNA technology (e.g., Northern blot, nuclear runoff assay, in situ
              hybridization) will be employed (1) to quantify MIH mRNA levels during the blue
              crab molt cycle, and (2) to determine the tissues and cells that express the
              MIH gene.  In addition, recombinant MIH will be produced by inserting the
              cloned cDNA into a baculovirus expression vector. Monoclonal antibodies will be
              generated against the recombinant peptide and used to develop an enzyme-linked
              immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for quantification of MIH in crab hemolymph
              (blood).  The proposed research addresses fundamental questions about the
              neuroendocrine regulation of development in this abundant and economically
              important group of organisms.  The results will be a starting point for
              designing methods to specifically manipulate growth and  molting in
              crustaceans, a potential benefit to fisheries management, aquaculture, and
              consumers of shellfish.  ***
