Title       : National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9419534

Award Number: 9419534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kichoon Yang                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gang Tian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Professor Gang Tian of the Courant Institute of Mathematical  Sciences of
              New York University, is the the 1994 and 19th  recipient of the National
              Science Foundation's annual Alan T.  Waterman Award. The award is presented to
              a promising scientist,  no more than 35 years of age, who is judged by a
              selection  committee, the Director of the Foundation and the National  Science
              Board, to be in the forefront of his/her field. The award  which has been given
              annually since 1976, is in commemoration of  the Foundation's first director,
              Dr. Alan T. Waterman. Professor  Tian's research area is complex differential
              geometry and the  analysis of partial differential equations. Much of the deep
              and  technically intricate work he has pursued has been motivated by  several
              fundamental problems in mathematical physics related to  Einstein's field
              equations and string theory. His accomplishments  include the solution of the
              existence of Kaehler-Einstein metrics  on complex surfaces, the proof that the
              moduli space of Kaehler-  Einstein metrics with zero first Chern class is
              nonsingular, the  proof of the stability of algebraic manifolds by using
              Kahler-  Einstein metrics and the systematic study, with S.T. Yau, of 
              Kaehler-Einstein metrics on the complements of divisors  satisfying certain
              positivity conditions. More recently, his work  on quantum cohomology and the
              `mirror symmetry' problem, is  considered by physicists to be of fundamental
              importance in the  advancement of string theory as a potential candidate for a 
              unified theory of matter and of the universe.       The award greatly
              encourages and brings much inspiration to  such a developing scientist and to
              his peers. Professor Tian is  poised to make further breakthroughs in his field
              and thus  advancing mathematical and scientific knowledge generally.  Already
              his contributions to mathematical physics are very  substantial relative to the
              mission of interdisciplinary research  as endorsed by the Foundation. Professor
              Tian will also be  working w ith postdoctoral assistants and graduate students
              and in  turn will be assisting in the development of the careers of his  junior
              colleagues. Professor Tian's career as a research  mathematician befits his
              recognition as a major contributor to  the scientific infrastructure and
              cultural advancement of the  United States.
