Title       : The Function of Intermediary Cells in Leaves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9419703

Award Number: 9419703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Turgeon ert2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mandayam V. Parthasarathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      9419703  Turgeon  Phloem loading is the transport process in which 
              carbohydrate, synthesized by mesophyll cells, is transferred  to the vascular
              tissue (phloem) of leaves in preparation for  long-distance translocation to
              other organs.  A new model of  phloem loading has been put forward by Dr.
              Turgeion for  those species that translocate stachyose in addition to  sucrose.
               Possibly one-third of all dicotyledonous species  are in this group. 
              According to this model, sucrose  diffuses from the mesophyll cells into a
              specialized type of  companion cell (the intermediary cell) in the minor veins 
              and is converted there into stachyose.  Diffusion occurs  through numerous
              branched plasmodesmata linking bundle  sheath cells to intermediary cells.  The
              stachyose  accumulates in the intermediary cells and sieve elements  because it
              is too large to diffuse back into the mesophyll.    This award supports
              experimental studies into the dynamics  of intermediary cell phlasmodesmata
              ultrastructure.  These  plasmodesmata are especially narrow on the intermediary
              cell  side and this constriction is the possible site of  discrimination
              between transport of sucrose in one direction  and stachyose in the other. 
              Cryofixation will be used to  preserve plasmodesmata structure, which will be
              studied in  mature leaves before and after a reduction in carbohydrate 
              content.  Confocal microscope investigations with membrane-  specific dyes will
              determine whether the small vacuoles in  intermediary cells, which may be
              involved in transport of  sugar through the cell, originate from the vacuolar
              system  or the endoplasmic reticulum.  These studies will  concentrate on
              Cucumis melo and Cucurbita pepo but other  stachyose-translocation species may
              also be employed.
