Title       : Phenolic/Receptor Interactions in Agrobacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9419252

Award Number: 9419252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Lynn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1167,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-94-19252  Abstract    This is a proposal to examine the signal recognition
              steps  in the expression of the virulence (vir) genes necessary for  the
              transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens into  susceptible, wounded plant
              cells.  The vir gene system is  encoded on the Ti plasmid and is in part
              comprised of  the  genes for the transmitter/receiver complex (virA and vir G).
               The ability of the vir A/vir G system to respond to a broad  range of
              compounds, and yet provide sufficient interaction  enrgy to transmit
              information, might be achieved by the  catalysis of the transfer of a phenolic
              proton to the  receptor, thereby activating the signal transduction  cascade. 
              This model makes several mechanistic predictions  which have already given rise
              to the synthesis of the first  known inhibitors of vir expression.  The
              previous studies  have been in vivo; in this study  in vitro testing of these 
              predictions is accomplished by examination of  the  autophosphorylation of VirA
              in a reconstituted system.  Methods for the synthesis of the required inducer
              analogs  and molecular genetic manipulation of VirA are in place.  Affintiy
              labeling reagents based on the inhibitors have  implicated two phenol-binding
              proteins, p10 and P21, as  likely candidates for the phenol receptors.  These,
              as well  as the other proteins identified in screens for the  requisite
              chemical reactivity, will be purified, sequenced  and the sequence used to
              isolate the respective genes to  test their relevance in vir expression.  %%% 
              The ability to obtain transgenic plants for basic research  and for
              biotechnological enhancement of our nation's food  supply has in large part
              been made possible through plant  infection with  transformed Agrobacterium
              tumifaciens, a  bacterium which causes Crown Gall disease in nature.  The 
              mechanism of DNA transfer and how the bacterium can "sense"  an appropriate
              site for transfer is unknown.   This proposal  deals with the latter point and
              will isolate and  characterize the proteins which  perceive the appropriate 
              "signalling" cues provided by the plant.  These cues are  plant phenolics
              which, in most instances, serve as  antibiotics.    A. tumifaciens  is
              sensitive to these  phenols and "hones in" on them, perceiving them through an 
              interesting signalling mechanism which may provide a model  for plant
              recognition of hormones or bacterial recognition  of small molecules. The work
              characterizes the phenol  binding proteins and the proteins involved in
              relaying  binding information to the cell.  To do that,  in vitro 
              reconstitution of part of the signalling pathway will be  done using purified
              "stabilized" proteins involved in this  signaling cascade.  The proteins are
              stabilized by  synthesizing an active, but truncated version of the protein 
              through genetic engineering.  The outcome of the experiments  will be to shed
              light on this biotechnologically important,  yet fundamental signalling event. 
              ***
