Title       : Polymorphism of Major Histocompatibility Complex Genes in Red-winged Blackbirds:
               Behavioral and Parasitological Correlates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9419738

Award Number: 9419738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott V. Edwards sedwards@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1228,9135,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9419738  EDWARDS   Over the past three decades biologists have discovered a
              wealth of genetic variability in natural populations of organisms. Despite this
              abundant variability, much of it can be accounted for by two forces: mutation,
              which creates new variation, and genetic drift, which eliminates variability.
              At a few extraordinary genes at which a superabundance of variability has been
              found it been necessary to invoke Darwinian natural selection as an important
              evolutionary force. One such group of genes, the major histocompatibility
              complex (MHC), is known only in vertebrates and is involved in defense against
              invading pathogens and parasites. Although it is clear that some sort of
              diversity-enhancing selection is operating--perhaps driven by the constant
              evasion of the immune system by parasites--the precise nature and mechanisms of
              selection acting in natural populations are largely unknown. This study
              proposes to obtain a detailed view of mechanism maintaining variability at MHC
              genes in a common, well-studied North American songbird, the Red-winged
              Blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus). Red-winged Blackbirds are particularly useful
              for this type of study because, unlike many other birds, several populations
              have been monitored behaviorally and genetically for a number of years.
              Determining the pattern of allelic variability in birds with known reproductive
              and parasite profiles will show the mechanisms underlying the exceptionally
              large amount of variability occurring at this gene.  This study will be the
              first detailed survey of variability at an MHC gene in birds. Although much is
              known about the extent of MHC variability in rodents, primates and other
              mammals, even much of this work was conducted without the advantage of recent
              molecular techniques that will permit variability to be quantified at the
              nucleotide level. Moreover, there have been only a few studies that have
              attempted to link MHC variability with life-history or reproductive parameters
              in natural populations, and these on ly in mice and humans. This study will
              therefore provide a critical test of the wealth of hypotheses for MHC evolution
              in mammals, and will extend studies of detailed mechanisms of MHC evolution to
              a new vertebrate class.
