Title       : Detrital Record of the Eastern Himalaya, Assam and Bengal Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9419086

Award Number: 9419086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil S. Lundberg lundberg@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Naeser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419086  Lundberg     Recent work on the Himalaya suggest that significant
              crustal shortening, metamorphism, uplift and erosion began well before the
              mid-Miocene and younger record that has been well documented in the Siwaliks
              and distal Bengal fan.  This project proposes to investigate the
              poorly-constrained initiation and ensuing history of orogenesis and tectonic
              sedimentation in the eastern Himalaya, by analyzing detrital geochronology and
              mineralogy of late Eocene through Recent strata exposed and drilled in Assam
              and the Bengal basin.  These strata represent a missing link in an active
              clastic wedge that has  been used to exemplify orogenic sedimentation and to
              inspire collisional models, yet they remain virtually unexploited for
              stratigraphic information on mountain-building and erosional processes.   The
              objectives of this research include (1) determining the onset of rapid
              unroofing and evaluating temporal/and or regional patterns in rapid unroofing
              in the eastern Himalayas, (2) distinguishing sediment input from 3 major river
              systems that join in the Bengal basin, and (3) evaluating changes in sediment
              source terranes in the major drainages through time.  Cooling ages of detrital
              grains will be constrained by fission-track analysis of zircon, complemented by
              40AR/39Ar dating of potassium feldspar from selected horizons in pre-18 Ma
              strata.  Detrital composition will be analyzed by determining sand (stone)
              modes, especially focusing on lithic fragments, and heavy-mineral populations,
              complemented by microprobe analyses of tourmalines, garnets, and amphiboles. 
              Sediment input from the major river systems will be documented using an
              actualistic approach, beginning with modern sands from the Ganges, Brahmaputra,
              and Meghna (and related) rivers, and working back through Cenozoic sequences to
              assess changes in source rocks since inception of the Himalaya.   The
              significance of this project lies in the largely unexploited stratigraphic
              record accessible onland in the eastern Himalayan foredee p, which provides the
              opportunity to reconstruct orogenesis and surface processes that pre-data
              strata studied from the Siwaliks and the distal Bengal fan, as well as to
              evaluate along-strike and downstream changes in sediment composition in the
              Neogene part of this immense clastic wedge.  The ultimate objective of this
              project is to improve understanding of tectonic and surface processes in a
              well-constrained modern continental collision.  The proposed geochronologic and
              compositional analyses, complemented by improved stratigraphic control and
              related ongoing studies, will extend existing data sets through the entire
              development of the Himalaya, providing ground truth necessary for evaluating
              models of collisional processes.
