Title       : Land-Atmosphere Interactions: A Core Program in Support of Community Climate
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1996  
File        : a9419715

Award Number: 9419715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $581000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Dickinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rong Fu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xubin Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Qingqiu Shao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea N. Hahmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Vogelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9419715  Dickinson, Robert E.  University of Arizona  Title:
              Land-Atmosphere Interactions - A Core Program in Support of Community  Climate
              Modeling    This project focuses on understanding and parameterizing the
              interactions between  land and the atmosphere in the context of global change
              models.  Its objectives  are: to establish, through data analyses, numerical
              process studies and model  stimulations, the function of the most important
              atmospheric processes, from the  viewpoint of coupling to land-surface
              processes; and on the basis of these  studies, to develop new or improved
              parameterizations for GCMs, implement and  test these parameterizations in NCAR
              community climate system models, and provide  successful parameterizations to
              the NCAR climate modeling community.    This proposal brings together and
              supports a strong research team with a wide  variety of background and
              experience, each with important individual skills.  The  proposed work will:
              expand the basic understanding of the processes responsible  for
              land-atmosphere coupling; determine how these operate in NCAR community 
              models; determine how these processes differ, if they do, from those in other 
              climate models of comparable merit; determine how these observations,
              sensitivity  studies, and model intercomparisons are necessary to clarify the
              relative  correctness of differing parameterizations; and develop indicated new
              treatments  that are suitable, in the context of GCM's, for future improvements
              and upgrades  by the scientific community.    Individual subprojects designed
              to pursue these objectives include: studies of  interactions between the land
              surface and clouds in the planetary boundary (PBL);  characterization of cloud
              radiative fluxes and their coupling to the land  surface; parameterization of
              the effects of mesoscale circulations in a GCM,  including moist processes,
              clouds and precipitation; observation characterization  of relationships
              between cloud properties, atmospheric thermodynamics propert ies,  and land
              cover; observational search for effects of Amazon deforestation on cloud 
              processes; further exploration of climate effects of Amazon deforestation to 
              better understand land-surface interactions; and paleoclimatic linkages.   
              These studies will use satellite, radiosonde, and surface data for their 
              observational analyses.  Satellite data analyses will emphasize the use of a 
              local archive of high-resolution (30 km) ISCCP data.  They will also use 
              integrations of mesoscale and global climate models, with an  emphasis for the 
              latter on NCAR community models.  Theoretical and parameterizations analyses
              will  use mesoscale model integration and various 1-D convection
              parameterizations.    The proposed work will contribute substantially to great
              understanding of and  confidence in the use of NCAR climate system models for
              projections of future  climate.  This will be done by promoting major advances
              in what is arguably now  one of the weakest aspects of model performance from
              the viewpoint of scientific  understanding and practical aspects of climate
              simulation.  The performance of  the proposed research will provide training
              and education on these questions for  a generation of graduate students and
              post-doctoral trainees.    This award is under the USGCRP, Climate Modeling,
              Analysis and Prediction (CMAP)  project.
