Title       : Development of High Resolution X-ray Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1995      
File        : a9419574

Award Number: 9419574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janos Kirz KIRZ@SBHEP.physics.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris J. Jacobsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Development of High Resolution X-ray Microscopy    A scanning soft x-ray
              microscope has been built and put into operation  at the National Synchrotron
              Light Source at Brookhaven National  Laboratory. The instrument makes use of
              the bright, tuneable undulator  source at the XlA beamline. It uses zone plates
              to form a 55 nm beam  spot, and is well suited to the study of wet, unstained
              specimens.    New imaging modes will be developed further to map particular
              chemical  states using the resonances present near elemental absorption edges 
              (XANES), and to use the detection of visible light excited in  luminescent tags
              for immunolabelling.    The instrument will be modified to accept frozen
              hydrated specimens.  This will minimize specimen damage due to radiolytical
              etching; such a  step is necessary to reach higher resolution in wet biological
               specimens, and for studies where multiple images of hydrated specimens  are
              required, such as in tomography and chemical mapping. Whereas  electron
              microscopes can view thin cryosections at high resolution, our  instrument will
              be better suited to examining thick (1-10 ,m water  layer) whole specimens,
              without the need for sectioning.    The instrumental resolution will be
              improved to the 20-30 nm level  using higher resolution zone plates. With the
              planned brightness  upgrade of the Light Source, the microscope will remain the
              premier  instrument of its type through the proposed grant period.    These
              instrumentation developments will be undertaken to aid research  involving the
              following systems: chromosomes and chromosome folding,  malarial erythrocytes,
              the distribution of protein and DNA in sperms,  and spine formation in sea
              urchin embryo differentiation. These  collaborative biological investigations
              will be continued and expanded,  especially by the addition of a postdoc with
              biological rather than  x-ray physics background. The team also welcomes
              inquiries by  investigators interested in using the instrument to solve
              additional  biological problems mat ched to its unique capabilities.
