Title       : Biochemical Characterization of Bacteriophage Lambda Terminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9419087

Award Number: 9419087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Catalano carlos.catalano@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419087  Catalano  The objective of this research is to examine, at the
              molecular  level, the mechanism of assembly of viral precursors into an 
              infectious virus particle. One of the final steps in viral  assembly is the
              packaging of the viral genome into a protective  protein coat known as the
              capsid, or head. Similar mechanisms for  DNA packaging have been proposed for
              all of the doublestranded  DNA bacteriophages and likely apply to mammalian
              viruses such as  adenovirus and herpesvirus. Terminases are enzymes common to
              all  of these viruses and are responsible for packaging of a single  genome
              from a concatameric precursor. Bacteriophage lambda has  been extensively
              studied over the years and represents an ideal  system in which to study viral
              DNA packaging.  Phage lambda  terminase possesses site-specific endonuclease
              and ATPase  catalytic activities which work in concert to effect DNA 
              packaging. The P.I. has previously characterized the endonuclease  and ATPase
              activities of this enzyme utilizing well defined  biochemical assay systems.
              These experiments were performed in  the absence of viral proheads, however,
              and thus examined the  initiation of the packaging process. The experiments
              described  here extend this work and focus on the termination of packaging . 
              Physical and kinetic techniques are utilized in order to dissect  the role of
              protein and DNA in the termination process. The  energetics of the packaging
              process are addressed with the use of  high-energy ATP analogs.  Phage lambda
              terminase binds both ATP and DNA as substrates  utilized in the packaging
              reaction. Photo-affinity labeling  experiments are designed to locate the
              nucleotide binding sites  within the primary sequence of the protein. Amino
              acids critical  to binding and/or catalysis by the enzyme are also examined by 
              proteolytic digestion of the modified protein and peptide mapping  techniques.
              Finally, experiments which will ultimately lead to a  crystal structure for the
              small subunit of this DNA packaging  enzyme  are described. The terminase
              enzyme from bacteriophage  lambda bears functional similarities to terminases
              from all of  the double-stranded DNA viruses and, while the mechanistic 
              details differ, the data derived from these experiments may be  used to model
              DNA packaging by all of these viruses. An  understanding of how the multiple
              catalytic activities work in  concert to effect viral assembly may yield
              insight into the  general mechanisms of DNA manipulation by multifunction, 
              multiprotein enzyme complexes. The information derived from these  experiments
              thus extends beyond a study of viral assembly and may  yield insight into the
              basic properties of multiprotein enzyme  complexes.  %%%  This laboratory is
              interested in how a virus is assembled from  protein and DNA precursors
              synthesized within the infected cell.  The research centers on bacteriophage
              lambda,a DNA virus that  infects E. coli. This virus utilizes an enzyme known
              as terminase  to package its chromosome into a protective protein coat known as
               the pre-capsid, or prohead. This enzyme, along with other  proteins of both
              viral and host origin, assemble onto viral DNA  and use the energy derived from
              ATP hydrolysis to "stuff" the  chromosome into the confined space found within
              the capsid. This  laboratory is investigating the biochemical and biophysical 
              properties of phage lambda terminase as a model for DNA packaging  by several
              bacterial viruses as well as mammalian viruses such as  herpesvirus. They are
              interested in the role of each of the  proteins required to package viral DNA
              and how these proteins  come together to accurately and efficiently assemble an
               infectious virus.  ***
