Title       : Behavior of Large Random Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1997   
File        : a9419362

Award Number: 9419362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua M. Deutsch josh@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9183,9218,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419362  Deutsch    Research is proposed in three areas of theoretical
              statistical physics. (1)  Studies of nonequilibrium processes which possess
              large fluctuations.  The  objective is to better understand the structures
              which arise in fully developed  turbulence by using a simulation technique that
              selects large, but unlikely  fluctuations.  The results should provide an
              improved understanding of  turbulent intermittency.  (2) Structural prediction
              for macromolecules.  Prediction of structure and morphology is important in the
              understanding of  materials and biomaterials, but requires knowing the forces
              between the  individual building blocks of the systems.  The large experimental
              data base on  protein structure will be used to systematically determine the
              force field that  acts between different atoms or constituent submolecules. 
              The results will be  important in determining structures of macromolecules. 
              (3) Quantum simulations  using statistical methods.  A large class of problems
              is difficult to simulate  due to sign changes during averaging processes.  This
              class of problems is of  fundamental and current interest.  A method will be
              studied which greatly  speeds up this averaging process by replacing the sudden
              change in sign by a  continuously varying phase.  The consideration of the
              statistics of these  phases leads to improved methods for doing these averages.
               %%%  Theoretical research involving advanced computational techniques will be
              done  on a variety of problems dealing with very large random systems.  One
              problem  will develop new methods to better determine the structure of
              biologically  important macromolecules.  Another project will deal with new
              algorithms to  surmount a fundamental problem involving calculations of
              physical systems of  interacting electrons.  The solution of this problem can
              have a profound impact  on calculations for high temperature superconductors. 
              Finally, calculations  will be made on the effect of rare fluctuations on the
              development of  turbulence  in fluids.  Turbulence is an extremely difficult
              problem to  understand and it affects a wide variety of everyday happenings. 
              ***
