Title       : Evolution, Coevolution and Predator-Prey Dynamics: An Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9419660

Award Number: 9419660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon P. Lawler SLAWLER@UKCC.UKY.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419660  Lawler   Evolutionary theory predicts that predators can cause
              evolutionary change in their prey and that predators may evolve in response to
              their prey. Such changes are thought to affect the population dynamics of both
              predators and prey. However, this important realm of evolutionary theory is
              practically untested because prolonged studies are required to observe
              evolution and population dynamics in most animals. This problem can be overcome
              by studying evolution in micro-organisms, which can evolve rapidly because
              their generation times are only 4-48 hours. It is crucial to discover whether
              evolution can alter population dynamics, to determine whether evolutionary
              processes need to be incorporated into population biology theory. Such
              knowledge may increase the ability of scientists to predict changes in
              population sizes.    In this project, protozoan predators and their prey will
              be grown in replicated laboratory  microcosms, where their population dynamics
              and other characteristics can be measured with comparative ease. The project
              consists of four sets of experiments, each on a different predator-prey pair.
              Prey will be grown for over 100 generations, in microcosms alone and with
              predators. A wide variety of predator and prey characters will be measured
              regularly during this time to quantify evolutionary changes. Population sizes
              will also be monitored. Subsequent experiments will measure the effect of
              evolution on predator-prey population dynamics. In these, predators from the
              first experiment will be grown with either of two types of prey: prey that have
              not coexisted with the predator for hundreds of generations, or prey that have.
              Differences in the population dynamics of the predator when grown on the two
              prey types will provide evidence that evolution affects population dynamics.   
              This research will clarify whether population biologists need to consider
              evolutionary processes when constructing predictive models of population
              dynamics, and may establish whether coevolution o ccurs in predator-prey pairs.
              The theory that this research will test is potentially important to some
              problems in applied ecology. For example, it is important to know whether pest
              species can rapidly evolve resistance to predators introduced for biological
              control.
