Title       : Dissection of Promoter Induction by a Host-Specific Isoflavanoid in a
               Plant-Pathogenic Fungus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1996  
File        : a9419266

Award Number: 9419266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Straney ds106@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419266  Straney  Fungi which enter pathogenic or symbiotic interactions with
              plants have developed traits which allow entry and avoidance of the plant's
              defenses. In addition to these traits, fungi likely developed regulatory
              pathways which allow these traits to be expressed at the appropriate time and
              level, as well as on the correct host. An appropriate signal compound for such
              gene expression is one which is derived from the plant host. Much excitement
              has arisen from the observation that several fungal genes are specifically
              induced during interaction with the host plant. These present systems for
              studying the signal exchange controlling these unique regulatory responses in
              fungi. The PDAl gene of Nectria haematococca (anamorph Fusarium solani) offers
              an excellent model for a plant-induced gene in a phytopathogenic fungus. The
              expression of this gene is specifically induced by pisatin, the isoflavanoid
              phytoalexin of its host plant. The PDA 1 gene product, pisatin demethylase,
              detoxifies this antimicrobial compound. Gene transfer and gene displacement
              experiments indicate that pisatin demethylase has a partial but significant
              role in fungal virulence on pea. Studies have further shown that the PDAl gene
              is induced in vivo, during pathogenesis of pea, concomitant with induction of a
              pisatin biosynthetic enzyme.  The objective of this project is to elucidate the
              mechanism by which N. haematococca induces expression of the PDA1 gene in
              response to pisatin.  In vitro and in vivo techniques have been developed to
              dissect the molecular components of the cis and trans-acting components
              affecting PDA promoter expression. Notably, an in vitro transcription system
              which reconstitutes the components needed for pisatin-induced transcription has
              been developed This in vitro system is the first such regulated in vitro system
              in filamentous fungi. The first goal is to use in vitro transcription to define
              the minimum cis-acting element which confers pisatininducibility upon a
              heterologous promoter. The sec ond goal is to test the function of the
              identified cis elements in vivo (in culture and during pathogenesis) through
              the use of promoter::GUS fusion constructs introduced into N. haematococca by
              transformation. The cis-elements delineated in vitro will be fused on a
              heterologous promoter and its response to pisatin or nutritional signals in
              culture will be defined. This should allow the separation of
              pisatin-responsiveness and nutritional responsiveness in PDAl expression. The
              biological importance of each regulation and their interaction will be
              evaluated using these transformants to infect pea plants and comparing the
              patterns of GUS expression in diseased tissue. The third goal of this project
              is to clone the gene encoding the pisatin responsive factor. Cloning of this
              gene would allow the investigation of questions relating to its mode of binding
              activation, and its appearance in other fungi which also display
              pisatin-induced pisatin demethylase activity. The well characterized PDAl gene
              and the in vitro transcription system offer an excellent system to answer these
              questions and provide the first comprehensive picture of regulation of a 
              fungal virulence gene.  %%%  The completion of these objectives will provide an
              understanding of how a fungus that infects plants regulates expression of a
              detoxification gene in response to the host specific defense compound. The
              molecular components identified will serve as a tool in further detailing how
              this ability to respond to a plant signal may affect other genes in this and
              other fungi.  ***
