Title       : Molecular Genetics of Pectin Lyase Regulation in Erwinia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1997    
File        : a9419403

Award Number: 9419403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun K. Chatterjee achatterjee@psu.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Emerich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419403  Chatterjee  Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora (hereafter Ecc) and
              most other soft-rotting Erwinia species produce an assortment of extracellular
              degradative enzymes such as pectin Iyase (Pnl), pectate Iyase (Pel),
              polygalacturonase (Peh), cellulase (Cel), protease (Prt) and phospholipase. A
              long-term goal of this research is to clarify the genetic and physiological
              aspects of extracellular enzyme production in soft-rotting Erwinia and to
              elucidate the roles of these enzymes in bacterial plant pathogenicity. Purified
              Pnls, like Pel and Peh, can macerate plant tissues. Genetic data also indicate
              that Pnl contributes to virulence of Ecc. However, our research, supported by
              NSF, has revealed that Pnl is regulated differently from Pel, Peh, Cel and Prt.
              In Ecc71, the model Ecc strain used in my laboratory, as well as in many other
              Erwinia, Pnl production is activated in response to stress imposed by
              DNA-damaging agents. This unusual response, which links the production of a
              virulence factor with DNA damage, is controlled by a unique regulatory system
              involving, in addition to RecA, the newly discovered rdg genes (rdg = regulator
              of damage-inducible gene). The 2.1 kb rdg region contains two regulatory genes,
              rdgA and rdgB, organized as separate transcriptional units. The presence of
              helix-turn-helix motifs in both RdgA and RdgB indicates that they probably can
              bind DNA. There is high homology between RdgA and bacteriophage repressors and
              between RdgB and transcriptional activators. These features and structural
              similarity between the putative operators in rdgA and rdgB prompted the
              hypothesis that RdgA, as a repressor, may regulate its own expression and
              possibly also rdgB expression. By promoter switching, it has been determined
              that rdgB product activated Pnl production in E. coli, yet deletion analysis of
              rdg+ DNA indicated that when rdgB was driven by its own promoter, functions of
              both rdgA and rdgB were necessary for the induction of Pnl production by
              mitomycin C (MC). The activation  of rdgB transcription was subsequently found
              to require MC and functional recA and rdgA, implicating a role of a RecA
              processed RdgA derivative in rdgB expression. Thus, RdgA is postulated to play
              two key roles: in the native state RdgA functions as a repressor whereas the
              RecA processed RdgA serves as a transcriptional activator. The major goals of
              this project are to test this hypothesis and to elucidate the mechanism by
              which RdgB activates Pnl production in Ecc71. The specific objectives are (a)
              to fractionate RdgA, (b) to characterize RdgA derivatives produced by RecA*
              (i.e., activated RecA with protease activity), (c) to elucidate the regulation
              of rdgA by the use of reporter genes and DNA binding assays, (d) to identify
              the RecA* derived RdgA product required for the activation of rdgB
              transcription, and (e) to examine binding of RdgB to the sequences upstream of
              PnlA, the structural gene for pectin Iyase.  %%%  This research should
              elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which a novel regulatory circuit controls
              the production of a bacterial plant virulence factor.  It could lead to better
              ways to combat bacterial diseases of crop plants.  ***
