Title       : Physiology of Microbial Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9419597

Award Number: 9419597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Daniels   (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Strohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9104,9179,9197,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9419597  Daniels  Graduate programs specializing in Microbial Biology have
              declined  in recent years, greatly reducing the opportunities for advanced 
              training in this important research area.  As one way to rebuild  interest in
              Microbial Physiology and begin to train new scientists,  we propose a three
              week summer course focused on the theme  "Mechanisms of Microbial Adaptation". 
              The course will contain both  lecture and laboratory components targeted to
              senior level graduate  students and industrial scientists not working primarily
              in  microbial physiology research areas.  Current topics on the  mechanisms of
              microbial adaptation will be surveyed in lectures by  the teaching staff
              together with presentations by experts in the  field.  Lectures will address:
              adaptive response of microorganisms  in fermentations, global response
              mechanisms, regulation of  microbial autotrophism, carbon metabolism in
              methanogens, and  biodegradation and bioconversion by microorganisms.  The 
              accompanying laboratory exercises will illustrate current practical  problems
              in the topic areas and expose students to modern  experimental techniques and
              conceptual approaches.  Experiments  will provide the students with skill in
              fermentation technology,  characterization and quantitation of proteins and
              metabolic  intermediates, enzyme activity measurements and basic kinetic 
              analyses, genetic approaches for the identification of regulated  genes, and
              the anaerobic techniques needed to purify oxygen-  sensitive proteins. 
              Laboratory sessions will prepare the students  to challenge and expand their
              current research and to undertake new  approaches in their experimental
              systems.  The inherent goal of the  course is to establish a significant
              interactive community of  research scientists in the field of Microbial
              Physiology.   Introducing students to leading scientists in an informal but 
              intense science setting should stimulate a sense of excitement and  community,
              and set the foundation for a network of younger and  exper ienced researchers. 
              %%%   Programs in Microbial Biology have declined in our universitites.   As a
              result, the ability of our research scientists is becoming  reduced to respond
              to environmental pollution problems with  biologically based methods, or to
              explore the microbial biosphere  for new products for control of insect pests
              and disease, or to  discover and develop novel biodegradable biomaterials.  A
              course in  Microbial Physiology will begin to train scientists and rebuild 
              interest in this area.  The three week lecture/laboratory course  will be open
              to university and industry applicants.  Topics on the  mechanisms of microbial
              adaptation will be discussed by experts in  the field.  Laboratory excercises
              will illustrate these topic areas  with hands-on experiments.  The goal of the
              course is to regain a  significant interactive community of research scientists
              in the  fild of Microbial Physiology.  ***
