Title       : RUI: Integrated Stratigraphic and Sedimentological Analysis of the
               Cambro-Ordovican Inner Shelf, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1997     
File        : a9419141

Award Number: 9419141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90803              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Myrow pmyrow@cc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9419141  Myrow   The relationship between intervals of faunal turnover,
              including major extinctions, and various depositional and tectonic processes
              which may ultimately govern these events, is critical to the holistic
              understanding of the stratigraphic record.  Integration of sedimentological,
              paleontological, and stratigraphic data from all regions in an onshore-offshore
              profile are required for a complete analysis of system dynamics.  The
              Cambro-Ordovician boundary interval, which records several faunal turnover
              events including a major extinction at the base of the Cordylodus proavis
              conodont zone, is generally unrecognized or not preserved in inner detrital
              belt deposits in North America because of poor biostratigraphic resolution.  
              Sedimentological and biostratigraphic data from well-documented
              Cambro-Ordovician platform and offshore areas of the Great Basin and elsewhere
              have been used to propose processes-response models for faunal extinctions,
              which in many cases include puported ecstatic "events".  Unfortunately, little
              or no information exists from coeval proximal carnal deposits concerning the
              relationship of intervals of faunal turnover with depositional and tectonic
              events, which can be used as a test of the cause of extinctions or the global
              correlation of proposed ecstatic events.   Well-exposed and thick
              Cambro-Ordovician siliciclastic and carbonate carnal rocks in central and
              western Colorado provide an excellent opportunity to assess spatial and
              temporal changes in depositional systems during and between faunal turnover
              events for this poorly understood and biostratigraphically unconstrained
              paleogeographic region in the Cambro-Ordovician of ancient North America.  A
              two-year project is proposed for a sedimentological and stratigraphic study in
              which the recognition of unconformitites using conodont biostratigraphy and
              sedimentological  criteria will for the first time enable construction of a
              detailed sequence-stratigraphic framework for the Cambro-Ordovician of
              Colorado. Co mparison of systems dynamics for these deposits with
              well-documented outboard successions will contribute to a more complete
              understanding of the interplay between the evolution of faunal communities and
              depositional systems.
