Title       : Antarctic Rift and Hot Spot Volcanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9419686

Award Number: 9419686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110242             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Kyle kyle@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt S. Panter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a study of volcanic rocks in the Ross Sea  area of
              Antarctica.  Existing strontium (Sr), neodymium (Nd), and  lead (Pb) isotopic
              work on more than 80 basalts shows that a HIMU  (High U/Pb)-like isotopic
              signature (low 87/86Sr, high 206/204Pb)  is ubiquitous along some 4500 km of
              the West Antarctic Rift  System (WARS).  Three oceanic hotspots have been
              defined in the  region; Balleny and Scott Islands show the same HIMU-like 
              signatupe as the rift volcanics.  Peter I Island shows a hint of  this
              component, though these rocks indicate, in general, a more  enriched mantle
              hotspot source (refered to as an EM-2-like  hotspot).  Many of the WARS
              volcanics also show the presence of  an enriched component, but one which is
              derived from the  continental lithosphere (low Rb/Cs and Th/Pb).  In Victoria
              Land,  the presence or absence of the enriched component is directly  related
              to location with respect to the boundary between the Ross  Sea rift and the
              Transantarctic Mountain Front.  Its minimal  presence in Marie Byrd Land
              suggests a thinner and/or younger  crust, relative to the Transantarctic
              Mountain area.  The virtual  absence of enriched component in the rift proper
              suggests a  highly thinned crust, perhaps without significant underlying 
              lithosphere.    In this second phase of a longer term project, the work will 
              focus on geochemical study three WARS volcanoes (Sidley,  Overlord, Pleides) in
              detail, to constrain a crustal versus  mantle lithospheric source for the
              enriched component.  A number  of cognate and mantle xenoliths will be studied
              as a further aid  in this source discrimination issue.  The geographic extent
              of  the HIMU-WARS signature will be tested by analyzing Cenozoic  basalts from
              sub-Antarctic islands on the Campbell Plateau  (including cognate and mantle
              xenoliths).  In all of this work we  will, for the first time, employ osmium
              and oxygen isotopes in  combination as a tool to discriminate crustal versus
              mantle  lithosphere signatures.
