Title       : Environmental and Physiological Regulation of Water Flux Through a Tropical
               Forest Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9419500

Award Number: 9419500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick C. Meinzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo H. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hawaii Agri Research Cntr
	      99 193 Aiea Hts Dr
	      Aiea, HI  967013911    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Meinzer  9419500    Transpiration, or evaporation of water from the leaves of 
              plants, is a biological process that has a large impact on  our physical
              environment through its effects on soil water  storage, atmospheric water
              content, and the distribution of  rainfall.  Little is known about how plant
              species in  tropical forests partition and regulate their use of soil  water in
              time and space, yet such information is critical  for predicting the effects of
              deforestation and climatic  fluctuations on the water balance of tropical as
              well as  temperate regions.  The overall goal of this research is to  determine
              how water movement along a continuum from the soil  through plants to the
              atmosphere is regulated in contrasting  types of tropical forest plants such as
              upper canopy trees,  characteristic of mature forests, and forest gap
              colonizing  plants, which may be representative of regrowth after  harvest. 
              The project will be carried out at three sites  operated by the Smithsonian
              Tropical Research Institute in  Panama.  The relative roles of external
              environmental  factors and inherent plant traits in the regulation of water 
              use will be characterized.  The research will provide  unique, detailed
              information about how soil water resources  in a seasonally dry environment are
              shared in time and space  among different types of plants.  General patterns
              that  emerge will be applicable to temperate zone forests and  other plant
              communities as well as tropical forests.  The  findings will contribute to our
              ability to predict how water  use by vegetation at the stand and regional
              scales is  influenced by species composition and should constitute a  valuable
              contribution to the data necessary to make informed  decisions in watershed
              management.
