Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope For A Multi-User Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1995   
File        : a9419655

Award Number: 9419655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Cantino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janine N. Caira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests matching funds to purchase a Field  Emission Scanning
              Electron Microscope (FESEM) for the a  multi-use facility at the University of
              Connecticut Storrs  Campus.  The proposed instrumentation will replace an 
              existing 16 year old FESEM which is heavily used, but is now  out of date and
              increasingly difficult to maintain.  The  instrument will be available to
              investigators within and  outside of the main campus of the University of
              Connecticut.  Over the past five years 83 individuals have used the  existing
              FESEM.  The requested instrument will ensure  continued availability of high
              resolution scanning electron  microscopy for research and training at this
              institution.  It will also introduce useful capabilities not available on  the
              existing instrument.  In particular, variable scan rates  and high resolution
              low voltage operation will permit high  magnification imagine of radiation
              sensitive material and  uncoated samples difficult or impossible to study in
              the  existing instrument.  Other improvements such as high vacuum  gun design,
              digital control electronics, and capabilities  for digital image acquisition
              and replay, will greatly  facilitate operation and maintenance, increase
              throughput  for users and reduce photographic costs.  This instrument  will be
              used to carry out planned or ongoing projects of six  major users.  These
              include investigations of phylogenetic  relationships of parasitic worms, the
              role of development in  evolution and ecology of plants, cell death during 
              neurogenesis, effects of heat shock on renal function,  effects of land use on
              plankton biodiversity in lakes,  larval and pupal morphology in insect
              development.  It is  expected, based on previous experience at this facility, 
              that the requested instrument will also be heavily used by  many additional
              projects in years to come.
