Title       : Cell Culture Facilities for Organismal and Integrative Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9419545

Award Number: 9419545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John W. Cross                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Feder m-feder@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Q. Martindale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Matching funds are requested from the National Science  Foundation to set up a
              cell/tissue culture facility for use  by faculty investigators and trainees in
              the Department of  Organismal Biology and Anatomy of The University of Chicago.
               During the past decade, this department has made major  studies in applying
              the techniques of molecular biology to  problems of organismal biology, and in
              training students to  do likewise. Conspicuous by their absence from these 
              developments have been cell/tissue culture techniques.  Absence of suitable
              facilities in the building prevents  departmental researchers from analyzing
              gene expression in  cultured cells and performing physiological investigations.
               Use of facilities elsewhere on campus necessitates transport  of cells/tissues
              in culture over long distances and outside  in inclement weather, which is
              incompatible with the  proposed research. Accordingly, funds are sought to
              acquire  facilities on site. Proposed research applications include  (1)
              examination of possible molecular chaperone activity of  a heat shock protein,
              hsp70; (2) study of gene expression  associated with differentiation in a leech
              model; (3)  elucidation of temperature-sensitive regulation of  transcription
              in a natural model (the Ldh-B locus of the  fish Fundulus); (4) investigation
              of effects of aqueous flow  regime on stem cell differentiation in demosponges
              and  development of an experimental model for optimizing fluid  flow in
              biological systems; (5) examination of neural bases  of learning in a brain
              explant model. The proposed facility  would not only permit these projects to
              be carried out, but  also serve as a springboard for educating all departmental
               personnel about the utility, promise, and practice of  cell/tissue culture. To
              this end, the PIs would conduct  regular workshops whose participant would
              include  departmental personnel and local secondary school  instructors.
