Title       : Acquisition of a Phosphorimager and Associated Peripheral Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9419859

Award Number: 9419859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Nilsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Ann Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Bruzik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonatha M. Gott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      We propose to secure funding for a phosphorimager to be shared  among
              the members of the Center for Molecular Parasitology at Case  Western Reserve
              University. This group, within the Department of  Molecular Biology and
              Microbiology, is a newly formed division  consisting of four current
              (increasing to eight) principal  investigators. Each of the member laboratories
              is involved in research  examining different aspects of RNA processing.
              Briefly, this research  includes studies examining cis- and trans-splicing in
              nematodes, the  characterization of similarities and differences between cis-
              and trans  splicing systems, protein factor involvement in cis- and 
              trans-splicing, mechanisms of RNA editing in the slime mold, Physarum 
              polycephalum, developmental regulation of RNA editing in Physarum 
              polycephalum, molecular analysis of signal recognition particle in the  fission
              yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and splicing mechanisms and  factors in
              Schizosaccharomyces pombe.          As the molecular tools employed in the
              analysis of RNA processing  have become increasingly more sensitive, the
              traditional film-based  autoradiographic approach to isotope detection has
              become limiting. The  acquisition of a phosphorimager would allow us to gain
              access to new  technology that would directly impact not only our ability to
              perform a  majority of our experiments where signal strength is a critical
              issue,  but it would also allow for the Center as a whole to increase its 
              productivity by drastically decreasing the time required between the 
              performance of an experiment and the analysis of data. The system's  multi-user
              capabilities would be enhanced through the incorporation of  a package of
              peripheral equipment (detailed in the Description of  Instrumentation) aimed at
              maintaining the base phosphorimaging unit as  a data acquisition point with all
              subsequent data analysis performed at  remote, existing computer locations.
              This also allows for several  students, postdoctoral fellows and technicians t
              o analyze data  simultaneously. If funding for this equipment is provided by
              the NSF  through a Multi-User Biological Equipment and Instrumentation
              Resources  Grant, then multiple laboratory groups (presently four, but
              expanding  to eight) will gain access to current technology that will allow for
               experiments to be conducted that otherwise would be difficult or  impossible
              to analyze.
