Title       : RUI: Pattern Formation and Lanscape Change in a Sand Plain Oak Savanna and
               Woodland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9419922

Award Number: 9419922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Davis davis@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,9178,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419922  Davis   This project is a study of habitat change in a sand plain oak
              savanna in east central Minnesota. A threatened habitat in Minnesota, oak
              savannas are converted to oak woodlands in the absence of fire. In this
              process, patches of oak trees expand, connect, and encircle patches of
              prairies. Conversely, when fire is reintroduced, oak woodlands are opened up as
              patches of trees shrink, subdivide, and even disappear. Thus, the study of
              habitat change in these oak dominated environments is partly a study of pattern
              formation. One of the objectives of this study is to identify factors that
              influence the pattern development of oaks in the habitat. Factors to be
              investigated include landform effects, effects of pocket gophers, fire, and
              effects of existing herbaceous and woody vegetation. A second objective is to
              quantify some of the important physical and biological consequences of the
              changes in the oak vegetation, including effects on shrubby and herbaceous
              vegetation, pocket gopher and thatch ant distribution, litter layer, oak
              recruitment, and fire intensity. The project's methodology includes analysis of
              aerial photographs and spatially referenced data collection from a ground grid
              using geostatistics and GIS; an experimental garden study to investigate the
              effects of shade, water, and surrounding landscape on seedling survivorship and
              growth; and an experimental plot study to measure the effects of fire and the
              physical removal of shrubs and oak saplings on the herbaceous community. The
              methodology has been developed to permit the study of pattern formation at
              several spatial and temporal scales.   %%%  By elucidating mot only the
              patterns but the processes and mechanisms that produce the patterns, this study
              will contribute to our understanding of site history and habitat change in oak
              savanna and woodland environments. Information gathered from this study will
              specifically complement studies on oak regeneration as part of the Cedar Creek
              Long-term Ecological Research Project. Fin ally, the proposed project will
              provide data that can lead to improved management plans for one of the upper
              midwest's most threatened habitats.
