Title       : Towards Model Reduction of Dissipative PDE's Theory, Computation and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1996       
File        : a9419321

Award Number: 9419321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis G. Kevrekidis yannis@arnold.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edriss S. Titi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The low-dimensional dynamic behavior of infinite dimensional  systems is a
              field of intense mathematical research, and the  theoretical part of this work
              explores and builds on a number of  such directions.  The investigator and his
              colleagues study  several new aspects of the theory of inertial and approximate
               inertial manifolds, and explore and establish new connections  between them
              and the method of empirical eigenfunctions.  At the  same time, a goal of the
              proposal is the computational  implementation of the new methods and the study
              of certain  numerical analysis aspects associated with them (stability, 
              interaction with symmetries, and preservation of dissipation).       
              Dissipative time-dependent partial differential equations  arise from
              descriptions of a variety of important physical,  chemical, and biological
              phenomena.  The purpose of this project  is to develop, analyze,
              computationally implement, and test  methods for the reduction of such
              equations to accurate, small  dynamical systems.  This is a subject of intense
              research  interest in its own right; at the same time, it provides a bridge  to
              the study of many complex physicochemical and engineering  systems, with
              important implications for the simulation,  analysis, prediction and control of
              their dynamic behavior.  An  integral part of this work is the application of
              the techniques  to models of realistic systems of current research interest,
              such  as pattern formation in catalytic and electrochemical reactions.   The
              investigator and his colleagues believe that the attempt to  tackle realistic
              problems strengthens the theoretical and  computational aspects of the
              research, and provides new ideas and  directions.
