Title       : Confocal Microscope for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9419941

Award Number: 9419941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Moses   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Tower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chien-Ping Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rahul Warrior  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert A. Herrera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for funding for a BioRad DVC-250 laser-scanning  confocal
              microscope, together with associated camera, computer and  printer equipment.
              This equipment will be used for imaging both living  and fixed biological
              specimens, at high resolution, and in three  dimensions. This rapidly maturing
              technology is now in very wide use,  and is particularly suited to visualizing
              multiple antigens or stains,  simultaneously, and their digital analysis. With
              the equipment system  requested, we will be able to acquire microscopic images,
              process them  with a computer, and print them out, at publication quality.   
              While there are a number of other microscopes available on this campus 
              (compound microscopes, Electron microscopes, etc.), there is no  confocal
              microscope. The USC medical school houses a confocal system,  but this is not
              available to labs on this campus. Two of the proposed  major users now use
              confocal systems at other sites. Ko uses a system  at the City of Hope Hospital
              (20 miles distant), which is not available  to others. Warrior uses a system at
              U.C. Irvine (50 miles distant),  which is available, but charges a $100/hour
              user fee. In short, the  biological researchers here do not have regular, or
              open access to this  important technology. We have examined three different
              confocal  microscopes: the Nikon K2Bio, BioRad DVC-250, and the Meridian, and
              we  have determined that the BioRad offers the best compromise of  performance
              and cost, for our purposes. This institution (USC), has  undertaken to provide
              30% of the total cost of this equipment, as a  cost share.    This equipment
              system will be used by a group of Biological research  labs at the University
              Park campus, of the University of Southern  California (in Los Angeles). This
              group consists of five major users  (Moses, Warrior, Tower, Herrera and Ko, the
              principal investigators  listed), and five minor users (Bottjer, Manahan,
              McFall-Ngai, Thompson  and Watts). All of the major users are currently
              supported by federal  gr ants. While our research interests are somewhat
              disparate we all  share a strong interest in using the confocal microscope to
              visualize  structures and antigens in three dimensions in biological specimens.
                 The Moses lab studies pattern formation and cell fate determination in  the
              Drosophila compound eye. They will use the confocal system to  colocalize gene
              products (such as Drosophila homologs of Transforming  Growth Factor a, and its
              putative receptor), and to examine double and  triple stained genetic mosaic
              tissues. The Warrior lab studies inter  and intra-cellular movements in the
              developing Drosophila embryo. They  will use the equipment to study germ cell
              migration, and the functions  of the schnurri and DnudC genes in early
              development. The Tower lab  studies development of the Drosophila chorion, and
              the regulation of  DNA replication. They will use the system to quantitate DNA
              levels in  the developing follicle cells. The Herrera lab studies developmental
               plasticity in frog neuromuscular junctions, and the action of steroid 
              hormones on this structure. They will use the system to study the  junction
              structures in living specimens, in which their function, and  response to
              hormones, can be tested. The Ko lab studies neuro  transmitter release and the
              function of the presynaptic terminal. They  will use this equipment to explore
              the behavior and morphology of  voltage coupled Calcium channels, using
              specifically binding toxins.
