Title       : Real-Time Clocking of Energy Redistribution in Molecules Falling Apart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9419397

Award Number: 9419397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed mostafa.el-sayed@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professor Mostafa El-Sayed of the Georgia Institute of   Technology will pursue
              a series of investigations in transition state   spectroscopy.  Specifically,
              the internal vibrational energy   redistribution (IVR) in photodissociating
              molecules will be studied in   real time using a pump-probe method.  Two
              femtosecond lasers are to be   used, one to cause photodissociation and the
              other, suitably time delayed   with respect to the first, to resonantly ionize
              one of the photofragments   whose recoil velocity distribution is determined as
              function of the   pump-probe time delay.  The spatial distribution of the
              recoil velocities   of the photofragments will also be determined.  This
              distribution depends   on the internal energy distribution over the various
              degrees of freedom   of the parent and photofragment species.   The experiments
              will be done   with unsaturated organic and metal iodide molecules.  One of the
              current problem areas in chemistry is the nature of the   transition state. 
              Inherent in the field of chemistry is the simple idea   that during a chemical
              reaction the reactants are converted to products   by breaking reactant bonds
              and forming new bonds.  During the reaction   new species are formed which are
              neither reactants nor products.  These   species are transient species and, due
              to their role in the transition   from reactants to products, are said to occur
              in the `transition region`,   and their specific nuclear configurations are
              termed `transition states`.    One of the most important issues in chemical
              reaction dynamics is to   elucidate the relation between the properties of the
              transition state and   the characteristics of the reaction product. The
              duration, or life time,   of a transition state, and thus the duration of a
              chemical reaction   rocess, varies from one trillionth of one second (one
              picosecond) to one   housandth of a trillionth of one second (one
              quadrillionth, or one   femtosecond).  Direct, detailed molecular level
              information about the   transition state of molecular systems can only be
              obtained with   sophisticated techniques that employ lasers with ultra short
              pulse   duration (femtosecond lasers).  The research proposed by Professor  
              El-Sayed uses novel laser techniques to obtain needed data for the  
              understanding of the transition state in chemical reactions.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
