Title       : Quantitative Biology Core (phosphorimager/CCD camera-image analysis
               system/spectro-fluorometer)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9419667

Award Number: 9419667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167980             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Staros starosjv@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd R. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Cavener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Quantitative Biology Core, consisting of a phosphorimager, a CCD  camera/image
              analysis system, and a spectrofluorometer with  stopped-flow capability will be
              established for the use of biological  scientists in the College of Arts and
              Science at Vanderbilt University.  The main objective in the establishment of
              this resource is to enable  the participating scientists, and the
              undergraduate, graduate, and  postdoctoral students in their laboratories, to
              obtain quantitative  data, currently unobtainable due to the lack of access to
              appropriate  equipment.    The phosphorimager will allow quantitation of data
              presently collected  by autoradiography. Autoradiography is an inherently
              non-quantitative  technique. Exposure of a grain of film emulsion requires two
              photons.  Such two-photon processes under-report low levels of activity,
              because  at low levels, a high proportion of emulsion grains will have 
              interacted with only one photon and therefore remain unexposed on  development;
              and they under-report high levels of activity, because a  high proportion of
              photons interact with grains that have already been  fully exposed. Sensitivity
              to the low end can be enhanced by pre  flashing the film, but whether
              pre-flashed or not, the linear response  range is narrow, perhaps one log. In
              contrast, the proposed  phosphorimager can collect quantitative data over a
              four log range, and  collect it an order of magnitude faster than exposure of
              film. This  instrument will be applied to a wide range of studies, for example,
              the  quantitation of radiolabeled DNA, RNA, and proteins separated on gels.   
              The CCD camera/image analysis system will allow quantitation of data  presently
              collected qualitatively by photomicroscopy. For example,  immunofluorescence
              localization studies can be carried out on this  system with a resolution
              approaching that of confocal microscopy at a  fraction of the cost. A
              software-controlled stepper motor can be used  to acquire images from
              sequential optical planes, effectively optically   sectioning the specimen.
              Digitization of each field allows quantitative  analysis of the fluorescent
              marker in that field, which, combined with  the optical sectioning, results in
              quantitation within a predetermined  volume within the specimen. This facility
              will be employed in  immunolocalization studies in yeast, transgenic
              Drosophilia at various  developmental stages, Ascidian larvae, Dictyostelium
              cells, and  mammalian neuronal cells and tissues, and in studies of the
              assembly of  microtubules in vitro.    The spectrofluorometer will allow
              collection of quantitative  fluorescence intensity and kinetic data not
              currently accessible with  equipment available in the College of Arts and
              Science at Vanderbilt.  For example, utilization of the stopped-flow accessory
              with the T-  format spectrofluorometer configured with excitation and emission 
              polarizers, for simultaneous acquisition of parallel and perpendicular 
              emission with polarized excitation, will allow real-time acquisition of  the
              association kinetics of nascent RNA transcripts with proteins that  make up
              hnRNP particles, peptide ligands with their cell surface  receptors, and
              regulatory proteins with Ca++-release channels, and of  tubulin into
              microtubules.
