Title       : Repair of DNA Double-Strand Breaks in Mouse Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9419507

Award Number: 9419507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Jasin m-jasin@ski.mskcc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419507  Jasin  The repair of chromosomal DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) in
              mouse cells by homologous recombination will be studied. The hypothesis to be
              tested is that one pathway in the repair of DSBs in mammalian cells is
              homologous recombination, and that DSBs will stimulate gene targeting and
              interchromosomal recombination.  The approach involves the introduction of
              chromosomal DSBs in cultured cells through the expression of rare-cutting,
              site-specific endonucleases.  The first objective of the proposal investigates
              the repair of DSBs in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. In particular, it will
              be determined if chromosomal DSBs will stimulate gene targeting. The second
              objective investigates whether DSBs will stimulate interchromosomal
              recombination.  %%%  The repair of DNA double stranded breaks is crucial for
              the maintenance of genomic integrity in all organisms. Altered repair processes
              and the inability to repair  double stranded breaks will result in mutagenesis
              and oncogenic transformation, and ultimately cell death. Both homologous and
              non-homologous processes are expected to be involved  in the repair of such
              breaks in mammalian cells.  The understanding that is gained about normal
              cellular repair process and homologous recombination will have a broad and
              long-range impact on health, medicine, and basic science.  ***
