Title       : Genetic Dissection of Systemic Acquired Resistance in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9419301

Award Number: 9419301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Lamb peter doerner@qm.salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419301  Lamb  Attempted infection by a non-pathogen or an avirulent form  of a
              pathogen can result not only in localized  hypersensitive resistance, but also
              in the development of  systemic acquired resistance (SAR) in which resistance
              to  normally virulent pathogens develops throughout the plant.  Establishment
              of SAR is associated with increases in cell  wall hydroxyproline levels and
              peroxidase activity, together  with the system expression of a subset of
              defense genes, but  the functional significance of these defenses in SAR has
              not  been established.  Induction of the systemic signals is  correlated with
              localized hypersensitive necrosis, and  salicylic acid is a component of the
              SAR mechanism although  it does not appear to be the systemic signal.    A
              system has been extablished for biological induction of  SAR in Arabidopsis (A.
              thaliana) by pre-challenge  inoculation with genetically well-defined bacterial
               pathogens.  This system exhibits many of the features of  well-characterized
              SAR in tobacco and cucumber, and a  tractable mutant screen has been developed
              that in  preliminary studies resulted in the isolation, from a  population of
              11,000 mutagenized plants, of 10 confirmed  mutants that exhibit local
              hypersensitive resistance but  fail to develop SAR.  It is now proposed to
              exploit the  tools available with Arabidopsis for genetic dissection of  SAR
              with the following specific objectives:    1.   Further physiological
              characterization of biologically  induced SAR in Arabidopsis.  2.   Analysis of
              hypersensitive resistance-defective mutants  to define the role of    localized
              hypersensitive necrosis  in the biological induction of SAR.  3.   Further
              develop the collection of SAR mutants from  mutagenized seeds of    
              Arabidospsis ecotype Col-O and T-  DNA taggd lines of ecotype Wassilewskija. 
              4.   Characterization of this developing collection of  mutants with respect to
               dominance, complementation, and map  position.  5.   Use these mutants to
              delineate the signal pathway for   biological induction of SAR   by genetic and
              physiological  analysis of the sequence of gene action.  6.   Molecular cloning
              of SAR genes with an initial emphasis  on key genes for which   T-DNA tagged
              alleles have been  identified.
