Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1995   
File        : a9419792

Award Number: 9419792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Ettensohn ettensohn@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Hackney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan W. Jarvik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Lansing Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to support the acquisition of a Hitachi  H-7100
              transmission electron microscope (TEM) and ancillary equipment.  This
              instrument will be critical for the research activities of the  Department and
              will play an essential role in education and human  resources development at
              all levels. The Hitachi H-7100 instrument has  excellent performance
              characteristics and flexibility in terms of  possible future upgrading. We
              propose to equip this instrument for the  collection and storage of digital
              images. We will be able to take  advantage of existing expertise and
              computational resources in the  Center for Light Microscope Imaging and
              Biotechnology (a N.S.F. Science  and Technology Center) and the Pittsburgh
              Supercomputing Center to  assist in the processing, analysis, and 3-D
              reconstruction of digital  images. Both Centers are located in the Mellon
              Institute, where the  Department of Biological Sciences and its Electron
              Microscope Facility  are located. The single existing instrument in the
              Department of  Biological Sciences, a Philips 300 TEM, is more than 25 years
              old. It  is extremely limited in its capabilities because it is difficult or 
              impossible to equip with several kinds of modern peripheral components  and
              accessories, including video/digital imaging devices, goniometer or  cooled
              stages, and STEM-SEM or EDS systems. Moreover, the age of this  model raises
              concerns about the continued availability of parts and  even service contracts
              on the instrument. A new microscope with  expanded capabilities is therefore
              essential for the support of both  current and future research activities in
              the Department of Biological  Sciences.    Of 18 faculty members in the
              Department, 7 will be major users of the  instrument, and at least an
              additional 5 are anticipated to be minor  users. All 12 of these faculty
              members, representing two-thirds of the  faculty of the Department of
              Biological Sciences, use electron optical  methods as an essential tool in
              their research programs.  The requested  instrument will be used in research
              projects aimed at an understanding  of fundamental cell, developmental,
              neurobiological, and physiological  processes. Major-user projects will
              include: 1) Correlated electron  microscopic and light optical studies aimed at
              understanding cell  movements in culture and in living embryos (Ettensohn,
              Pollock,  Taylor); 2) Highresolution immunolocalization studies, focusing on 
              proteins with important functions in embryonic development (Ettensohn, 
              Pollock) and in critical cell biological processes such as protein  targeting
              (Jones), motility (Jarvik, Taylor), and energy metabolism  (Koretsky); 3)
              Ultrastructural analysis of mutant phenotypes; e.g., of  cells with altered
              organelle structure or function (Jarvik, Jones,  Koretsky), of normal and
              mutant visual systems in Drosophila (Pollock),  and of tissues in transgenic
              mice following molecular genetic switching  of enzyme isotypes (Koretsky); 4)
              Determination of the subcellular  distribution of mRNAs by electron microscopic
              in situ hybridization;  (Pollock); and 5) Structural studies of the motor
              protein kinesin,  including conformational changes in the protein under varying
              ionic  conditions and kinesin-microtubule interactions (Hackney). The 
              instrument will also have a major impact on education and human  resources
              development at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral  levels. A
              significant number of the Department's 60 graduate students,  165 undergraduate
              biology majors, and 20 postdoctoral fellows will be  expected to use the
              requested instrumentation either through an  existing, formal course in
              electron optical methods (Techniques in  Electron Microscopy, BSC 03~20) and/or
              in their independent research  projects.                                       
                     3
