Title       : Vacuolar Protein Sorting in Plant Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9315940

Award Number: 9315940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maarten J. Chrispeels mchrispeels@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315940  Chrispeels, Marten J.      The goal of the proposal is to understand
              how proteins  are targeted to and accumulated in vacuoles of plant cells. 
              Although plant vacuoles are related to yeast vacuoles and  lysosomes of
              mammalian cells, they contain a much greater  variety of proteins, including
              storage proteins, lectins,  enzyme inhibitors, defense enzymes, as well as many
              of the  acidic hydrolases commonly found in all vacuoles and  lysosomes.  Much
              progress has been made in the last years  in understanding the sorting  signals
              that occur on the  vacuolar proteins themselves, but there is at present no 
              information on the cellular machinery  that allows these  proteins  to be
              correctly targeted to their destination.  Correct vacuolar targeting  of
              Golgi-derived vesicles  involves proteins on the outside of the vesicles that 
              mediate vesicle budding, transport and fusion of the  vesicles  with the target
              membrane  in a highly specific  manner.   These processes are thought to
              require coating and  uncoating with proteins  that bind to the membranes  and
              can  be recruited from the cytosol. The identification of these  proteins is
              the major goal of this proposal.  The Pi will exploit the recent isolation of
              the gene that  encodes a phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase from Arabidopsis  and
              investigate whether it has a role in vacuolar protein  sorting.  The function
              of this protein will be examined in  stably transformed and transient systems,
              or protoplasts  treated with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotides.  The Pi will
              transform a yeast vps34 mutant with the plant  phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
              gene to find interacting  proteins, and then rescue this strain with a plant
              cDNA  library.  The two-hybrid method is also going to be used to  identify
              this gene.  The Pi will also continue  work on the targeting of  proteins to
              the vacuolar membrane or tonoplast.  He will  make constructs that involve a
              reporter protein against  which he has antiserum, and different membrane
              spanning  domains.  %%%  The  significance of this work lies in a better
              understanding  of vacuole biogenesis in plant cells.  The research proposed 
              here will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms  by which the
              vacuolar proteins reach their destinations.  As  with other aspects of the
              secretory system, some of the  findings will be applicable to all eukaryotic
              cells, while  others will be specific for plant cells.  ***
