Title       : Research in Gravitation and Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1997  
File        : a9315811

Award Number: 9315811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Deser deser@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will focus on three distinct, but interrelated  areas of research: 
              quantum gravity and its generalizations,  classical gravitation theories and
              quantum field theory.    The main problems to be considered include the
              following:  Conformal anomalies in general space-time dimensions and  their
              applications, following on results obtained very  recently.  This subject cuts
              across all three main topics,  with consequences for both classical gravity and
              quantum  field theory, for example in extending two-dimensional field 
              theoretical theorems to four dimensions.  The properties of  quantum gravity in
              the ultra-high energy domain will be  studied to establish whether this regime
              can be understood  independent of the complications of the full theory, just as
               can the low energy sector.  In particular, possible  relations to topological
              theories will be investigated;  again preliminary progress is encouraging and
              will provide  the starting point.  The role of the self-energy problem for 
              ultra-rapid particles must be considered both in the above  context and as an
              intrinsically important aspect of gravity  theories; is there an improvement
              over the difficulties  encountered by massive sources?  The definition of
              energy,  central to understanding the solutions of two-dimensional  gravity
              should be uniquely settled by systematic application  of the well-understood
              methodology originally developed for  general relativity.  While the properties
              of two-and three-  dimensional gravity have provided much insight and have been
               a central aspect of recent research, the qualitatively  different domain of
              high dimensions has not yet received  attention.  Any simplifications or
              unusual features at high  D would also yield a deeper understanding, and this
              sector  of gravity will also be probed.  The role of scalar fields  in
              gravitation has been pervasive, most recently under the  impetus of string
              theory, as well as in connection with  conformal invariance.  Nevertheless,
              there is still no  systematic unde rstanding of the possible physical effects
              of  scalars.  At their most optimistic, these might include an  alternate
              approach to the Higgs problem at a fundamental  level.
