Title       : Search Strategies for Locating Underwater Odor Sources: Robots and Lobsters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9315791

Award Number: 9315791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranier Voigt voigt@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jelle Atema  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas R. Consi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Mountain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chryssostomos Chryssostomidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9315791  Atema  Neurobiological and behavioral studies on lobsters have taught
              us  that turbulent (underwater) odor plumes contain directional  information
              based on its patchy fine structure.  To measure  biologically relevant signals,
              sensor technology capable of high-  resolution (30m, 5ms) chemical signal
              analysis has been  developed.  Lobsters locate odor sources efficiently based
              on  bilateral sampling with antennules.  Chemoreceptor cells in the  antennules
              are capable of frequency analysis similar to (but  slower than) acoustic signal
              processing.  This research tests the  hypothesis that bilateral analysis of
              pulse features is the basis  for turbulent chemotaxis.  Lobsters, computational
              models and  physical models, i.e., untethered robots, will be employed for 
              this task.  Lobster-generated hypotheses will be tested in robots  equipped
              with search paradigms that are pre-tested with  computational models.  Robot
              failures to locate efficiently will  lead to re-examination and testing of
              lobsters.  Further advances  in our knowledge of signal processing in lobsters
              will be used to  update computational models and robot search algorithms.    1.
                Two small underwater robots will be designed and tested to  have the size,
              mobility and chemical sensing capabilities of a  lobster (the benefit vehicle)
              and a fish (the free swimming  vehicle).    2.   The vehicles will be used to
              characterize the spatial and  temporal dynamics of underwater chemical plumes
              in two and three  dimensions.    3.   The vehicles will be used to test
              chemo-sensing algorithms  proposed for lobsters and fish concentrating on
              algorithms  involved with chemical source localization which is the basic 
              behavior underlying the finding of food and mates.    Significant advances in
              underwater robotics design and in  understanding chemosensory signal processing
              is expected.  ***
