Title       : The Structure of Feasible Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9315354

Award Number: 9315354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Goldsmith goldsmit@cs.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This award funds two related projects:  an exploration of  the structure of
              the  class, P, of polynomial time computable sets, and an  exploration of the 
              structure and applications of the Sharply Bounded Hierarchy  within P.   
              Earlier work (with Steve Homer) explored scalability, an ordering  property of 
              sets in P, as a tool for determining the P-isomorphism degree  structure of the
               class P.  This work raised more questions than it answered.  These questions 
              about the strength of various ordering properties on sets in P  are explored. 
              Is scalability, the P-isomorphism closure of  P-rankability,  actually stronger
              than P-rankability?  When is it harder to  order a set than to  give its census
              function?  In addition, when are two sets  in P with similar  densities
              P-isomorphic?    One can also consider the structure of the sets  within the
              class by considering  self-reducibility properties.  Prior work  showed a
              series of results of the  form, `a set is in P if it has the following  two 
              self-reducibility properties,` which is continued, in light of recent  work on
              self-reducible sets.   P is a large class, including sets recognizable  in 
              polynomial time, where the polynomial has a large degree. This seems to be  too
               large a class to be considered feasible, so this research studies  classes 
              within P defined by limited polynomial time and O(log n) bits of 
              nondeterminism.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
