Title       : The Mechanism by which Ribosomes Form Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9315034

Award Number: 9315034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boyd A. Hardesty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9179,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hardesty  9315034  Folding of nascent proteins into a three-dimensional
              conformation  as they are synthesized linearly on ribosomes will be studied. 
              The  role of the ribosome and the chaperones in the folding process will  be
              evaluated.  Three enzymes (bacterial dihydrofolate reductase,  chloramphenicol
              acetyl transferase, and mammalian rhodanese) will  be synthesized by coupled
              transcription/translation with ribosomes,  tRNA and enzymes derived from
              Escherichia coli in a cell-free  system.  Folding of the nascent peptides as
              they are elongated by  the sequential, C-terminal addition of amino acids to
              peptidyl-tRNA  on ribosomes will be monitored by florescence techniques.  
              Acquisition of enzymatic activity will be used as a measure of  correct folding
              into the native conformation.  For studies  involving florescence, a
              fluorophore such as coumarin will be  incorporated at a specific site in the
              nascent peptide from the  corresponding amino acyl-tRNA derivative, such as
              N(coumarin)-Mer-  tRNA for incorporation of coumarin at the N-terminus of the
              nascent  protein.  Special emphasis will be given to testing the hypothesis, 
              and to a determination of what part of this folding, if any, takes  place
              within a tunnel or cavity in the large ribosomal subunit.   The role of
              chaperones in folding of the three enzymes also will be  studied.  %%%  A
              detailed understanding of the molecular forces and processes that  are involved
              in folding of a linear peptide into the specific,  three dimensional
              conformations of a protein in its native state is  one of the most fundamental
              and challenging problems currently  under intensive investigation in molecular
              biology.  This process  is crucial for the formation of active, soluble enzymes
              rather than  aggregation of newly formed proteins into insoluble, intractable 
              mass of denatured protein as occurs with egg white when it is  cooked.  An
              understanding of the process is critical for the  rational design and synthesis
              of new enzymes.  Understanding of the  folding  process would be a large step
              toward developing the theory  and procedure that will make it possible to
              produce new protein  catalysis for research, medicine and industry, many of
              which may  not occur in living cells.  Largely because of the inherent 
              problems and technical difficulties, most studies have focused on  refolding of
              proteins from their denatured state. Our approach is  fundamentally different. 
              Proteins are synthesized linearly on  ribosomes by the sequential addition of
              amino acids from their N-  terminal to C-terminal ends.  We use florescence
              techniques to  monitor folding of nascent proteins as they are formed. 
              Techniques  have been developed by which we covalently attached a fluorophore 
              to a specific amino acid as aminoacyl-tRNA then incorporated the  derivatized
              amino acid at a unique point in a nascent protein as it  is formed on a
              ribosome.  Fluorescence from the fluorophore is used  to monitor synthesis and
              folding of the nascent protein.  The role  of the ribosome itself and
              "chaperone" proteins in the folding  process will be studied.  ***
