Title       : Posttranslational Regulation of Pep-Carboxylase Activity in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9315928

Award Number: 9315928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Chollet RCHOLLET1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9315928  Chollet  The experimental plan is composed of three areas of research
              on the  control of higher plant phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) 
              activity in vivo by regulatory phosphorylation and allosteric  metabolite
              effectors.  Specific research objectives include (i) the  continued scrutiny of
              the highly regulated PEPC-kinase signal-  transduction chain by in situ studies
              with intact C4 and CAM plants  using an integrated biochemical, immunological
              and/or molecular-  genetic approach, and the further elucidation of the complex
              C4  PEPC-kinase signal-transduction chain by in situ studies with  intact
              C4-mesophyll cells and protoplasts.  The outcome of these  objectives could
              strongly affect our basic understanding of the  regulation of PEPC activity by
              L-malate, the negative allosteric  effector.  Conversely, project (ii) will
              focus on the opposing  control of C4/CAM PEPC activity exerted by positive
              phosphorylated  effectors (e.g., glucose 6-P, triose-P) by mapping this
              activator  binding domain with photoaffinity-labeling and site-directed 
              mutagenesis techniques.  Finally, project (iii) will critically  assess the
              possible regulatory phosphorylation of nonphotosynthetic  PEPC in leaves and
              root-nodules from C3 plants by integrative in  vivo (detached leaves and
              nodules), in situ (intact leaf  protoplasts), and in vitro (isolated PEPC and
              PEPC-kinase)  analysis.  Results from these three projects will not only 
              delineate important details of the control of C4- and CAM-  photosynthesis, and
              details of general C/N metabolism in plants at  the level of cytosolic PEPC,
              but at the same time will provide much  needed insight into enzyme regulation
              in higher plants by  reversible protein phosphorylation.  %%%  This project is
              focused on the posttranslational regulation of the  carbon dioxide (CO2)-fixing
              enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  (PEPC) in higher plants.  While this
              enzyme is best known for its  role in CO2 fixation during C4 photosynthesis and
              Crassulacean acid  metabolism (CA M) in crops as maize, sorghum, sugarcane, and
               pineapple (CAM), it also functions in general plant carbon/nitrogen 
              metabolism.  Besides these important physiological and functional 
              considerations, the PEPC enzyme represents one of the few well-  known examples
              in higher plants of an enzyme that is controlled by  the opposing action of a
              protein phosphatase and a protein-serine  kinase.  Consequently, this complex
              regulatory phosphorylation  cycle forms the central focus of many of our
              present studies.   Understanding about how the cycle operates is important in 
              regulation of CO2 assimilation and in plant metabolism in general.   It can
              form the basis for biotechnological engineering of plants to  improve growth
              and productivity.   This project is supported jointly by Metabolic Biochemistry
               Program, MCB and the Plant Integrative Biology Program, IBN.  ***
