Title       : Carbonate Cementation in Quiet Water Environments: Role of Bacterial-Microalgal
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9315056

Award Number: 9315056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Gaffey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315056  Gaffey       Cementation in modern shallow-water marine carbonate
              sediments  is believed to be confined to the intertidal zone, restricted 
              environments with high salinity, and reefs and sand shoals at  platform
              margins.  Boring by microbial endoliths, resulting in  micritization or
              destruction of grains, is thought to be the  dominant diagenetic process in
              other shallow marine environments.   However, published studies by various
              workers, and preliminary work  by the investigator, indicate that significant
              volumes of cement  are precipitating in low to moderate energy, normal marine
              phreatic  environments, a fact with important implications for cycling and 
              storage of carbonate within protected settings.        It is also widely
              believed that marine cementation is largely  a physicochemical process, and
              that the role of microorganisms in  carbonate cementation is restricted to
              inducing precipitation of  carbonate by changing pH and Eh of pore waters. 
              However, sample  collection and preparation methods commonly used by 
              sedimentologists degrade or destroy organic structures, so that  their role in
              cementation often goes unrecognized.  The proposed  work will assess the role
              of chasmolithic bacteria, cyanobacteria,  and microalgae in cementation by
              using techniques designed to  preserve the microbial component of samples
              intact, and will  develop new criteria for recognition of calcified chasmoliths
              in  ancient sediments.       In contrast with high energy, platform margin
              settings,  calcification of chasmoliths rather than physicochemical 
              precipitation of carbonate appears to be the dominant cement-  forming process
              in sands from low energy marine phreatic  environments.  There also appear to
              be variations in cement types  and abundance between different subenvironments
              within low energy  settings.  the proposed work will characterize the types and
               amounts of cements, and their distribution with bioclastic sands in  a low, an
              intermediate, and a high energy lagoon on San Salvador  Is land.  Bahamas, and
              relate types and distributions of cements in  these three settings to
              environmental factors such as sea grass  cover, wave and current energy, and
              degree of bioturbation.   Characterization of cement types and of their
              distributions in  relation to environmental factors will provide useful
              criteria for  interpreting early diagenetic environments of ancient shallow 
              marine carbonate sediments.
