Title       : "MGATP Energy Transduction in Nitrogenase"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9315835

Award Number: 9315835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance C. Seefeldt seefeldt@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Seefeldt  9315835  The long range objective of this project is to define the
              mechanism  by which MgATP hydrolysis is coupled to electron transfer and 
              substrate reduction in the metalloenzyme complex, nitrogenase.  The  approach
              will be to use date from the recently solved x-ray crystal  structures of both
              nitrogenase components coupled with site-  directed mutagenesis and biochemical
              characterization of altered  proteins to define the functions of specific amino
              acids in the  mechanism of this reaction.  A series of amino acids within the 
              iron protein (FeP) components of nitrogenase have been targeted as  a result of
              their conservation among iron proteins from 22  different organisms, their
              inclusion in nucleotide binding motifs  and by their location in the x-ray
              structure of the FeP.  The  specific objectives for this project period will be
              to elucidate  the function of amino acids within the FeP involved in:  1) 
              nucleotide phosphate binding and hydrolysis, 2) adenine  recognition, 3)
              component docking and electron transfer and 4) the  MgATP induced
              conformational change.  A system has been developed  that allows the rapid
              generation of altered FePs by site-directed  mutagenesis with expression in
              Azotobacter vinelandii.  The altered  proteins will be purified and subjected
              to detailed biochemical and  biophysical characterizations to determine the
              function of the  original amino acid.  These characterization studies will
              include  steady state and pre-steady state kinetic studies, analysis of 
              conformational states, and structure determination by x-ray  crystallography. 
              Preliminary results have begun to define residues  in the FeP that are
              essential to MgATP binding and hydrolysis and  to the conformational switch
              that is part of the energy  transduction mechanism.  It is expected that the
              results from this  project will provide a more detailed biochemical
              understanding of  the MgATP coupled electron transfer mechanism in nitrogenase
              and  will have broader applications to our knowledge of  other nucleotide 
              coupled energy transduction systems.  Finally, the results from  this study
              should provide a foundation of knowledge required to  initiate rational protein
              engineering of nitrogenase to develop new  properties such as altered
              nucleotide affinities.  %%%  The long range objective of this project is to
              define the mechanism  by which MgATP hydrolysis is coupled to electron transfer
              and  substrate reduction in the metalloenzyme complex, nitrogenase.   Reduced
              forms of nitrogen are essential to all living organisms.   The need for reduced
              nitrogen is especially limiting in modern  agriculture where it must be
              supplied in the form of fertilizers.   The nitrogen in fertilizers is prepared
              by a chemical reaction that  requires large amounts of energy in the form of
              high temperatures  and pressures.  In contrast to this chemical process, many
              soil  bacteria can convert atmospheric N2, a gas that constitutes 80% of  the
              air that we breath, into ammonia, an agriculturally useful  nitrogen source,
              without the requirements for high temperature or  pressure.  This bacterial
              process, called nitrogen fixation, is  catalyzed by the enzyme nitrogenase. 
              Nitrogenase catalyzed ammonia  production accounts for the largest total input
              of fixed nitrogen  into environment and represents a very attractive
              alternative to  industrially prepared fertilizers for agriculture.  We are 
              investigating the mechanism of this biological process at the  molecular level,
              especially the requirement for the cellular energy  source MgATP.  Our approach
              will be to combine modern genetic  cloning techniques with biochemical and
              biophysical techniques to  define the mechanism of energy utilization by
              nitrogenase.  We  anticipate that the results of our investigations will
              provide a  detailed understanding of the mechanism of nitrogenase and will 
              provide the foundation knowledge that will be required to initiate  protein
              engineering of nitrogenase.  Such studies could prove  valuable to the future
              utilization of nitrogen ase in agriculture.   ***
