Title       : Technical Support: Request for an ICP-MS Technician at the University of Notre
               Dame
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2000    
File        : a9315930

Award Number: 9315930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive R. Neal neal.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Irvine  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9315930  Neal       This award provides partial funding to support a  technician
              assigned to the inductively-coupled plasma mass  spectrometry (ICP-MS)
              laboratory in the Department of Civil  Engineering and Geological Sciences at
              the University of  Notre Dame. The ICP-MS instrument was recently obtained by 
              Notre Dame University through matching funds from a grant  from the NSF
              Academic Research Infrastructure Program. It  will be used primarily by
              students and staff of the  University involved in research and teaching
              projects in the  area of environmental geochemistry, pollution control, 
              petrology, paleoclimatology, limnology, and groundwater  hydrology.  *** 
              9406684  Johnson       This award provides partial funding for the support of 
              a technician assigned to the Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory  in the Department
              of Geology and Geophysics at the  University of Wisconsin, Madison. The
              technician will assist  in the operation and maintenance of the laboratory's 
              equipment that includes a multicollector thermal ionization  mass spectrometer
              and associated instrumentation for sample  preparation and data analysis. The
              laboratory is a resource  for mass spectrometric analysis needed in research
              and  teaching projects in the earth sciences by a large number of  researchers
              on-campus and off-campus. Research applications  include work on Arctic Ocean
              sediments, mantle geochemistry,  volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the
              Michigan Basin  and Wisconsin Arch provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic 
              granites. The technician will also participate in the  technical developmental
              work of the laboratory, including  the development of new methods for the
              quantitative  measurement of the isotopes of hafnium.  ***
