Title       : Mechanism of Recombination Between RNAs Associated With Turnip Crinkle Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9315948

Award Number: 9315948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford D. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9197,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Simon  MCB-9315948  Abstract  Turnip crinkle virus is an ideal system to study
              the mechanism of  RNA recombination. The genome is among the smallest viral RNA
               genomes and is associated with satellite RNAs and numerous small,  subviral
              RNAs (Sat-RNA) which are the products of recombination  events within the
              genomic RNA or between the genomic and subviral  RNAs. The development of an in
              vitro recombination as well as a  protoplast recombination system has allowed a
              more complete  characterization of the elements and factors which mediate 
              recombination in this system. A model of recombination has resulted  from our
              work which suggests that coat protein helps to mediate the  recombination event
              by possibly positioning the templates in  proximity. In order to test this
              model and to continue  characterizing the event, we will: 1. Establish
              protoplast and in  vitro assays for recombination. 2. Conduct structural
              studies on  motif I (the sequences found at the right sides of all junctions of
               recombinant RNA) using both mutagenesis and chemical and enzymatic  probes. 3.
              Determine the role of coat protein in recombination  between sat-RNA D and
              Sat-RNA C using gel-shift assays and 4. Assay  for binding of the RNA-dependent
              RNA polymerase to motif I.  %%%  Viruses which depend on RNA-dependent RNA
              polymerases for  replication of their genomic and sub-genomic RNAs are subject
              to  high inherent mis-incorporation of nucleotides that can lead to 
              heterogeneous mixtures of related species. Thus, RNA recombination  is now
              thought to have been, and perhaps still is, a major factor  in the evolution of
              viruses. The discovery that the turnip crinkle  virus contained nearly the
              entire sequence of a satellite RNA  joined to two regions of genomic RNA by
              this laboratory suggested  that non-homologous recombination occurs. That fact,
              as well as  small genome size and the generation of recombinant molecules in a 
              non-random manner suggested that a detailed examination of the  sequences,
              structures and mechanisms inv olved in the  recombinational event would be
              productive. It is critical in many  ways to have a better understanding of the
              mechanisms used by  viruses in the evolutionary process and the information
              resulting  from the specific goals pursued in this work will enhance that 
              understanding.
