Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Chemical and Physical Properties of Novel
               Carbon Based Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9315165

Award Number: 9315165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Eklund   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Derbyshire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gene F. Dresselhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mildred S. Dresselhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9315165  Eklund    This award supports a two-year collaborative  research
              project between Professor Peter  Eklund, Department of Physics and Astronomy
              and  the Center for Applied Energy Research,  University of Kentucky, and
              Professor Riichiro  Saito, Department of Electronics Engineering,  University
              of Electro-Communications, Tokyo,  Japan.  The focus of the joint research is
              on  the chemical and physical properties of novel  forms of carbon-based
              materials including high  surface area carbons, metal carbide particles,  and
              fullerene-based solids and tubules.  In  addition to Professor Eklund, four
              other U.S.  investigators (Professors Francis Derbyshire  and Ping Zhou of the
              University of Kentucky and  Professors Gene Dresselhaus and Mildred 
              Dresselhaus of MIT), one postdoctoral fellow,  and three graduate students from
              the University  of Kentucky and MIT will participate in the  project.    The
              materials will be synthesized both in the  United States and Japan.  A wide
              variety of  experimental probes will be used to study these  materials
              (electron spin resonance, magneto-  transport, UV-Vis-IR optical spectroscopy, 
              Raman scattering, piezoresitivity,  photoconductivity, electron microscopy,
              x-ray  diffraction, specific heat, and magnetic  susceptibility).  The data
              will be analyzed to  formulate structure-related microscopic models  for the
              chemical and physical properties of  these carbon-based materials.   ***
