Title       : Discotic Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9315341

Award Number: 9315341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Heiney heiney@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9315341  Heiney    Discotic liquid crystals are generally composed of organic
              molecules with a rigid disk-shaped core  and 6-8 alkyl tails. Depending on the
              temperature and molecular geometry, these molecules can form  either nematic
              phases or columnar structures with long-range intercolumnar order and only
              short-  range intracolumnar order. Such columnar structures represent a new
              ordering of dimensionalities  for a condenssd state of matter: they are ordered
              in two dimensions and disordered in one.  Further, discotic donor-acceptor
              complexes formed by doping with an electron acceptor such as  iodine may
              combine the electrical properties of semiconductors or conductors with the
              anisotropic  mechanical, optical, and structural properties of liquid crystals.
              Discogenic molecules can  aggregate at the air-water interface to form Langmuir
              films, and thence be transferred to solid  substrates to form Langmuir-Blodgett
              films. The columnar structure of these materials is reflected  in transport
              anisotropy. Such thin films are of interest as model low-dimensional systems
              and for  display applications and the development of pressure  sensors.    In
              this research, studies on discotic liquid crystals are conducted to correlate
              the structure of  bulk phases, the structure of thin films, and the
              conductivity of both three-dimensional and two-  dimensional materials. The
              primary tools employed will be x-ray diffraction, atomic force  microscopy, and
              voltammetry, in conjunction with standard characterization by optical
              microscopy and  calorimetry. The materials studied will include triphenylene
              and truxene derivatives, hexacyclens,  and phthalocyanine derivatives; the
              latter are synthetic analogs of porphyrins that are of interest  because of
              their electrical, optical, and catalytic properties. Additionally, the
              properties of  newly conceived heptameric "supradisks" and tubular compounds
              will be characterized and explored.    ***
