Title       : A Project to Adapt and Adopt Workshop Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9752892

Award Number: 9752892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Cracolice markc@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Madeline Adamczeski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1046,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A coalition of four institutions, the University of Montana, American
              University, Clark Atlanta University, and the University of Kentucky, are
              adopting and adapting the core project Workshop Chemistry (centered at CUNY
              City College), currently supported by the Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate
              Chemistry Curriculum initiative.  Workshop Chemistry is a flexible curriculum
              model that involves students in active participation in the learning process
              under the facilitation of a peer group leader.  The traditional "question and
              quiz" recitation section format is replaced by a cooperative learning, peer-led
              workshop.  We are addressing the problem of the high drop and fail rate in
              general and organic chemistry courses by changing the social dynamics of the
              course format.  Specifically, we are promoting (1) a collegial network of
              learners among students, (2) a recognition of differences in learning styles,
              (3) the development of mentoring relationships, and (4) active group study that
              develops interpersonal verbal communication skills.  We also address the
              problem of improved conceptual understanding through a collaborative learning
              process that is specifically focused on chemistry concepts and problem-solving
              techniques.  Our objectives are being accomplished by restructuring our courses
              to utilize the Workshop Chemistry format.  Workbooks for both General and
              Organic Chemistry courses are also being developed as part of the project.
