Title       : A Multidisciplinary Workshop on Novel Process Science and Engineering Principles
               for College Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9752789

Award Number: 9752789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83948              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Stewart Slater slater@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Process engineering is critical to virtually all modem products used by society.
              In addition, process engineering spans many disciplines including chemical,
              petroleum, biochemical, environmental, food, materials production and
              manufacturing. Society is requiring these products to be produced in an
              environmentally benign manner which necessitates the infusion of new and
              emerging process engineering concepts. Many faculty do not have the experience
              in novel process engineering required to teach this information to students.
              For example many new faculty from engineering, science, mathematics and
              technology are hired with no industry experience and only have a highly
              specialized knowledge of one particular field. Faculty should have experience
              in emerging process engineering technologies such as environmental processing,
              hazard evaluation. materials engineering, particle processing, bioprocessing
              and novel unit operations.    The thrust of this proposal is to conduct two
              hands-on, industry integrated workshops that have a major impact on lower level
              engineering, technology and science instruction as well as having a secondary
              impact in the preparation of future teachers. Two workshops are planned for
              Summer 1998 and 1999 with participants actively recruited from underrepresented
              groups in science and engineering. Participants in these workshops will gain
              experience in process engineering through hands-on laboratories, industry
              experts, site visits and interactive demonstrations. Through industry
              involvement, faculty are given an initial networking base for process
              engineering. Participants are required to use the given methodology to
              integrate novel processing into their curricula and develop an action plan for
              their home institution. Active learning methods is employed in the workshop and
              participants are encouraged to incorporate this experience into their teaching
              style. This state-of-the-art workshop in process engineering facilitates the
              integration of engineering practice into the undergraduat e curriculum.
