Title       : Integration of Laboratory and Lecture within an IntroductoryGeology Course:
               Combining a Constructivist and Case Study Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9752327

Award Number: 9752327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Soreghan msoreg@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Douglas Elmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this project is to increase the relevance of science in a
              large introductory Physical Geology course by redesigning the course to: 1)
              include fewer topics that are covered in greater detail; 2) employ a case-study
              approach in lecture that maximizes discussion/debate; 3) employ a constuctivist
              approach in lab maximizing discovery based learning; and 4) fully integrate lab
              and lecture, so that labs illustrate the geologic principles relating to
              lecture discussions. The course will be divided into three main content areas:
              an introductory module (minerals, rock cycle and geologic time); an external
              processes module (groundwater, rivers/floods, energy from the Earth) and an
              internal processes module (volcanoes, earthquakes, plate tectonics). In
              lecture, case-studies will form an integral part of the curriculum. Background
              material and the "problem statement" for each case-study will be available to
              all students through a series of web pages designed for the course. Four groups
              of students will do additional research collaboratively and discuss/debate the
              issues to the rest of the class. Each student will be involved in one
              collaborative group and all students will be responsible for all case studies.
              The instructor will serve as quality control for the material presented in
              these discussions. Labs will develop the background principles for these case
              studies through explorationtype activities as well as analysis and synthesis of
              integrated datasets. The impact of this work will be three-fold: 1) the
              emphasis on case studies will produce a general student populace that is more
              aware of "real" geologic and environmental issues; 2) the focus in lab will
              shift from classifying and identifying to critical thinking and
              problem-solving; and 3) the exercises and case studies will serve as a model
              that other institutions can adopt in whole, or in part.
