Title       : The Coordinated Curriculum Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9752421

Award Number: 9752421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Moore lang@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project is creating and maintaining a library of web-based,
              interactive modules that have been tested, reviewed, and edited.  The existence
              of general purpose mathematical software, such as Maple, Mathcad, Mathematica,
              and Matlab, has spawned development of learning environments based on
              interactive text.  The emergence of the World Wide Web enables the creation of
              materials that are easily linked to each other and to disciplinary data sites,
              that may be used with a range of mathematical software, that are easily
              accessible at a distance, and that are easily updated. These modules provide
              materials for a range of lower division college-level mathematics courses and
              for independent exploration and study. In addition, materials are available for
              use in mathematically rich courses in other disciplines across the curriculum. 
                 The Coordinated Curriculum Library is a natural outgrowth of Project CALC
              calculus reform efforts and of a follow-on project to create modules for
              courses beyond calculus. This project is an integral part of the larger
              Coordinated Curriculum Project, currently involving faculty from the University
              of Arizona, Cal Poly at San Luis Obispo, Duke University, Hewlett Packard, and
              Montana State University. The format most appropriate for web-based materials
              is a combination of an HTML text with a mathematically sophisticated helper
              application-- e.g., Maple, Mathematica, etc. To determine how principles of
              module design should be applied in this setting, an integral component of the
              project is a study on how students learn in this environment.  In addition to
              putting the materials on the Web, presentations at meetings, minicourses, and
              workshops, are being used publicize the library as a source for innovative
              web-based learning materials that can be used with confidence and easily
              supplemented.
