Title       : Intersection of Population Biology and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9752645

Award Number: 9752645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane C. Gallagher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward H. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   A solid background in working with mathematical models using calculus and
              statistics has become a necessary component of education in Biology,
              particularly in the sub-fields of Ecology and Evolution.  However, the
              importance of mathematical concepts to Biology is extremely difficult to convey
              to beginning students who are more comfortable with qualitative, "natural
              history" approaches.  The problem in understanding the necessity of math to
              biology is greatly exacerbated by the fact that most Math courses and Biology
              courses are taught independently of each other, even when one course is a
              prerequisite to another.  These difficulties are particularly acute in teaching
              these subjects in inner city environments where the students tend to have poor
              quantitative skills and limited exposure to science.         We are addressing
              this difficulty by developing two coordinated undergraduate courses, one in
              Ecology and Evolution and one in Mathematical Modeling, that are designed to be
              taken together.  The flow of topics is designed to reinforce each other.  The
              Math course clarifies underlying principles of models of calculus and
              statistics and the Biology course provides a context for their application.  We
              are developing computer simulations and exercises using the spreadsheet program
              Excel, which is readily available to all students.  A new textbook in
              Mathematical Modeling for the Life Sciences is being produced, and we are
              making our lecture notes, laboratory exercises and simulations available on
              line.  We have assembled a team of outside advisors helping us to evaluate our
              materials, and have constructed an assessment plan.
