Title       : Multimedia Science Lab Incorporating Ojibwa/Metis Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9752568

Award Number: 9752568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139541             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Hanson culex@giizis.turtlemountain.cc.nd.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Desjarlais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Turtle Mountain Cmty Col
	      Box 340
	      Belcourt, ND  583160340    701/477-7862

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Disproportionately few Native Americans obtain baccalaureate science degrees and
              become employed as scientists.  A major reason for the scarcity of Native
              Americans with baccalaureate science degrees is the relatively low number of
              Native American science majors at tribal colleges.  The project goal is to
              increase the number of Turtle Mountain Community College students majoring in
              science, and to produce attractive, effective modular materials in
              interdisciplinary science that can and will be used at other tribal colleges.  
                 The projects objectives are to enhance science laboratories with: multimedia
              materials, materials with increased cultural content, greater emphasis on local
              natural resources, and improved pedagogical design, particularly increased
              cooperative learning.      This project will design a module on fish species
              composition, another on fish life histories, and a third on effects of water
              quality on fish.  Turtle Mountain fish species will be the focus of all
              modules.  In each module, students will perform field exercises (in local
              lakes) and laboratory exercises in cooperative groups.  Students will learn to
              pronounce the Ojibwa an Metis names for each fish and learn Ojibwa legends
              about fish.      The final product will be a CD-ROM-based interactive program
              for beginning biology, chemistry, ecology, language, and wildlife courses. 
              Students and an external evaluator will evaluate the curriculum.  The design of
              the field and laboratory exercises will be evaluated and baseline data will be
              collected.  The results and products of this work will be disseminated using
              presentations at professional meetings, mailings to other tribal colleges, and
              the assistance of the American Indian Higher Education Consortium AIHEC.
