Title       : CCD: Assessing and Disseminating a New Model for Undergraduate Physics Education
               at Large Research Universities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9752539

Award Number: 9752539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Gladding geg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Campbell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Alfred W. Hubler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the project are to (1) assess the effectiveness of the
              pedagogical content and instructional methods of the new University physics
              sequence under development at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
              (UIUC), (2) to standardize it and supporting materials in modular components,
              and (3) to produce and disseminate the model curriculum modules to other large
              research universities interested in undertaking physics educational reform. The
              project directly addresses widely documented problems in contemporary physics
              education, such as its perceived failure to impart conceptual understanding vs.
              rote learning and formulae crunching and its lack of support for diverse
              learning styles. The project also recognizes the special needs of large
              research universities in delivering undergraduate physics service courses--the
              need to provide effective instruction to hundreds of students per semester, the
              need to promote collaborative learning and teamwork and communication skills,
              the need to motivate research faculty to employ new instructional methods and
              to train graduate teaching assistants to be effective teachers, and the need to
              make successful learning independent of the efforts of one inspired .teacher by
              standardizing effective pedagogy. Activities to be undertaken to accomplish the
              objectives include (1) professional assessment of the curricular content of the
              newly revised UIUC University physics sequence, (2) production of modular
              course components, such as lectures, homework sets, laboratories, examinations,
              and teaching assistant training materials, with appropriate documentation, and
              (3) dissemination of the project materials to peer institutions wishing to
              undertake their own University physics course revision.
