Title       : On-Line Weather Studies: Introduction to the Atmosphere Through the Use of
               Internet-Delivered Meteorological Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9752416

Award Number: 9752416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William C. Beston                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira W. Geer geer@dc.ametsoc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Weinbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Meteorological Soc
	      45 Beacon Street
	      Boston, MA  021083631    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The American Meteorological Society (AMS) will develop and nationally implement
              a one-semester, introductory college-level, on-line distance-learning course on
              the fundamentals of atmospheric science in which students study weather as it
              happens. The course addresses the need for innovative and cost-effective
              science education opportunities for an increasingly diverse and non-traditional
              student population. It is being developed for use with pre-service teachers,
              giving them both an understanding of meteorological principles as well as
              numerous useful classroom investigations.  It will be available to colleges and
              universities as a turn-key package with electronic and printed components. The
              course will contain learning activities with components written to current
              meteorological data and delivered via the Internet. Use of simulations modules
              and a weather forecasting module, developed at Iowa State University is an
              integral component of this initiative. The experience of real-time study will
              enable students to negotiate scientific understanding of the atmosphere and its
              processes while actually tracking the ways the atmospheric system behaves. A
              course Reader, Student Study Guide, and Instructor's Resource Manual will be
              developed. On-line delivery of current meteorological data and related learning
              materials via an Internet Homepage will be coordinated with the Reader and
              Student Study Guide contents. The AMS project staff will produce the on-line
              component of the course and be available to local instructors for assistance.
              The course will be offered in spring and fall semesters. It is expected that up
              to 100 undergraduate institutions will offer the course through their offices
              of continuing education/outreach or academic departments, and approximately
              12,000 students will be enrolled during the two-year development phase. The
              course is expected to continue indefinitely on a self-sustaining basis.
