Title       : POWRE: Molecular Genetic Approaches to Study Organellar Membrane Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9752974

Award Number: 9752974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabeeha Merchant merchant@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1132,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9752974  Merchant   This is a POWRE Visiting Professor award.    The broad,
              long-term objective of the PI's research program is the understanding of the
              process of assembly of the chloroplast energy transducing membrane, with
              particular emphasis on how the cofactors and polypeptides are assembled to
              yield a specific functional arrangement in vivo.  A recently-developed project
              deals with the c-type cytochromes, soluble c6 and membrane-anchored f of the
              b6/f complex, and cyt b6, an integral membrane subunit of the b6/f complex. 
              This complex is not essential for heterotrophic growth in the experimental
              model organism Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which allows exploitation of
              classical, molecular genetic, and biochemical approaches of the study of its
              assembly.  Genetic analysis of C. reinhardtii cyt b6/f-deficient mutants has
              led to the definition of multiple loci which are required for chloroplast
              c-type cytochrome maturation (ccsA in the plastid genome, and CCS1 through CCS5
              in the nuclear genome).  Biochemical analysis of ccs strains indicates that the
              products of the CCS loci are required for conversion of apocytochromes to
              holocytochromes in the thylakoid lumen.  The ccsA and Ccs1 genes have been
              cloned; their products encode low abundance thylakoid membrane proteins.  A
              prime objective now is to undertake functional studies of these two
              newly-identified components of a putative thylakoid membrane-associated
              cytochrome c assembly complex.  Of interest are the topology and orientation of
              these novel proteins, and the identification of other components of the
              complex.  In the case of cyt b6, the products of at least four loci (CCB1-CCB4)
              are required specifically for post-translational heme insertion into one of the
              two heme binding sites.  These are also envisioned to be thylakoid membrane
              proteins, since cyt b6 synthesis and assembly is entirely a membrane-associated
              process.      The objective of this POWRE project is to access approaches and
              methodologies employed for the functional character ization of multi-component
              organellar membrane-protein complexes so that they may be applied to the study
              of products of the CCS and CCB loci.  The experimental strategies employed for
              the definition of the mitochondrial protein translocases serve as precedents
              for the development of methods for the study of the thylakoid membrane c-type
              cytochrome synthesis complex.  The PI will therefore engage in a 6-month
              collaboration with Dr. Carla Koehler in the laboratory of Dr. Gottfried Schatz
              at the Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland.  During this visit, the PI
              will participate in the functional analysis of genetically-identified
              components of a mitochondrial translocase required for the import of carrier
              proteins into the inner membrane.  Direct involvement in this project will
              facilitate the acquisition of the expertise the PI needs to move her project on
              chloroplast cytochrome biogenesis beyond gene identification to the definition
              of the biochemistry of the gene products.    ***
