Title       : "Experimental and Investigative Laboratory Courses in Evolutionary Biology"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9752409

Award Number: 9752409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis Antonovics   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander F. Motten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past twenty years, evolutionary biology has developed in to a vibrant,
              investigative science with a potent relevance to societal issues such as
              origins of infectious disease and biotechnology. The emerging role of
              evolutionary biology as a scientific discipline is in stark contrast to the
              continuing efforts to limit teaching evolution in high-schools, or to question
              evolutionary ideas as a valid province of science. While the teaching of
              evolutionary biology at both high school and college levels is now struggling
              to emerge from such censoring and neglect, evolution is still largely taught as
              a theoretical, dialectical discipline that often seems only to impact on
              theoretical ideas and broad conceptual landscapes. Rarely is it taught as an
              experimental, analytical science of applied relevance on a par with, say,
              physiology or molecular biology. We propose to rectify this situation in two
              ways. First, we will develop an experimental investigative laboratory in
              evolutionary biology that can serve as a "flagship" for illustrating how
              evolution can be taught at the college level as an experimental and
              investigative science that is societally relevant. We also illustrate how such
              an investigative course could be run with minimal resources and using a wide
              range of possible materials. Second, recognizing that curricula and colleges
              will vary in terms of their ability or desire to commit to such a focused
              laboratory course, we will also stimulate the teaching evolution as a hands-on
              science by additionally developing a web-site for distribution via the internet
              of laboratory exercises in evolutionary biology. Currently, such a resource is
              not available, and we only know of one manual on teaching evolution as a
              laboratory course. We will therefore gather, collate, and distribute materials
              that can be used to enrich discussion sections and laboratory classes.
