Title       : Faculty Institutes for Reforming Science Teaching Through Field Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9752713

Award Number: 9752713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Hodder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Ebert-May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda P. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Field stations and marine laboratories (FSMLs) offer an exceptional opportunity
              to teach biology in ways that truly enhance student learning. FSMLs are
              particularly well suited to inquiry-based learning called for in science
              education reform as their unique natural settings foster learning communities
              and cooperative activities that are not always evident on main campus
              locations. However, the majority of faculty based at FSMLs, and those faculty
              that bring students to FSMLs from universities and colleges, have limited
              experience with effective instructional strategies to teach science through
              inquiry. Faculty Institutes For Reforming Science Teaching Through Field
              Stations (Project FIRST) is designed to prepare communities of faculty
              associated with field stations throughout the United States to utilize
              inquiry-based, active  learning approaches for reforming undergraduate biology
              courses and curriculum.  During FIRST, new faculty, senior faculty and
              post-doctoral students who are either based at, or associated with, a field
              station or marine laboratory will form a Field Station team (the FSML team) to
              work together to expand their knowledge of inquiry-based learning at FSMLs,
              ideal active learning settings. Six FSML teams will recruit one hundred eighty
              biology faculty from universities, and four-year and community colleges in
              their region to form a regional network centered at the field station or marine
              laboratory. The faculty will come from both science and education departments
              at these institutions.  FSML teams will work with the regional faculty to
              translate and make connections between active learning models designed at field
              stations, and similar innovative teaching methods or strategies that would work
              for courses and curriculum within departments to enhance student learning.
              These techniques will also serve as models for the prospective K-12 teachers
              enrolled in the science and education courses of participating faculty.  By
              providing these opportunities, all students should have opp ortunities to gain
              scientific understanding through direct experiences with methods and processes
              of scientific inquiry.
