Title       : Beyond Formulas: Utilizing Workplace Application Modules toEnhance Introductory
               Mathematics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9752241

Award Number: 9752241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74976              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Khoury khouryj@brevard.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shai Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacquelyn A. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah McClinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brevard Community College
	      1519 Clearlake Road
	      Cocoa, FL  329226503    305/632-1111

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                         This project Beyond Formulas is developing holistic,
              interdisciplinary Workplace Application Modules as enhancements to existing
              mathematics curricular materials. By presenting students with challenging,
              work-based problems, these modules demonstrate the relevance of abstract
              concepts to the real-world, thereby helping students improve both their
              understanding of and attitude toward mathematics. In turn, by making
              mathematics real to students through meaningful examples and engaging
              activities, the project is increasing critical-thinking and intuitive abilities
              - beyond rote memorization of formulas - to help students more effectively
              solve problems and make decisions as future employees in a highly technological
              workplace.    Modules comprise five areas of study: algebra, statistics,
              trigonometry, precalculus, and calculus. Each module is exposing students to
              workplace-relevant scenarios and case studies that engage the students in
              abstract reasoning and the process of inquiry, provide overviews of industries
              on which case studies relate, and integrate mathematical theory within the
              industrial context. Module activities include cooperative learning;
              mathematical problem-solving; utilization of technology; use of data,
              measurement, models, and cause and effect diagrams; written assignments; and
              presentations.    Modules are being pilot-tested, evaluated and revised by
              College mathematics faculty from other two-year colleges and an external
              evaluator from Manatee Community College. Student attainment of learning
              objectives, improved performance, and changes in attitudes and perceptions are
              being used as indicators of project effectiveness. Qualitative evaluations by
              faculty are also being conducted. Developed materials and results are being
              disseminated locally, statewide and nationally to maximize project impact.
