Title       : Tribal College Math-Science Teaching Project (TC-MAST Project)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9752761

Award Number: 9752761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salish Kootenai Coll
	      P O BOX 117
	      Pablo, MT  598550117    406/675-4800

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A collaboration of all seven of Montana's tribal colleges (TCs), in partnership
              with the University of Montana (UM) and Montana State University (MSU),
              proposes to carry out a tribal college faculty enhancement program consisting
              of summer workshops and TC faculty terms-in-residence (TIR), where TC faculty
              will spend a term or academic year in residence at either UM or MSU. The main
              objective of the workshops is to explore new teaching methodologies in areas
              such as math-science integration, inquiry-based learning,
              practical/experiential learning, integration of research and coursework, and
              incorporation of new technologies. The TIR will provide additional
              opportunities for professional development. During a TIR, individual TC faculty
              members may take courses that will enable them to expand and enrich course
              offerings or lead to an advanced degree, conduct research with university
              colleagues, co-teach courses with university colleagues, and participate in
              educational reform efforts. An important additional benefit to the TIR is that
              tribal college faculty, through collaborations with university faculty, will
              provide leadership in developing strategies that are more conducive to the
              education of Native Americans in the university system. Participation in the
              workshops will be open to 20 TC math-science faculty as well as four university
              faculty per year. Workshops will take place during the summers of 1998 and
              1999. Participation in the terms-in-residence program will be selective and
              based on the quality of sub-proposals submitted to the steering committee. The
              development and reinforcement of collaboration between TC and university
              faculty will be of long-term benefit to higher education across Montana. In
              particular, tribal college faculty will enrich their knowledge while
              simultaneously enriching the university system with methods that have proven to
              be successful in the education of Native Americans in science and math.
