Title       : UFE: Teaching Computer-Intensive Resampling Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a9752705

Award Number: 9752705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gale R. Bryce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian L. Simon  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter C. Bruce  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Problem:    Probability and statistics are vital tools in a wide variety of
              fields and professions, from astronomy to zoology, and its teaching can be
              improved substantially with resampling. Next to calculus, statistics is
              probably the most taught course on college campuses. It also may be one of the
              least successful--students strain to remember or crib from formulae that
              distract them from the key tasks of problem formulation and data analysis.
              Computer-intensive resampling (an innovative technique now widely accepted
              among statisticians but not yet widely taught) allows students to determine
              sampling distributions and solve problems empirically with simulations based on
              sample data, rather than memorizing formulae.    Objectives:    This project
              will provide workshops to assist instructors in teaching  introductory
              statistics using a resampling approach. Resampling is the repeated drawing of
              simulated samples, often from the given data, to observe the behavior of some
              statistic or estimate of interest. Bootstrap, Monte Carlo, and resampling
              counterparts to permutation (randomization) methods also are included.
              Sometimes the term "computer-intensive methods" is used to refer to these
              methods generally.    Activities:    There will be an initial series of
              meetings with instructors who already teach resampling, or order to learn the
              issues that arise during resampling education. Next, workshops for interested
              statistics instructors will be held. Participants will be provided with the
              materials they need to return to their institutions and teach resampling.
              Follow-up questionnaires will be sent to participants to assess their
              experience. A web site will offer some of the same materials. Two follow-up
              workshops will be held in order to have in-person meetings with participants to
              discuss their experiences in teaching resampling methods--an "innovate, assess,
              adjust" cycle.
