Title       : Product Design for Injection Molding: A Java-Based Training Module
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9752356

Award Number: 9752356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony A. Renshaw ar177@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert McClintock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project further develops, evaluates, and disseminates a pilot project for a
              Java-based, interactive, self-paced learning module entitled "Product Design
              for Injection Molding." This module was identified from a group of seven pilot
              modules for freshman engineering design as the project with the greatest
              likelihood of success as an on-line, multimedia learning tool and the  most
              potential impact beyond the Columbia courses in which it will be used.    The
              module strategically uses multimedia technology to enable users with little or
              no engineering background to learn and begin to apply basic mechanical design
              principles to reverse engineering problems and their own designs, both for
              injection molded parts and parts using related design principles. Educational
              institutions and companies can use the module to train students and new
              employees. The module also provides useful computational design tools that can
              be used on a day to day basis by practicing engineers.    This is a
              collaborative effort among Columbia University, industrial partners (Texas
              Instruments, Inc. and Symbol Technologies, Inc.), and several NYC high schools.
              The criticism, use and evaluation of the module by this diverse group helps to
              direct and focus the development of the module. The different computer
              platforms and skill levels of the team members will also ensure that the module
              is universally portable and useable.    Formative and summative evaluations of
              the module will be conducted by experts from Columbia's Teachers College with
              an emphasis on the effectiveness of the module in attracting, motivating, and
              retaining students of all backgrounds in engineering. A substantial fraction of
              the high school students have backgrounds that have been traditionally
              disenfranchised from professional engineering.    Dissemination to industry,
              academia, and high schools will leverage the resources of the Society of
              Plastics Engineers and a coalition of 80 NYC K-l 2 schools fostering technology
              enabled education.
