Title       : Development of a Model Set of Engineering Course Materials Using Java
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9752311

Award Number: 9752311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Devenport devenport@aoe.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kusum Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kamal B. Rojiani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rakesh K. Kapania  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                        The objective of this proposal is the
              development of a series of novel computer-based instructional units in key
              areas of engineering mechanics that serve as a national model for the
              development of similar materials throughout engineering and science. The units
              are centered on instructional programs written in the universally compatible
              Java programming language, and are made available to all engineering students
              and educators over the World Wide Web. They are focused, self-contained and
              independent so that they can be easily integrated into a broad range of
              engineering courses and curricula. The units are designed to have a significant
              impact on engineering students, providing them additional materials that
              promote their understanding of central concepts over a medium that allows
              independent learning at an individual pace from anywhere in the world.    A
              broadly advertised site on the World Wide Web will contain these peer-reviewed
              instructional units and similar reviewed materials developed by others.
              Stimulating the development of similar materials by other instructors is a
              crucial goal to be accomplished by direct contact with educators at Virginia
              Tech and its many sister institutions as well as by providing supplementary
              information over the Web and through scholarly publications and meetings. 
              Evaluation of the educational effectiveness of the units is an integral part of
              the project. Formative evaluation are used to improve and modify the units
              based on the responses of users. Both quantitative and qualitative evaluations
              are performed to assess the effectiveness of the units in terms of the
              cognitive gains of students who use them.
