Title       : PKAL Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9752771

Award Number: 9752771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $806517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne L. Narum pkal@pkal.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Independent Coll Off
	      1730 Rhode Island Avenue
	      Washington, DC  200363101    202/232-1300

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) is continuing its series of faculty enhancement
              workshops on the reform of science, mathematics, engineering and technology
              undergraduate education. During 1998-2000, there will be 26 workshops, one of
              which will be a national colloquium. The workshops will provide faculty and
              administrators with: 1) promising new ideas about effective pedagogies and
              teaching technologies; 2) hands-on experiences with reforms whose success has
              been demonstrated; 3) materials that can be adapted to their own settings; 4)
              insights into the process of developing, implementing and evaluating reforms;
              5) connections to others who share their commitment to strengthening education
              for undergraduates studying science, mathematics, engineering and technology.  
                A. Goals. The goals of the workshops are consistent with PKAL's continuing
              mission -- to equip teams for leadership reform at the local level and assist
              their efforts; to build public support for the work of strengthening
              undergraduate programs, based on a more educated understanding of how such
              programs serve the national interest; and to develop partnerships of
              institutions working together to achieve those goals.     B. Target Audiences.
              The workshops are for undergraduate SME&T faculty members and their
              administrators at colleges and universities already participating in PKAL, to
              consolidate and broaden efforts underway so that successes confined to one
              department become system-wide. They will also be for two-year colleges and
              research universities who have yet to participate in the workshops but where
              interest in reform is growing.     C. Project Leaders and Workshop Topics. The
              topics for the 1998-2000 series are identified by faculty, reflective
              practitioners of what works who serve on the PKAL Workshop Task Forces and
              Leadership committees. Representing all types of institutions, they know
              first-hand the problems of undergraduate SME&T education, how different
              solutions work in various settings, and what it takes to make them  work.
              Topics for workshops on single disciplines will include new pedagogies
              (collaborative learning, inquiry-based learning, etc.), and the new uses of
              technologies for teaching and learning. Topics for workshops with a broader
              focus will include interdisciplinary programs and teaching, and science for all
              students, including underrepresented students. Workshop Task Forces identify
              major themes of reform in their area, and challenge participants with a broad
              spectrum of ideas and approaches.     D. Approach and Structure. Over the past
              four years, PKAL has developed a workshop approach and structure that is
              effective and efficient. Workshop applicants are asked to identify those
              questions most pressing for their institution, and secure the administration's
              informed endorsement of their participation, to prepare for the workshop. The
              sequence of activities at the workshops, limited to 80 participants, is
              designed to identify and explore the right questions, and engage in
              wide-ranging discussions. Finally, at the end of the workshop each team plans
              the steps towards implementing reform they will take at their home campus.    
              E. Follow-up. It is essential that participating teams have continuing support
              as they implement reform. PKAL asks for follow-up reports on actions taken, on
              the impact of reforms, on student learning, on curricular and pedagogical
              discussions within and between departments, and on administrative support for
              reform efforts. PKAL also provides continuing access to people and ideas
              changing undergraduate SME&T education, and the opportunity to use the
              expertise of the Keck/PKAL consultants for help with specific efforts to
              implement significant new initiatives.     F. The PKAL Context. The workshops
              proposed are central to PKAL's work. They offer the young faculty who form the
              PKAL F21 Network the opportunity to take a leadership role in reform; they are
              the point from which we focus on institutional reform, they provide significant
              materials for the PKAL Web site.
