Title       : Integrated Mathematics and Physics for Technical Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9752038

Award Number: 9752038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kimball rkimball@gwmail.wake.tec.nc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Maynard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise M. Wetli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cyrus McCarter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice C. Sexton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Technical Cmty Col
	      9101 Fayetteville Road
	      Raleigh, NC  276035655    919/772-0551

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                  This project is creating several integrated
              mathematics/physics projects that are (1) strengthening the student's skills at
              applying mathematical concepts and (2) better preparing students for a highly
              technical workplace.  These classroom projects use physics concepts to motivate
              the study of mathematical concepts.  The mathematics is immediately applied to
              revisit the physics concept and serves to uncover the physics.    Both the
              physics and mathematics community are calling for the pedagogy used in
              classrooms to reflect current knowledge about how students learn as well as to
              reflect the technology available.  The projects serves to produce a
              student-centered classroom where students are expected to take on the
              responsibility for learning using the instructor as one of the resources. 
              Technology (CBLs and MBLs) is being utilized to collect data with spreadsheets
              and graphing calculators used as tools to organize and analyze data.  Students
              are developing the skills that are necessary to work collaboratively (e.g., the
              ability to utilize the resources of each team member, the ability to express
              oneself clearly, and the ability to be sensitive to the individual needs while
              still requiring a final product) as well as the skills that are necessary for
              them to work independently (i.e., the ability to read critically, the ability
              to develop a process and a plan of action, and the ability to find resources as
              needed). Communication skills are being developed as the
              solicit-confront-resolve model is used extensively.                These
              projects demonstrate that an integrated approach to mathematics and physics
              helps students by providing them with a better understanding of the physics,
              and with the ability to apply the mathematics.  The projects are being
              disseminated at state and national meetings of physics and mathematics
              professional organizations, and by publishing the projects as a collection.
