Title       : POWRE: A Genetic Approach to Structure and Function Analysis of a New Class of
               Molecular Chaperones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9752978

Award Number: 9752978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Vierling vierling@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1156,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9752978  Vierling    This is a POWRE Research Enhancement Award.    The
              immediate goal of this project is to establish a genetic approach, using the
              cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, for structure and function analysis
              of a new class of molecular chaperone, the small heat shock proteins (sHSPs). 
              These ubiquitous stress proteins, found in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes,
              accumulate during heat stress in virtually all organisms, and appear to also
              have a role in certain developmental and growth stage transitions in many
              organisms. While a working model for the sHSPs exists, there are essentially no
              data on the mechanistic details of sHSP action, and very little direct in vivo
              data to support the model.   Recently, Dr. H. Fukuzawa at Kyoto University
              discovered that deletion of the single sHSP gene in the cyanobacterium
              Synechocystis, HSP16.6, leads to inability to develop thermotolerance but does
              not affect normal cell growth.  This is the first demonstration that a
              prokaryotic sHSP is required for high temperature tolerance, and is the first
              phenotype associated with an sHSP mutant in any organism other than the fungus
              Neurospora.  Since Synechocystis can be easily manipulated genetically, this
              discovery affords an excellent opportunity for detailed analysis of sHSP
              structure and function.  Synechocystis carries the further advantage that its
              complete genome has been sequenced.      The project will be carried out in
              collaboration with H. Fukuzawa at Kyoto University in Japan.  This award
              provides support toward the acquisition of equipment necessary for the culture
              of the cyanobacteria in Dr. Vierling's laboratory.  The acquisition of this
              equipment is critical to the initiation of this project.  ***
