Title       : Development and Evaluation of Computer-Assisted Instruction in the Methods of
               Scientific Sociology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9752619

Award Number: 9752619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Cappell cappell¦niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes the development of approximately ten computer programs
              utilizing new features of multi-media, interactive, instructional design. The
              programs will reinforce the conceptual learning of the basic elements of
              quantitative/statistical reasoning in the social sciences: critical thinking
              skills, probability, conceptual modeling and hypotheses construction,
              statistical modeling, sampling, and inference.  Instructional design techniques
              are used to improve student learning: interactive feedback, learner control,
              active learning, conceptual mapping, and performance tracking. The modules will
              be written using AUTHORWARE, an application development tool that creates
              programs executable as both resident software and over an INTRANET using
              AUTHORWARE's browser plug-in, SHOCKWAVE. The development of these applications
              addresses a major problem encountered in teaching quantitative statistical
              reasoning - how to improve students' understanding of basic concepts used in
              statistical reasoning, the linkage between concepts, and their role in solving
              real world problems, especially among students under educated in mathematics.  
                The modules will be used in a course sited in a laboratory known as the
              Sociology Quantitative Research Laboratory, which was equipped with the aid of
              an NSF ILI grant.  These modules will add the "conceptual learning" tools to
              existing "computational learning" lab tools.  An experimental design using
              students in an introductory methods course will evaluate the improvement in
              student learning. The learning modules will have a general social science
              context relevant for nearly all sociology and social science research courses.
              We plan to distribute the modules commercially.
