Title       : Infusion of Laser Technology in Science Courses: An Interdisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9752340

Award Number: 9752340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia T. Bozeman sbozeman@spelman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Derrick Hylton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Burns-Kaurin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash C. Bhatia  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Spelman College
	      350 Spelman Lane S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303144346    404/681-3643

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project addresses the well-documented need to incorporate modern
              technology and various learning approaches in undergraduate education.  Despite
              reports citing the importance of lasers in chemical and physical research, it
              remains unclear where and how undergraduate students begin to learn and explore
              creative ideas using lasers.  This proposal describes the development of an
              interdisciplinary Lasers, Optics, and Spectroscopy course and relevant
              materials for chemistry and physics students.  This course will utilize
              non-traditional pedagogical approaches to help capture the genuine interest and
              excitement of scientific exploration and discovery.  It will provide a means
              for introducing modern equipment and technology into the undergraduate
              curriculum, while using an investigative approach designed to enhance the
              learning experience.  A key element to these approaches will be
              laboratory-based activities involving situations encountered in real scientific
              endeavors and real-world situations.  This learning experience is also designed
              to help students build connections between disciplines, theory and experiments,
              and basic scientific principles and applications.  In addition, new experiments
              based upon lasers and related technology will be developed for introductory
              science and mathematics courses, and for an interdisciplinary science course
              for non-science majors.  Finally, the proposed effort would include a workshop
              for science and mathematics teachers in order to provide similar materials for
              use in K-12 classrooms.  All of the course materials developed will be
              interdisciplinary (involving physics, chemistry, and mathematics), thus
              demonstrating the students the need to retain, transfer, apply, and evaluate
              basic concepts presented in their core courses.  As a result, students should
              be better prepared to use science and technology in addressing future issues of
              society.
