Title       : CCD: Development of an Interdisciplinary Biocomputing Course at the Introductory
               Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9752504

Award Number: 9752504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaorong Zhang zhangx@tigerpaw.savstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Savannah State University
	      State College Branch
	      Savannah, GA  31404    912/356-2186

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biocomputing is a newly emerging interdisciplinary field which uses
              computational methods to analyze the fast-growing biological data.  As
              biological information continues to increase, there is certainly an increasing
              demand for biocomputing experts by industry and academia at all levels, from
              senior scientists with a Ph. D. degree to laboratory scientists with MS or B.S.
              degrees.  Currently, however, there are too few scientists who possess such
              cross-disciplinary skills in both biology and computer science to meet such
              demand. Therefore, this project is proposed to address this urgent problem. The
              overall goal of this project is to introduce biocomputing into the first two
              years of the undergraduate curriculum and to prepare undergraduate students for
              pursuing biocomputing-related careers. To help accomplish this goal, a new
              course entitled Introduction to Biocomputing is being developed.  The course
              format consists of core lectures, laboratory practices, group discussion, and a
              course project.  These components of the new course are carefully designed to
              promote student academic interest and success in the field of biocomputing.  A
              textbook and laboratory manual needed for the course, are also being prepared.
              The effort is being evaluated by an independent evaluator.  To aid
              dissemination, a virtual on-line course is being designed and provided on the
              World Wide Web.
