Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis Applied to Evolution, Ecology, and Systemic Biology:
               An Extended Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9752712

Award Number: 9752712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank T. Bayliss fbayl@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg S. Spicer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Routman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement (UFE) project provides for each of the
              next two years: an intense fourteen-day laboratory short course, Molecular
              Genetics & Evolutionary Biology, in the summer; a 4-day follow-up session the
              following summer; and on-going technical and material support. The format 
              evolved from prior national Chautauqua and UFE courses. Twenty-two faculty are
              selected each year from a national applicant pool comprised of faculty from
              community colleges, 4-year liberal arts colleges and universities,
              comprehensive universities, and research universities.  Four pre-service
              teachers are selected from SFSU. Participants learn the fundamentals of
              molecular biology through lectures and demonstrations, and  conduct a series of
              experiments to develop skill in PCR amplification, restriction enzyme analysis,
              and various gel separation techniques.  Participants investigate "thematic"
              research projects in research groups of six composed of a mix of a pre-service
              teacher, a mentor teacher and faculty from community colleges and four-year
              institutions.  Seminar topics include the use of molecular techniques to
              investigate procaryote, vertebrate, invertebrate, and plant systems, the
              incorporation of these techniques into the undergraduate laboratory, and
              examples of effective teaching practices.   As a final exercise, each of the
              preservice teachers and faculty create teaching modules incorporating the new
              laboratory and teaching techniques developed during the workshop. Following the
              course the SFSU faculty is available via telephone and email to help
              participants incorporate molecular techniques and analysis into their research
              projects and their undergraduate courses. The instructional materials developed
              in prior courses as well as materials developed by new UFE participants are
              being placed on an SFSU/UFE web site.
