Title       : A Low Cost Open-Ended CBL Based Approach to General Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1998   
File        : a9752535

Award Number: 9752535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane D. Wolff dwolff@ferrum.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ferrum College
	      
	      Ferrum, VA  24088    540/365-2121

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This innovative general chemistry laboratory development project seeks to  
              transform the traditional approach to laboratory. Open-ended labs covering
              multiple weeks are conducted with methodology created by the students as the
              labs proceed. Environmental and biological applications are used to enhance the
              interest of the students. Data is collected on each student's Texas Instrument
              TI-83 calculator using the lab's calculator based laboratory (CBL) system and
              instrument probes. Real-time data analysis determines the quality of the data
              and the need for further analyses.    Four laboratory investigations are
              conducted each semester.  Each involves a variety of topics included in the
              traditional single-week lab approach so that all of the important concepts
              generally included in first year labs are addressed.  The topics for this
              project include: a) Internet and Web searches, b) chemical and physical
              properties of ten environmentally important chemicals, c) water, water
              everywhere, d) properties of liquids and gases, e) properties of solutions, f)
              vitamin chemistry, g) a kinetics study, and h) a four week research project.   
               The emphasis on non-"cookbook" chemistry should stimulate the student's
              creativity and ability to formulate and carry out self-designed scientific
              investigations. A final research project involving concepts learned in the
              beginning labs is used to investigate a problem that is of interest to the
              student.  The goal of this project is to create interesting, relevant
              laboratories that will lead to a better understanding of chemistry as well as 
              the methodology of science.
