Title       : The Shodor Computational Science Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9752815

Award Number: 9752815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Panoff rpanoff@shodor.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Holly P. Hirst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shodor Educ Fdtn Inc
	      923 Broad Street
	      Durham, NC  277054141    919/286-1911

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Shodor computational Science Institute is a series of workshops, seminars,
              and support activities to introduce the authentic use of numerical models
              across the undergraduate curriculum.  The SCSI project will enable teams of
              mathematics, science, and computer science faculty at small to medium sized
              colleges to work together, to enhance their professional standing through the
              use of technology and the wider use of mathematical modeling and the tools of
              computations science within a truly interdisciplinary approach.  This focus on
              modeling will enable these faculty to learn how to do computational science and
              how to teach computational science in engaging and enriching interactive
              environments incorporating the same tools, techniques, and technologies which
              characterize the modern practice of science and engineering.  During a series
              of workshops and follow-on activities, participants progress from finding and
              assessing models, to running other people's models, to modifying these models,
              to ultimately writing their own.  At each stage, the faculty grow to understand
              the importance of challenging the model and its numerical implementations,
              asking themselves and their students, "How do we know if it is right?"  The
              project includes a series of campus visits, a series of three, intensive,
              one-week, interdisciplinary summer workshops which cover the principles and
              practices of computational science at the introductory, intermediate, and
              advanced levels, and seminars and modeling-based activities back at the home
              institutions.  continuous support and follow-up, materials development, access
              to HPCC and visualization resources, and evaluation are coordinated and enabled
              by using collaborative tools and electronic networks.
