Title       : Iowa General Chemistry Network: Adapt and Adopt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9752884

Award Number: 9752884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Greenbowe tgreenbo@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K L. Woo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micheal J. Sanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1046,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the past three years, 32 chemistry faculty from Iowa's community colleges,
              private colleges, and regents universities have participated in the Iowa
              General Chemistry Network (IGCN). They have helped each other develop and
              implement a variety of instructional strategies and techniques. This
              adapt/adopt project allows members of the IGCN to continue reform of their
              undergraduate chemistry courses and curriculum.      The project is a
              collaborative effort among members of the IGCN and four of the existing
              initiatives in the Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
              program.  The following components were identified for implementation in IGCN
              institutions: instructional modules (University of California-Berkeley),
              Conceptual Questions and Modern Materials (Wisconsin-Madison), Peer Teaching -
              Workshop Chemistry (City College of New York), and Guided Inquiry Labs - Theme
              Based Approach (Beloit College).     Faculty from IGCN institutions are
              adapting components from one or two of the above initiatives. Members share
              their experiences and based upon these experiences, the most promising
              components are being incorporated into other participating members courses.
              Participating members use the IGCN state-wide fiber optics two-way audio and
              visual system to implement adaptation and to conduct meetings among faculty
              from member institutions.  In addition, summer workshops conducted by leaders
              from the systemic change projects are assisting IGCN faculty members in
              adapting the targeted components.  This continuous forum for communicating and
              working among all participants is facilitating reform of  introductory
              chemistry courses. Both formative and summative evaluations are designed to
              provide meaningful assessment.     The goal of this project is to involve
              students more actively in understanding important chemical concepts.  The
              project also serves as a model for regional collaborative efforts to improve
              learning in chemistry through adapting the results of the major chemistry
              initiat ives to a variety of local environments.
