Title       : The Southeast Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in Technological Education
               (SMARTE): Advanced Technologies in Product Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9752024

Award Number: 9752024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mulchand S. Rathod rathod@et1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cora Eubanks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine M. Ferman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rahmatollah Golshan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Alliance Members: There are five community colleges who are part of SMARTE
              (Southeastern Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in Technological Education). 
              The Alliance also represents a major state university, K-12 school systems,
              community-based organizations, government agencies, labor, business, and
              industry interests in southeastern Michigan.    Overall Goal of the project: To
              assist community colleges, school districts, and universities to prepare
              skilled technicians in product design by offering programs and delivery systems
              which are partnered with business and industry.    Re-engineering Initiatives: 
               1) To develop regional product design curricula based upon skill standards,
              math and science applications, information technologies, and work-based
              learning.   2) To develop programs and delivery systems for the recruitment,
              retention and placement of non-traditional students in a learning communities
              setting.    Objectives to Accomplish Initiatives:   Develop or enhance regional
              product design programs incorporating knowledge areas which are based on skills
              using the industry standards and criteria (SCANS, ABET, NAIT, Advanced
              Manufacturing) established during the first phase of this project and resulted
              in the core competencies for product design.   Implement work-based learning
              experiences as part of technical programs.   Incorporate/integrate information
              technologies for instructional delivery.   Develop simulation programs which
              incorporate skills needed by the advanced manufacturing industry.   Conduct
              enrichment programs for students to increase competencies in math, science,
              computers, and product design.   Develop and deliver an enrichment program for
              middle school teachers in product design.   Work with faculty and teachers to
              share training resources on technological skills, core competencies, and
              recruitment and retention programs for non-traditional students.
