Title       : Virtual Classroom Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9752054

Award Number: 9752054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $551106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bob L. Williams williab@dbcc.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Baron  (Principal Investigator former)
              James F. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles O. Pike  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dallas B. Peacock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Cameron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Daytona Beach Cmty Col
	      1200 W. International Speedway
	      Daytona Beach, FL  321202811    386/255-8131

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Daytona Beach Community College (DBCC), utilizing computer and engineering
              technology faculty and consultants, proposes to create a new instructional
              environment for introductory classes in electronics, computer aided design,
              civil engineering and computer programming.  This new environment addresses the
              various learning modalities, diverse schedules and lifestyles of the
              non-traditional students found in ever increasing numbers at institutions
              nation wide.  The virtual classroom will permit students to access their
              computer technology and electronics courses at any time and from any place
              through the resources and capabilities of the internet and the World Wide Web. 
                 The specific objectives of this project are to: 1) Develop and implement a
              Virtual Classroom Environment which allows time/place in dependent access to
              course materials and teaching/learning interchange for students and faculty; 2)
              Develop and implement the appropriate interactive curriculum for the virtual
              classroom to ensure not only the success of students in their field, but to
              continually enhance the learning process as a by-product of this environment;
              and 3) To provide in-service training for participating secondary school
              teachers through Tech-Prep and School-to-Work programs on the use and
              development of interactive computer aided instruction.     The significance of
              this project is that it will demonstrate how the virtual classroom environment
              can be developed and utilized to train postsecondary students in various
              disciplines; produce course database on CD-ROM or disk media, and have national
              and international impact though the Internet and the World Wide Web.
