Title       : Enhancing Mathematics Courses Through Engineering Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9752266

Award Number: 9752266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janis M. Oldham oldhamj@athena.ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bala Ram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton B. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Derome O. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guoqing Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project entitled" Enhancing Mathematics Courses Through Engineering 
              Applications" is a collaboration between the Mathematics Department and the
              Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Departments. The project is informing and
              developing the understanding of engineering applications of mathematics, with
              the expectation that this motivates students within their math courses to
              understand how the math is used. The project is producing multimedia modules
              for specified mathematics courses, training math faculty on the use of the
              modules, implementing classroom use of the modules, and training faculty to 
              develop additional multimedia modules. Twelve multimedia modules are being
              developed. Each module consists of an applications module and two Maple labs
              based on the applications module. The applications modules are being developed
              using multimedia, including video, text, audio, and the computer. In the
              applications modules, in-depth engineering applications selected from courses
              are being introduced, the mathematics explained, the mathematics revisited with
              the math theory explained, and then extrapolation with in depth questions or
              other applications. The two associated Maple labs involve students
              interactively. The modules are being incorporated into the target courses.   
              The expected impact on students (87% African-American) is better understanding
              of the need to learn the math as well as better retention of the math. The
              expected impact on the teachers is more knowledge of applications and continued
              further understanding of and use of technology in instruction.
