Title       : POWRE: Evolution and Persistence of the T-Haplotype in Finite Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9752945

Award Number: 9752945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie D. Durand durand@molbio.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9752945  Durand     Ultraselfish gene complexes (USGC's), which have been
              observed in several species, are chromosomal entities that are both aggressive
              and deleterious.  They are transmitted to offspring more often than their
              genetic counterparts, in violation of Mendel's laws.  Yet, they are harmful to
              the organism that carries them in that they cause sterility and often carry
              recessive lethal mutations.  The evolution of USGC's is of interest as an
              example of competitive evolution between genetic elements in a single organism.
                   The long term objective of this work by Marie Dannie Durand is to
              understand how USGC's evolve in populations.  The goal of the current project
              is to demonstrate that a combination of simulation and analytic methods can be
              an effective research tool in this area by developing a combined model of a
              USGC that occurs in mice.  Computer simulations and Markov models will be used
              to study the behavior of ultraselfish genes in small populations where
              stochastic variations in USGC frequency have a big impact on the ability of
              such elements to survive.  Computer simulations of mutations in USGC's will
              show how different aggressive variants compete under selective pressure.  The
              expected results of the proposed work include new tools for studying the
              evolution and population dynamics of USGC's, hypotheses concerning the basic
              population genetic mechanisms that mediate their evolution and characterization
              of the population conditions under which USGC's can arise and persist.    This
              POWRE award permits Dr. Durand to expand her research program by applying her
              computational skills to model a significant question in evolutionary biology. 
              This work should increase her prominence in an interdisciplinary area of the
              biological sciences, an area in which women are significantly underrepresented.
