Title       : Advanced Technology Education Program in Manufacturing Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9752004

Award Number: 9752004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nabil A. Ibrahim nibrahim@isc.sjsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This program is creating and delivering appropriately designed curriculum to
              enable students of diverse educational background to enter either the workforce
              or a Community College program in manufacturing information systems
              engineering.  The program is refining curriculum, delivering faculty
              enhancement workshops, providing student industry experiences, and establishing
              itself as a model for replication.    The manufacturing information systems
              program emphasizes system integration.  The curricula being developed leads
              first to a Certificate in Information Technology (CIT) at the high school
              level, and then to an Associate of Science degree in Manufacturing Information
              Systems Technology (MIST) at the community college level.  Both curricula can
              proceed seamlessly to an existing BS-Engineering degree in Manufacturing
              Information Systems Engineering (MISE).  The project also includes the
              development of a certificate of Technical Preparation in Information Technology
              (TPIT) for working technicians.  These curricula are being designed and
              delivered by an alliance of high schools, community colleges, a four-year
              university and several high-tech companies in the Silicon Valley.  The program
              tracks are designed to provide seamless transitions among curricula.    This
              ATE project has four components:     1.  curriculum and instructional materials
              development,   2.  student transition and articulation   3.  faculty
              development, and   4.  industry internship program for students.   
              Participating companies play an active role in defining customer requirements,
              curriculum design, development of case studies, faculty internships, students
              apprenticeship/training, state of the art laboratory equipment, industry-based
              team projects and commitment of matching funds.  The project aims to serve
              NSF's ATE program through contribution of products (curricula, laboratory
              manuals, instructional materials, experience with cooperative learning
              workshops for faculty) that are being disseminated nationally through pu
              blications, annual workshops, and Internet for use by other institutions.
