Title       : The Internet Science Institute: A Web-Based Method of Involving Students in
               Scientific Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9752606

Award Number: 9752606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Dianne Martin                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Shelton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elliot King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola College in Maryland
	      4501 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212102601    301/323-1010

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The advisory committee for NSF's education activities recently called for all
              students to learn science by participating in the methods of science. This
              project is a pilot demonstration of the Web as a platform for achieving that
              goal in an affordable and attractive manner. During the last five years, Loyola
              College has upgraded many of its science courses for majors based on modern
              information processing and networking techniques with assistance of a series of
              grants. This project will extend the benefits of these investments to the
              introductory science courses for nonmajors via an Internet/intranet system that
              will serve as a site for highly-interactive multimedia courseware, both locally
              developed and downloaded from other sites. The user interface will be
              structured as a virtual Internet Science Institute (ISI) with one  building and
              two wings: Physics and Computer Science, each with classrooms with courseware,
              laboratories with virtual experiments, departmental libraries with other
              teaching materials, and a faculty seminar room for exchange of ideas in science
              teaching. The newly available Java network programming standard and an intranet
              structure will greatly speed access, making high bandwidth media and true user
              interactivity feasible. A special effort will be made to encourage development
              of interactive science courseware via organization of peer review panels to
              validate its quality and monthly recognition of the best courseware submitted.
              Courseware will be developed at Loyola to teach science by involving physics
              students in the scientific method, and students of computer science and
              engineering in the design of hardware and software. Initially the material will
              be tested in specific courses for non-majors, targeting those for education
              majors intending to teach science where possible. ISI will also be available
              for other Loyola students and as an Internet site for public use.
