Title       : Curriculum Resources in Interactive Multimedia (CRIM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9752408

Award Number: 9752408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Fox fox@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Curriculum resources in interactive multimedia (CRIM) will be developed to help
              meet the chronic shortage for trained workers in the areas of interactive
              multimedia applications, education, interfaces, production, programming,
              publishing, systems, technologies, and tools. Curriculum guidelines and
              courseware will be made available through a digital library accessible through
              the WWW, linking back to resources developed at sites around the nation that
              will be a part of the CRIM Consortium. With support by ACM (especially SIG
              Multimedia), IEEE CS (especially its TC on Multimedia), and AACE (especially
              through ED-MEDIA), CRIM curriculum guidelines will be published to facilitate
              the spread of new multimedia specializations, courses, and training programs,
              as well as small "knowledge modules" (that will fit into existing courses,
              e.g., graphics, HCI, operating systems, networking).    This project also will
              contribute a new methodology for preparing curricular resources in high
              technology fields. First, it will draw upon prior curriculum and courseware
              developed at Virginia Tech (VT) and The George Washington University (GW) that
              will serve as a strawman for future work. Second, it will couple an in-person
              decision support room workshop with other interested parties connected through
              satellite and networked videoconferencing, so a first (semester long) round of
              collaborative work can proceed along the lines of agreed upon curriculum
              development directions. Third, during that round, not only will VT and GW
              materials be re-worked, but small travel awards to other consortium members
              also will lead to broader preparation of knowledge modules that can be easily
              disseminated and re-used. Efforts will be monitored by the project coordination
              team, to ensure progress in accord with project guidelines. Server logs will
              provide quantitative data on adoption and use that will supplement qualitative
              evaluation through surveys and focus groups. Fourth, during the next academic
              term (semester), completed modules  will be tried at sites other than where
              development took place, and carefully evaluated, at the same time as other new
              modules are built. Finally, this three-step pipeline of curriculum resource
              development, deployment, and evaluation will be institutionalized through the
              CRIM Consortium and its support by professional societies, so that periodic
              discussions, panels and workshops at multimedia conferences can further improve
              CRIM materials.
