Title       : Interactive Business Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9752533

Award Number: 9752533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Marie McDill jmcdill@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Agnes M. Rash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Business calculus is notorious for being unappreciated by economics and business
              majors who see it as rigid and irrelevant. Even well prepared students have
              trouble making the transition from the discrete to the continuous domain that
              is inherent in calculus. The purpose of this project is to address these
              problems by creating truly interactive software that emphasizes visualization,
              applications, data and curve fitting. The project consists of designing a set
              of 20-25 interactive computer illustrations (tools) and a workbook of
              explorations. The user will interact with the tools by means of a
              point-and-click interface and sliders that are linked to illustrations. The
              software designer is Hubert Hohn of the Massachusetts College of Art, who is
              the software designer on Interactive Differential Equations, a similar project.
              Mathematicians at California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, and
              St. Joseph's University in Philadelphia will direct the project, write the
              explorations and collaborate with Hohn on tool development.    This package
              will be useful as a demonstration in a classroom with real-time interaction, in
              a distance learning situation or as assigned work in a studio classroom,
              computer laboratory or at home. It will be designed to be used with any
              business calculus textbook and will enhance either a standard or reform course
              in business calculus.
