Title       : Science Writing and Revision Interactive Technology Environment (Science WRITE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a9752612

Award Number: 9752612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence S. Greene greenel@samiam.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Boyko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Kintsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally Susnowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                          Science WRITE, a computer-supported
              learning environment, will offer an innovative solution to the challenging
              problem of helping undergraduate science students to write well, by directly
              facilitating the complex cognitive processes that are critical for success. The
              system's educational foundation is a technique called procedural facilitation,
              which fosters independence in high-level thinking as students develop from
              novice to expert writers. We will deliver Science WRITE through World Wide Web
              technology because it is uniquely suited for accomplishing these learning
              goals.    We will design, write, program, test, refine, and disseminate 10
              interactive modules containing an array of learning activities that will help
              students develop their own independent processes for planning and revising
              scientific documents. We will integrate these modules with each other, with a
              document annotation system that we recently developed, with collaborative and
              knowledge-construction tools, and with links to other Web resources for
              disciplinary and discourse knowledge. The system will be designed for use by
              the nation's undergraduate students who have scientific writing projects in
              kinesiology.     Science WRITE will be the first comprehensive resource (in
              print or on line) that is grounded in cognitive research and that supports
              undergraduate science students through all the processes involved in planning
              and revising papers. In addition, the system will be designed as a research
              laboratory in which we can continue to investigate and refine strategies for
              helping students learn to write in scientific disciplines. Science WRITE will
              demonstrate the powerful potential of this educational approach to improve the
              quality of undergraduate writing and thinking.
