Title       : UFE: Multiple Entry Points to the Mathematics Major and Minor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9752750

Award Number: 9752750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet S. Pollatsek hpollats@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donal O'Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                    This Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement
              project brings 32 faculty members from other schools to Mount Holyoke College
              for a one week workshop and to a two-day follow-up meeting preceding the joint
              mathematics meetings 18 months later. The project is disseminating materials
              and methods from the courses Laboratory in Mathematical Experimentation,
              Algebra, Geometry and Number Theory, which were developed at Mount Holyoke with
              NSF support. Exploration of the course materials is introducing participants to
              the interactive, conversational mode of mathematics teaching that the courses
              require. Participants also explore the opportunities the courses afford for
              broadening the mathematics curriculum and attracting new students to majors and
              minors in mathematics through employing interdisciplinary courses as feeders,
              creating entry-level courses that go somewhere and adding a course following
              the introductory courses which points to additional mathematics courses.    The
              June workshop has five elements. First, participants model the learning
              experience of students in courses by actually carrying out computer
              experimentation. Second, by looking at student papers participants address
              issues of teaching and evaluating writing and also have a means of examining
              some of the ways students' thinking develops. Third, participants have an
              opportunity to talk with students who have taken these courses. Fourth,
              participants discuss their observations and experiences and compare them among
              themselves. Finally, the workshop ends with a presentation of participants'
              implementation plans at their home institutions.
