Title       : The Rio Grande River Project: An Interdisciplinary Math/ Science Curriculum for
               College Freshmen and Sophomores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9752192

Award Number: 9752192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Vaughan pjvaughan@laredo.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Coats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Earhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Laredo Community College
	      West End Washington St
	      Laredo, TX  78040    512/722-0521

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through its Rio Grande River Project, Laredo Community College is developing a
              two-course undergraduate interdisciplinary program of studies focusing on the
              Rio Grande River. The program will integrate biology, algebra, trigonometry and
              the physical sciences using problem-posing, discovery learning, river
              monitoring and exploration, teleconferencing, microcomputers, and a student-led
              mini-science symposium, as the culminating activity. The immediate
              beneficiaries of the project are 100 freshmen and sophomores who will take the
              courses in fulfillment of their associate degree math and science requirements.
              The courses are designed for pre-service teachers, and science and math majors,
              as well as for students pursuing other majors and careers.   The major
              objectives of the project are: 1) Train faculty to design interdisciplinary
              math/science courses; 2) Design a two-course sequence which will provide the
              required foundations in four areas of college math and science; 3) Maintain
              high level of academic achievement for participating students; 4) Increase
              career knowledge in math, science and math/science education, especially for
              female and Hispanic students; 5) Expedite institutionalization of the courses;
              6) Manage the project effectively. The major contribution which the project
              will make to the field of math/science education is its focus on a major
              national resource at risk (the Rio Grande River) as a means of integrating the
              four disciplines and the emphasis on developing approaches which are effective
              with students, specifically Hispanic students for whom English is a second
              language.  This interdisciplinary approach will be particularly valuable as a
              model for those students who will pursue K-12 science teaching as a career.
