Title       : Internet Based Interactive Construction Management Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9752425

Award Number: 9752425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil Sawhney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl E. Wendell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Growth and the replacement of people leaving the labor force will add more than
              68,000 new positions for civil engineers by the year 2005, according to a
              recent forecast of employment trends (ASCE, 1996). Attracting talented  high
              school graduates and imparting the best possible civil engineering education is
              critical to the future of the U.S. construction industry. Studies conducted by
              researchers reveal that civil and construction engineering education should
              include practicality and feel for construction, creative thinking and problem
              solving, engineering judgment, and practitioner involvement. In reality, civil
              and construction engineering undergraduate curriculums are inadequate in
              providing students with the necessary construction management skills and
              experience. The goal of this project is to incorporate practical content in the
              civil and construction engineering thus bridging the gap between the classroom
              and the construction site. The project seeks to accomplish this important goal
              through the development of an integrated educational framework for the civil
              and construction engineering curricula that will serve as a national model. The
              two main activities of the project are: 1) to develop an Internet-based
              Interactive Construction Management Learning System; and 2) to develop an
              advising and mentorship program that will enhance practitioner involvement. The
              Interactive Learning System will focus on using interactive and adaptive
              learning environment to train students in the area of planning of construction
              processes. Tools that will be used in the development of the system will
              include multimedia, internet based computing, relational databases, simulation,
              and gaming. It will provide a real world environment requiring the use of
              multiple tools. The Interactive Learning System will be incorporated into the
              construction engineering and management curricula at Western Michigan
              University. The computer package, course material, and findings of the project
              will also be disseminated to unive rsities offering civil and construction
              engineering curricula at the national level. Evaluation instruments will be
              utilized to evaluate the learning and cost effectiveness of the proposed
              educational framework. This project provides an innovative methodology that
              utilizes  the knowledge and guidance of industry experts, state-of-the art
              active learning paradigms, advanced computing tools, and skills of the
              university faculty to enrich the undergraduate engineering education.
