Title       : Chemistry ConcepTests Linked to Course Learning Objectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  2000 
File        : a9752882

Award Number: 9752882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl C. Wamser wamserc@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gwen P. Shusterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1046,7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Presentation of sophisticated course material to chemistry students has become
              easier, richer, and broadly available, significantly enhancing or sometimes
              replacing the traditional lecture mode of information delivery.  This
              impressive progress comes with the risk of overwhelming students with
              information.  Students need the ability to determine whether they are on track
              towards meeting the learning objectives that are expected of them.  Similarly,
              faculty need to recognize whether their teaching methods are effectively
              bringing students to success in the course learning objectives.  As chemists
              have always recognized, it is the working with information, whether in the lab
              or in problem-solving, that generates real understanding and capability.     
              This project will primarily work with the ConceptTests database, which is part
              of the University of Wisconsin New traditions Project.  The primary outcome
              will be a collection of web-based questions intended to be useful to students
              for self-assessment and to faculty for immediate feedback in class.  This
              project will add to the size and diversity of the ConcepTests database, and it
              will extend its usefulness by correlating the questions to specific learning
              objectives for general chemistry and organic chemistry classes.  We will
              class-test the questions in large lecture classes of general chemistry and
              organic chemistry, and we will integrate the questions with the web-based
              course materials that we have already developed for these classes.  We will
              also evaluate whether these ConcepTests will be useful to judge student
              readiness for different levels of chemistry in general education coursework.   
               We will initiate a "Chemistry Commons," where students will have access to the
              web-based materials in an exciting, interactive environment.  We will
              collaborate with the Oregon Collaborative for Excellence in Preparation of
              Teachers (OCEPT) in statewide programs that address improvement of science
              teaching and learning for all students.  In collaboration  with OCEPT
              initiatives, we will work to develop support systems for the two mainstream
              chemistry courses and a seminar on teaching/learning that will help to draw
              students into recognizing the values and rewards of teaching as a profession.
