Title       : Embedded Learning Modules (ELMO'S): A New Approach for Teaching SME&T to
               Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9752511

Award Number: 9752511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Bansil bansil@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm D. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Voland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Coleen Carey Pantalone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Northeastern University has developed a concept - known as ELMOs (for
              Embedded Learning Modules) program - for naturally integrating progressive
              learning experiences in science and technology throughout non-science
              curricula.  We are developing, implementing, and evaluating a set of integrated
              laboratory and field experiences that will be naturally embedded within
              required major courses in non-science curricula.  Our ELMO model explicitly
              uses reinforcement learning in which students experience an integrated set of
              progressive, cumulative experiences in order to develop a coherent
              understanding of key concepts, methodologies, and principles.  Each set of
              experiences are designed by cross-disciplinary teams of science, engineering,
              and non-science faculty members to mesh seamlessly with study within a
              particular non-science 'client' major so that students will recognize the
              direct relevance of science and technology to their disciplinary interests. 
              For example, music students are introduced to wave phenomena through physics
              and engineering experiments in their music courses as they study such topics as
              the production of sound by various instruments, and the acoustical design   of
              auditoriums for optimal sound effects.  These laboratory experiments are
              supplemented by field experiences in which students interact with professionals
              in their disciplines to understand the direct applications of science and
              technology in their work - e.g., in the form of visits to local symphony halls
              and theaters for the study and evaluation of various acoustical designs and
              through joint interviews with performers and acoustical engineers.  We contend
              that students only retain knowledge and skills that they want to retain; if
              science and technology seem irrelevant to their academic and career interests,
              they will simply complete whatever introductory required courses in these areas
              that they must - and promptly forget the principles and concepts that they
              learned. Thus, it is critical that non-science majors r ecognize the relevance
              of science, mathematics, engineering, and technology  SME&T  in their lives.
              The ELMO project embeds pertinent SME&T coursework in selected required and
              sequential courses in non-science curricula, thereby achieving this objective.
              An ELMO Science and Engineering Laboratory Clinic is being constructed and
              staffed for this project, representing a substantial financial investment by
              the university and reflecting its long-term commitment to this project.  We are
              convinced that students will acquire and retain both broader and deeper
              understanding of concepts and principles in science and technology through the
              ELMO program than they do under the traditional general education formats
              currently in place at most undergraduate institutions.
