Title       : Virtual Science Evironment for an Oceanography Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9752367

Award Number: 9752367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100048             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Prothero prothero@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Weiland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses science literacy and knowledge transfer from research to
              the classroom.  This initiative allows students to participate in the work of
              science by collecting real Earth data, making authentic observations on the
              sea-floor, and analyzing and interpreting obtained results.  Interactive,
              multimedia modules for a general education class and also for preservice
              teacher use in their classrooms is being developed.  The emphasis is on
              teaching students both content and the process of doing science.  Many of the
              investigations are automatically graded and posted to the students' records,
              thereby allowing instructors to help students in higher cognitive levels of
              understanding.   The project develops a "Virtual Science Workshop", and
              "Virtual Reality Field Trip to the Mid-Ocean Ridges", both of which build on,
              and integrate with, the recently developed "Our Dynamic Planet" CD-ROM, created
              by the PI, with support from NSF.  The interactive "Virtual Science Workshop" 
              will be modeled after a real science workshop.  It will address the issues of
              providing students with background information in an engaging way, modeling how
              scientists argue from evidence, and helping students to pose their own
              experimental problem.  The "Virtual  Reality Field Trip" to the mid-ocean
              ridges will use the latest research data from ongoing ridge and vent studies to
              create a dynamic field laboratory where students can explore, gather data, and
              analyze their findings.
