Title       : UFE: Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9752810

Award Number: 9752810
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Ressler is8874@trotter.usma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Klegka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Lenox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Costello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher H. Conley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Military Academy
	      
	      West Point, NY  10996    914/938-4041

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teaching Teachers to Teach Engineering (T4E) is a one-week short course  offered
              during the summer at the United States Military Academy, West  Point. The goal
              of the T4E program is to raise the standard of teaching  excellence in
              undergraduate engineering programs nationwide by increasing  the number of
              engineering faculty who have studied and practiced sound,  proven teaching
              methods. The principal objectives of the short course are  ( 1) to provide a
              diverse group of 24 relatively inexperienced engineering  educators with an
              opportunity to make substantive improvements in both the  effectiveness and
              efficiency of their teaching, and (2) to provide six  additional senior faculty
              members or administrators to observe the course,  for the purpose of
              establishing similar programs at their own institutions.  The course strives to
              meet the needs of faculty from two-year and four-year  teaching and research
              institutions and to achieve appropriate representation  from groups that are
              typically underrepresented on engineering faculties--  women,
              African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, Native Americans, and  individuals with
              disabilities.    In a series of workshops, the short course addresses topics in
              organization and presentation of classes, establishing objectives, student
              learning styles, instructional technology, student-teacher relations, promotion
              and tenure, and success in academia. Working in small groups, participants will
              prepare and present practice classes and will be critiqued on their performance
              by the T4E faculty and their fellow participants. Through this experience,
              participants will build confidence and poise; they will significantly improve
              their ability to prepare classes efficiently; and they will develop the
              self-assessment skills necessary for continued long-term improvement after the
              short course. This highly focused, week-long immersion experience will provide
              a foundation on which participants ca build their own individual teaching
              styles, consistent with their own personalit ies and teaching environments.
              Following the workshop, participants are expected to interact with faculty at
              their own institutions to promote the cause of teaching excellence.    Teaching
              Teachers to Teach Engineering is expected to have an immediate, substantive
              impact on the teaching skills of participants because of its practical,
              student-centered approach and its emphasis on actual "get-up-anddo-it"
              teaching.  *
