Title       : Scientific & Technological Education in Photonics (STEP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9752092

Award Number: 9752092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chandra Roychoudhuri chandra@phys.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred P. Seeber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell M. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravinder K. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Vandergriff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 The project "Scientific and Technological Education in Photonics" (STEP) is
              being conducted by a national alliance of community colleges, tech-prep
              schools, universities, industry leaders, scientists from government labs,
              photonics societies, and non-profit organizations. Photonics is a very fast
              growing technical area that employs many technicians. STEP is meeting the
              challenge of technician training for the 21st century in rapidly expanding
              photonics industries and other industries who use photonics as a key enabling
              technology.  A consortium representing above all of the partners is developing
              and validating an industry-driven curriculum for an Associate of Science Degree
              in photonics.  The photonics societies, OSA and SPIE, is providing a forum for
              industry leaders to determine the skill standards.  Two-year college faculty,
              supported by university researchers to maintain technology currency, are
              creating the detailed curriculum. This project is also producing, field
              testing, and disseminating the introductory course, Fundamentals of Photonics
              in what is expected to be an eight course sequence. The courses meet both
              academic and voluntary industry skill standards and are articulated with
              preparation of secondary school students and with courses in four year colleges
              and universities.  The course is being evaluated  by pre- and post- instruction
              test to continuously improve and implement the curriculum content and
              educational cognitive psychology.    *
