Title       : Team-Oriented, Project-Based Collaborative Learning Workshop for Engineering
               Faculty Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9752726

Award Number: 9752726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Batill batill@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for the development of a week-long faculty workshop which is
              intended to assist mechanical, electrical and computer engineering faculty in
              the development of project-based, collaborative learning exercises. The goal is
              to present a workshop in which faculty will actually participate in a
              "hands-on" project in order to assist them in developing a understanding of how
              fundamental topics in the engineering curriculum can be applied in engineering
              practice - to make a distinction between "academic problem solving" and
              "engineering decision making". The workshop will group faculty in small
              "design-build" teams, provide them with a "statement of opportunity", a
              schedule, computing, fabrication and material resources and "technical"
              support. Each faculty team will define, design, fabricate and demonstrate an
              autonomous, computercontrolled electro-mechanical system. The purpose of the
              project is to provide these faculty with the opportunity to apply their own
              discipline expertise to team-based decision making in the product development
              process . This experience can then be used by participating faculty in
              developing similar experiences for their own curriculum. Part of the workshop
              will include the topics of establishing specific project goals, identifying
              deliverables, such as written or oral reports and prototypes, appropriating
              resources and developing effective project schedules. The unique feature of
              this two-year project is that in these workshops the faculty will actually be
              engaged in the "team-based" product and process development process, so they
              can then carry their own experience, not those from a book or lecture, back to
              their classroom.
