Title       : Seminar Workshops on Material Science & Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9752721

Award Number: 9752721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot P. Douglas edoug@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Holloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Materials science and technology impacts a number of industries.  The fields of
              microelectronics, transportation, energy storage, power production, biomedical
              devices, and environmental science and technology are typical examples. Physics
              and chemistry form the basis for these technologies, and they are applied in a
              number of engineering disciplines.  The expertise needed to impart the
              knowledge and expose the students to available opportunities in materials
              science and technology is not commonly available in two and four year colleges.
               In addition, high school students are often completely unaware of the field,
              its importance, and the opportunities that exist for future employment and
              contributions.  Workshops which introduce advanced materials science and
              technology to teachers at four year colleges, community colleges, and high
              schools, with special emphasis on minority institutions will be offered.  The
              workshops will result in the incorporation of materials science in their
              curricula.  It is expected that this incorporation of materials science into
              the physics, chemistry, and engineering curricula will enable the students to
              understand the fundamental principles of materials science.  It will also
              introduce them to the exciting higher educational opportunities and
              professional careers available to them.  This proposal also includes a plan for
              assessing the factors in the workshops that most affect the learning process,
              and then modifying the recruitment process and the workshops themselves to make
              them more effective.  The results of the assessment process and a description
              of the workshops will be disseminated to other institutions in order to further
              expand the reach of this program.
