Title       : Development, Testing and Dissemination of Dynamic Visual Learning Tools for
               Solid State Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9752316

Award Number: 9752316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chu R. Wie wie@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop, test and disseminate interactive dynamic
              and visual simulation software modules in solid state materials. The visual
              simulation programs will be developed using the Java programming language. They
              are to help students visualize difficult physical processes and to demonstrate
              the operating principles of solid state devices. The modules will be designed
              to enhance student's learning of difficult material and device concepts. The
              small Java applet programs will run in most popular web browsers, which
              maximizes the dissemination to the widest possible audience. It also increases
              the applicability to a traditional course structure such as lecture, recitation
              and student home work assignment. Many applets will be developed for use in
              design problems. Some will be used for student oral presentations and for
              written reports to develop student communication skills. Most of the simulation
              programs will be developed in such a way that both lower level and upper level
              courses can utilize the modules in electrical engineering, materials science
              and physics. Also, collection of the applets will be sufficient to cover most
              of the topics needed in a one-semester junior-level solid state devices course.
                 We will begin with a comprehensive list of initial topics. This list will
              continually improve during the project lifetime so that we can identify
              important topics and focus on them while addressing the comments and
              suggestions from users (professors and students). Feedbacks from instructors
              from around the world will be used as a guideline for selecting new applet
              topics. Dissemination of this project will take place in many ways: world wide
              web, CD-ROM, email broadcast, journal articles, and conference presentations.
              Some of our existing applets for solid state materials and devices are already
              being used in several universities. It already helps more than three hundred
              students annually based on the informal feedbacks received from various
              collegies and universities. O nce a more formal effort is made for development
              and dissemination, this number is expected to climb manifold.
