Title       : Validation & Implementation of a Coordinated Precision Agricultural Curriculum
               with K-12, Community Colleges, Universities and Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9752081

Award Number: 9752081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Brase   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry A. Bolton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert I. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hawkeye Comm Coll
	      1501 East Orange Road
	      Waterloo, IA  50704    319/296-2320

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Precision agriculture is defined as all aspects of the new emerging
              technologies, such as biotechnology, computers/telecommunications, animal
              technology, and precision farming that allow an agriculturalist to organize and
              maintain data for maiing decisions about precise production units.  A two year
              Associate of Applied Science Degree in Agriculture and Food Technology was
              achieved by Hawkeye Community College as a Phase I project funded by a National
              Science Foundation (NSF) grant.  Hawkeye Community College along with Kirkwood
              Community College and Lansing Community College is currently validating and
              implementing a coordinated precision agriculture curriculum in the Midwest. 
              This precision agriculture model design incorporates modules and courses in
              precision farming, environmental science, and geographic information systems
              with a core of applied mathematics and science courses to augment the
              Agriculture and Food Technology curriculum.  Thus, this increases the
              flexibility of the Agriculture and Food Technology curriculum for use by other
              community colleges in the Midwest.  Five additional participating Midwestern
              community colleges each are developing a certificate program, implementing the
              current program, or integrating the agriculture technology program into current
              agricultural programs.    Each of the participating community colleges is
              forming a linkage with K - 12 school(s) and a university.  By expanding the use
              of this curriculum to K - 12 schools, mathematics and science skills can be
              enhanced through application of precision agriculture.  Preservice teachers and
              current teachers are being offered workshops in precision agriculture
              technology and conferences to coordinate discussion on articulation between
              educational levels.  An outcome of this effort is a coordinated Precision
              Agriculture curriculum that provides a seamless career pathway while providing
              mathematics and science skills necessary for technological advanced careers.
