Title       : POWRE: gRNA/mRNA Interactions During Editing in Trypanosoma brucei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9752970

Award Number: 9752970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Koslowsky koslowsk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1154,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9752970  Koslowsky    This is a POWRE Visiting Professor Award.    The
              phenomenon of mitochondrial RNA editing in kinetoplastid protozoans is the most
              radical form of post-transcriptional alteration known to date.  The editing of
              messenger RNA transcripts in these organisms can create over half of the mRNA
              by uridine insertions.  Editing generates translatable mRNAs by creating the
              open reading frames as well as proper initiation and termination signals.  The
              specificity of uridine insertions is provided by a class of RNAs called guide
              RNAs (gRNAs).  These small RNAs are complementary (allowing G:U base pairs) to
              portions of the fully edited sequence.  All of the gRNAs identified to date
              have defined 5' anchor sequences, guiding sequences and a non-encoded 3'
              uridine tail.  The 5' anchor sequence is required for in vitro editing and is
              thought to be responsible for selection and binding to the pre-edited mRNA. 
              However, the smallest anchor sequence identified is four nts in length,
              suggesting that other factors must play a role in specific gRNA selection and
              use.  In addition, almost nothing is known about how the gRNAs are used to
              direct RNA editing and considerable controversy exists concerning the role the
              non-encoded U-tail plays in the editing process. The overall objective of this
              proposal is to define the structures of the gRNA and mRNA as they interact
              during the editing process.  By combining site-specific photoaffinity
              crosslinking with solution structure probing techniques, the secondary
              structure of both the gRNA and the mRNA will be analyzed during the initial
              editing reaction. This information will greatly enhance our understanding of
              the structure-function relationship involved in the transfer of information
              from one RNA molecule to another and will help lead to a molecular
              understanding for the role of gRNAs in the RNA editing process.  The ability of
              small RNAs to dramatically increase the coding capacity of another class of RNA
              offers strong support for the role of RNA in the o rigins of life. 
              Interactions between the two RNA molecules are fundamental to the editing
              reaction and the characterization of these interactions in terms of
              structure-function relationships is crucial for our understanding of this
              phenomenon.  Understanding how the two RNA molecules interact to achieve
              information transfer may lend considerable insight to the evolution of early
              replication mechanisms and has substantial implications on our understanding of
              the storage and regulation of genetic information.    This project will be done
              in collaboration with Dr. H. Ulrich Goringer at the Max-Planck-Institute for
              Biochemistry in Munich, Germany.  Dr. Goringer's laboratory provides a
              particularly appropriate environment for Dr. Koslowsky to learn the new
              biophysical approaches she plans to employ in these studies.    ***
