Title       : Guided Inquiry Physical Chemistry Labortory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9752195

Award Number: 9752195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jane Shultz Mary.Shultz@Tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur L. Utz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl H. Illinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Iacobucci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, extensive efforts have been expended to develop open-ended,
              inquiry-based, laboratory exercises for introductory, college-level chemistry
              courses. A major goal of these efforts is to develop the student's conceptual,
              molecular-level picture of chemical interactions. Ironically, it is recent
              advances in physical chemistry that have made a major contribution to this
              molecular level picture, yet typical physical chemistry laboratory exercises
              remain much as they were several decades ago. The cost of the equipment is only
              one reason for this dating. Two other significant reasons are a scarcity of
              experiments based on cutting edge problems, and a lack of experience with
              running an inquiry-based laboratory. The proposed work addresses both of these
              national problems.    The objective is to restructure physical chemistry
              laboratory courses by creating a set of real-world, inquiry-based experiments
              that reflect current practice on a less-than-million-dollar budget. Costs are
              kept modest by focusing on several areas: materials surface chemistry,
              biochemistry, environmental chemistry, and electrochemistry. Materials
              chemistry might initially appear to be an unusual choice for this mission since
              modern surface experiments are often extreme in utilization of expensive
              techniques. The proposed project circumvents the expense issue by featuring
              quantum dots: Cutting-edge materials which are examined with spectroscopic
              techniques such as adsorption, luminescence, FTIR, photocorrosion, and chemical
              derivatization. The courses are completed with groups of experiments
              highlighting biochemical experiments to appeal to those with medical interests,
              environmental experiments for the environmental studies constituent, and
              electrochemistry to appeal to engineers. Since none of the currently available
              laboratory texts support open-ended experiments, one deliverable is a text.   
              In order to propagate the results of this work to other institutions, we
              propose offering workshops to give potential faculty  concrete experience.
              These workshops feature follow-up visits to the home institution by Tufts
              University faculty. This ongoing contact with participants is expected to
              substantially increase the success of dissemination of this work.
