Title       : Environmental Literacy for All Students: Development of Environmental Science
               Courses in a New Core Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a9752602

Award Number: 9752602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise A. Battles dbattles@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Li Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrick J. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica N. Orvis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Morrison-Shetlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A growing body of literature amply documents the low levels of scientific and
              environmental literacy among the American public.  The main goal of this
              project is to provide a framework in which all Georgia Southern undergraduates
              can achieve basic environmental literacy while acquiring an understanding of
              science.  This goal will be pursued through the development of environmental
              courses in four science disciplines: biology, chemistry, geology, and physics. 
              These courses constitute a particular area of GSU's new core curriculum that
              will be required of all students, including science majors, non-science majors,
              and future K-12 teachers.      The new courses will utilize environmental
              issues to introduce and discuss relevant scientific concepts, providing
              in-context instruction on a "need-to-know" basis.  The project has three
              distinctive features:  1. An approach that will expand students' awareness of
              local, regional, and global environmental problems,  2. A focus on hands-on
              laboratory activities based on these issues, and  3. Involvement of advanced
              science and science education majors in the laboratories as faculty-mentored
              interns in the "Undergraduate Teaching Internship Program" (UTIP).     
              Expected project outcomes are: graduates who possess the knowledge to engage in
              environmentally-aware behavior and informed citizenship, improved scientific
              and environmental knowledge of future K-12 teachers, appreciation by students
              of the connections between science and real-world problems, and teacher
              training for UTIP participants, including student interns and science faculty. 
                  The project will yield laboratory exercises that will be made available for
              adaptation by other institutions.  Dissemination will be accomplished thorough
              presentations at national meetings, faculty development workshops, publication
              of laboratory materials and professional articles, and a project web site. 
              This model is a general one that can be reasonably adapted by other
              institutions and, therefore, has excellen t potential for impact outside the
              university.
