Title       : A Digital Computer Science Teaching Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9752190

Award Number: 9752190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Knox knox@tcnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott B. Grissom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The College of New Jersey
	      P.O. Box 7718
	      Ewing, NJ  086280718    609/771-1855

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The digital Computer Science Teaching Center (CSTC) is an internet-based
              repository of peer reviewed reusable teaching resources for computer science
              educators. It will be implemented as a compelling web site with intuitive
              navigation and powerful search capabilities. This clearinghouse of teaching
              resources is endorsed by the Association of Computing Machinery and will
              provide a trusted avenue for the dissemination of quality materials. The CSTC
              will foster collaborative efforts as faculty are brought together by their
              common interests.    Outcomes will include a framework for developing and
              distributing peer reviewed reusable teaching resources. This framework can be
              used for a variety of resource centers that specialize in teaching resources
              such as curriculum development, test banks, lecture notes, and syllabi.
              However, the first three Resource Centers will be for visualization tools,
              computing laboratories, and NSF Education Innovation (EI) projects. The
              Visualization Resource Center contains tools and techniques to use
              visualizations in the classroom. The Computing Laboratories Resource Center
              contains peer reviewed laboratory materials designed for reuse. The EI Resource
              Center contains courseware, tools, and other educational resources resulting
              from NSF EI projects.    An open solicitation and peer review process will be
              developed to collect, critique, rate and refine submissions. By preserving
              traditional standards from an Editorial Board and peer review, the CSTC
              provides an avenue for professional recognition and reward for the scholarly
              contribution of reusable teaching materials. Accepted materials will be
              available to download from the CSTC. User profiles and survey results on the
              adoption of materials will be used to enhance the value of the CSTC. The
              mission and existence of the CSTC will be disseminated widely.    This project
              is supported in part by the ACM Education Board.
