Title       : Measure Up! Dimensional Metrology and ISO 9001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9752032

Award Number: 9752032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Anderegg banderegg@madison.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth K. Bremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Soren Bisgaard  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Madison Area Tech College
	      211 N Carroll Street
	      Madison, WI  537032285    608/266-5050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To provide opportunities for lifelong learning to machine tool and metrology
              technicians so they can develop and maintain skills to meet the needs of
              industry.  To achieve this goal, the partnership among Madison Area Technical
              College, the University of Wisconsin Center for Quality and Productivity
              Improvement and the Madison Metropolitan School District will collaborate with
              a network of industry and education representatives who have a stake in highly
              skilled metrology technicians and qualified teachers.  This proposal will
              actively pursue the following objectives: (1) Establish and maintain active
              collaborations with representatives from education, business/industry, and
              government.  (2) Incorporate employer needs, math and science standards, and
              quality standards into a metrology curriculum for middle school, high school,
              and undergraduate students as well as employees.  (3) Develop and implement
              faculty and industry professional development.  (4) Adopt and develop
              strategies to: increase the enrollment and success of students, particularly
              those from under-represented groups; increase work experiences for students and
              faculty; enhance professional status of technician careers; and provide
              lifelong learning opportunities for technicians.  (5) Facilitate exchange of
              ideas among students, educators, employees, employers, and manufacturers.  (6)
              Evaluate project implementation through proactive third-party evaluators. 
              Stakeholders will exchange ideas and collaboratively develop metrology
              curriculum for secondary and undergraduate students as well as employees at
              Metrology Institutes.  They will also develop strategies as prescribed in
              Objective 4.  Finally, they will gain work and hands-on laboratory experiences
              at the MATC Metrology Laboratory and on the proposed Mobile Metrology
              Laboratory.  *
