Title       : Using Technology to Transform Instruction and Improve Learning in Introductory
               Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9752349

Award Number: 9752349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth H. Maki rumaki@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Maki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The lecture-test method of teaching introductory college courses focuses on the
              teacher rather than the learner, encourages passive rather than active
              learning, promotes individual more than cooperative learning, and targets
              short-term retention at the expense of long-term learning. An alternative
              course format for Introduction to Psychology emphasizes active learning using
              computer-based laboratories and collaborative groups. The world-wide web is
              used to deploy course materials, laboratory experiences, information retrieval
              and evaluation exercises, and practice quizzes "any time, anywhere." Nearly 200
              students have been taught during two offerings of this course. Evaluations of
              student satisfaction and learning showed that students appreciated the
              flexibility of the on-line format, and that they learned as much as students
              taught in the traditional lecture-test format.     The evaluations also
              revealed those components of the course that need improvement. The proposed
              project aims to improve the quality of the collaborative group interactions, to
              increase the amount of student learning through increased opportunities for
              active learning enabled by technology, to identify those students for whom an
              on-line course is most appropriate, to conduct a thorough evaluation of the
              on-line course format to determine how it can be used to improve both immediate
              and long-term learning of content, and to disseminate the findings so that the
              course may serve as a national model for the social and behavioral sciences.
              Additional laboratory experiences will be created for delivery on the web, and
              course materials will be enhanced during Year 01. During the next four
              semesters, course components will be developed and evaluated, always comparing
              the on-line course to concurrent versions of conventional lecture courses.    
              The project will also develop four Web based courses in the College of
              Education using the same set of principles and tools to allow elementary
              education majors to take initial courses in ma thematics teaching and science
              teaching in this format.  It is hypothesized that this will further sensitize
              future teachers to the importance of teaching approaches and to learning how to
              assess what is working and not working with their students.      Various group
              activities and different advanced organizers will be evaluated. Learning styles
              and personality traits will be assessed in order to determine the
              characteristics of those students who benefit most from the on-line course
              format.
