Title       : Probability by Surprise: Animations and Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1997   
File        : a9752559

Award Number: 9752559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank Wattenberg                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. Holmes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students begin their study of probability and statistics with strong and often
              misleading intuitive ideas.  This project seeks to confront students'
              preconceptions and at the same time use them as a source of motivation.  Our
              approach uses the counter-intuitive side of probability to "rope students in" -
              to capture their imagination and force them to think.    We are developing a
              Web site with interactive, Java-based, material that can be used in
              introductory probability and statistics classes for both specialists and
              non-specialists, from AP courses through upper level college courses.  The site
              will include:  simulations; animated scenarios; links to background material in
              mathematics; interactive Venn diagrams, probability trees, and densities as
              limits of histograms; historical material related to probability and
              statistics; and graphical animations.  But the heart of the site will be a
              collection of modules that surprise and engage students - the "Gotcha!" of
              probability.   We exploit the observation of Laplace -- "The Mind, like the
              sense of sight, has its illusions; and just as touch corrects those of the
              latter, so thought and calculations correct the former.    Recent work of
              cognitive psychologists informs this project in two ways.  First, it identifies
              students' preconceptions and the barriers they create for understanding
              probability.  Second, it will guide the development of effective educational
              uses of the rich array of multimedia and interactive technologies available via
              the Web.
