Title       : Biotechnology Technicians for the Future: Replicating the Wisconsin Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9752027

Award Number: 9752027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy A. McMillan jmcmillan@madison.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin Borgh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa A. Seidman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Madison Area Tech College
	      211 N Carroll Street
	      Madison, WI  537032285    608/266-5050

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Biotechnology Technicians for the Future" is expanding and disseminating
              successful activities developed and implemented through "An Advanced
              Biotechnology Education Partnership Program," funded through the ATE program
              (94-54555).  The overall goal of the project is the improvement of technical
              education in biotechnology.  It represents a collaborative effort among the
              Biotechnology Laboratory Technician Program at Madison Area Technical College,
              the University of Wisconsin Teacher Enhancement Program, and the
              industry-supported BioPharmaceutical Technology Center Institute. 
              Efforts-to-date include the development and dissemination of curriculum
              materials for technician training at the two-year associate degree level;
              teacher enhancement activities for associate degree instructors and high school
              teachers; and, school-to-work experiences for high school students.  Through
              this grant, these activities are being significantly enhanced through: (1)
              continuing technician curriculum development and dissemination, (2) expanding
              participation geographically through collaboration with other University of
              Wisconsin system campuses and other technical and community colleges in the
              state and in the Midwest region; (3) increasing participation by students and
              faaulty at all levels from middle school through baccalaureate programs; (4)
              offering opportunities for "lifelong learning" to technicians already employed;
              and, (5) increasing the participation of qualified women, minorities and
              persons with disabilities.  This partnership, supported by an extended network
              of collaborators, is poised to effectively meet the challenge of recruiting,
              training and providing continuing education for employees so critical to the
              continued success of the biotechnology industry, offering the Wisconsin Model
              for replication.   *
