Title       : Interactive Biochemistry-An Interactive Web Course in Biochemistry Using
               JAVA-Based Problem Solving and Chime- Based Molecular Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9752689

Award Number: 9752689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Grisham grisham@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The long-range objective of this project is to develop a comprehensive,
              highly-interactive course in biochemistry that will be widely accessible on the
              World Wide Web. This course is designed for use with a conventional instructor
              and textbook, and it does not attempt to duplicate either of these roles on the
              Web. Rather, it consists of interactive learning devices that actively engage
              the student in going well beyond the limits of textbook- blackboards, overhead
              transparencies and text-and-graphics Web pages. The fundamental motivation of
              this project is to create a learning environment which leads the student
              through problem-solving exercises and which provides a richer, more
              three-dimensional and more animated vision of biological molecules, models and
              concepts.  The pedagogical elements of this course include: a) JAVA applets
              that lead students through calculations, graphing exercises, problem-solving
              and modeling of fundamental and advanced topics in biochemistry, including
              amino acid titrations and chemistry, enzyme kinetics, enzyme mechanisms,
              metabolic pathways, protein structure analysis, etc., and b) tutorial and
              modeling exercises on protein, nucleic acid and carbohydrate structural
              analysis using the free CHIME~ plug-in.  A variety of applets that demonstrate
              the potential of JAVA for this project and the pedagogical possibilities for
              teaching and learning biochemistry have been produced. These efforts have also
              produced  tutorial exercises that demonstrate the power of CHIME~' as a
              teaching and learning tool in biochemistry.  This project may be viewed on the
              Web with the URL: http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/~cmg. (The user's computer must
              be JAVA-capable and must have the CHIME~ plug-in installed.)    The programming
              efforts described in this proposal include:  1. Expansion of current modules to
              include many new examples.  2. Development of an interactive, menu-driven
              protein modeling package based on CHIME~ and Javascript (a language loosely
              related to JAVA). This package permits stu dents to select proteins, model and
              study them, write scripts to save and redisplay their work, and print their
              results, all within the Web environment.     3. Virtual-reality-animation of
              figures, biochemical events and processes. This pedagogical element presents
              spatially complex and time-dependent phenomena such as the motions of peptide
              chains, the replication of DNA and binding equilibria to students in
              three-dimensional animations which the student will be able to view from a
              variety of perspectives.   4. Virtual reality-modeling of biochemical
              'thought-experiments', including development of protein purification schemes,
              elucidation of the functions of signal-transduction factors, modulators of
              vesicle transport and transcription factors. These models employ JavaScript and
              JAVA to lead student users from hypothesis to logically-chosen experiments, to
              results (generated by JAVA applets), followed by re-evaluation of the
              hypothesis and further experimentation.  Biochemical knowledge is expanding at
              an explosive pace. Teachers in this field need new and better tools to manage
              and communicate this knowledge to students. This project provides a package of
              such tools for teachers and students. Its Web-based nature make it available
              either for classroom use or for study by students outside of class from any
              Internet access point. Its interactive design engages students more effectively
              in comprehension and learning. The broader significance of this project lies in
              the fact that the underlying nature and structure of the proposed JAVA applets
              are applicable to nearly any field of knowledge. These applets can be readily
              adapted to the teaching (and learning) of mathematics, physics, economics, and
              many other fields. They can also be adapted to other levels of education,
              including elementary and secondary education.
