Title       : Interactive Fractals and Chaos Unit for Undergraduate Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9752226

Award Number: 9752226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry S. Liebovitch liebovitch@walt.ccs.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz-Otto Peitgen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   An integrated mathematics and science course and accompanying pilot
              technological enhancements are being developed that use fractals and chaos to
              build a conceptual understanding of scientific principles in mathematics,
              physics, chemistry, and biology for undergraduate students training to be
              pre-college teachers.         The course uses fractals and chaos to develop
              concepts in science. Units that are most successful in the course, will be
              implemented in technological form that can be disseminated and used in similar
              integrated courses, or as separate units in other introductory college level
              science and mathematics courses. The technological enhancements consist of: 1)
              interactive exercises based on spreadsheets, 2) Java applets, and 3) hypertext
              curricula and evaluation material.  The spreadsheet and Java exercises
              emphasize active learning.  The students vary the parameters of the systems to
              discover how their properties depend on the parameters.  The use of
              spreadsheets give students real-world technological skills by providing
              experience in a media used throughout the academic and business worlds.  The
              hypertext curricula material provides reference information on the content
              area, support the interactive spreadsheets and Java applets, and include
              performance based assessment of these pilot technological enhancements. 
              Specific examples of the content areas: 1) SYMMETRY: the mathematical
              properties of translational, rotational, and self-similarity symmetries are
              used to provide a basis for understanding the concept of invariants, that is,
              the consistency of physical properties under transformations in the
              conservation of energy, momentum, and electromagnetism. 2) PATTERN FORMATION
              PROCESSES: the mechanisms of processes that generate tree structures are used
              to understand the vascular and pulmonary branching patterns in biological
              systems; and the spatial patterns generated by diffusion in chemical systems
              and their resultant time dependencies. 3) PREDICTABILITY: the mathematical
              prope rties of nonlinear, chaotic systems, such as sensitivity to initial
              conditions, bifurcations, and attractors in phase space are used to develop the
              concepts of stability and instability in physical systems such as fluid flow,
              in chemical systems systems such as biochemical reactions, and in biological
              systems such as predatory-prey relationships.  A central goal of this project
              is to develop course curricula and technological enhancements that reach
              students who have math/science anxiety.  This is being accomplished by
              integrating the math and science, using specific applications as examples,
              covering few topics in depth rather than many topics superficially, and by
              fostering feedback and active participation by the students in the learning and
              evaluation processes.        This project builds on the previous K-12 project,
              Mathematics and Science Teacher Enhancement through Chaos and Fractals
              (ESI-95550052), by transforming the previously developed materials into new
              forms, technological enhancements in spreadsheet programs and hypertext
              curricula, and orienting them towards a different audience of college
              undergraduates training to be teachers.  It will uses the knowledge and skills
              developed by the previously trained lead teachers to develop, use, and evaluate
              the effectiveness of the technological enhancements.
