Title       : Cases in Industry Practice in Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a9752090

Award Number: 9752090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599983             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Patterson wrp4573@mercury.fhda.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              V. Celeste Carter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lane H. Conn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Desmond Mascarenhas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foothill College
	      12345 El Monte Road
	      Los Altos Hills, CA  940224504    415/948-8590

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Foothill College and its partners are developing a four-year curriculum
              development project in advanced technology education entitled "Cases in
              Industry Practice in Biotechnology" (CIPB) to address the critical need for a
              trained workforce in the rapidly expanding biotechnology industry in the United
              States.  In active partnership with local industry, the project is first
              developing an on-line infrastructure that permits industrial partners to
              participate in the development of biotechnology instruction; this
              infrastructure is then being utilized to develop three casebooks containing six
              industry-based teaching cases that help students in biotechnology programs gain
              practical insights into the skills required for research and development,
              intellectual property, manufacturing, production, quality assurance/quality
              control, and clinical studies.  These materials are being used in classrooms at
              the high school, community college, and university levels with over l OO,OOO
              students nationwide and are suitable for use within industry employee training
              programs.     This project addresses the two most significant shortcomings in
              contemporary biotechnology education programs: a lack of active involvement
              from industry participants in the instructional process itself, and a dearth of
              high quality biotechnology education curriculum materials.  The unique time and
              resource limitations that characterize the workforce of young biotechnology
              companies make it necessary to explore a variety of methods for getting
              industry involvement and buy-in into the biotechnology education process.  Core
              partners in this effort include representatives from industry and education.   
              By preparing students with the requisite biotechnology workplace skills--beyond
              biotechnology content knowledge--the project's materials promote a wide range
              of career opportunities in the field for high school, community college, and
              university students nationwide.
