Title       : A Work/Site Alliance: Community Based GIS Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9752086

Award Number: 9752086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart Waddell swaddell@hfcc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Freda L. Brown  (Principal Investigator former)
              Yichun Xie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Henry Ford Cmty College
	      5101 Evergreen Road
	      Dearborn, MI  481282407    313/271-2750

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                While the market for GIS services may be growing at 35 percent per year, the
              Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) observes that the major obstacle
              impeding a GlS revolution is a shortage of trained GIS personnel.  The Work and
              Spatial Information Technology Education (WORK/SITE) Partnership is developing
              and establishing a community-based model to integrate GIS field experiences
              into high schools and to prepare undergraduate students in community colleges
              and regional universities for careers using complex GIS technologies.   
              WORK/SITE is testing a new educational model relying on emerging skill
              standards and designed to respond swiftly to changing GIS technology and
              expanding workplaae applications.  Primary projects include community-based
              curriculum modules, courseware, and Project Kits the Alliance is disseminating
              using Internet-based technologies.  In the high schools, interdisciplinary
              teams of four teachers and four students per teacher work on community-based
              projects.  These address urban issues that affect the communities. 
              Companies/organizations provide "real life" projects and data for students to
              develop GIS solutions focusing on urban issues such as public safety, crime
              reduction, brown field redevelopment, and environmental justice.    The model
              joins partners committed to GIS -- two traditional educational institutions
              with businesses -- to train GIS educators and to develop curriculum which
              integrates employer-defined, work-based GIS projects.  The curriculum permits
              students to be GIS practitioners while being engaged in formal GIS education at
              the certificate, associates, or bachelors degree levels.  Because the WORK/SITE
              approach, when fully implemented, relies on an existing traditional educational
              infrastructure, it facilitates an efficient use of societal resources in
              expanding the availability of trained GIS personnel.
