Title       : An Integrated Package of Computer-Based Learning Tools for Teaching Biochemistry
               in a Studio Format
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9752343

Award Number: 9752343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce J. Diwan diwanj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Warden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The studio mode of teaching that has been developed at Rensselaer promotes
              learning, excites students' interest by involving them directly in knowledge
              acquisition, fosters development of communication skills, and allows tailoring
              the educational process to varied needs of a diverse student population. This
              project in biochemistry is designed to expand and improve computer-based
              learning modules, and to create an integrated package of instructional
              materials for teaching biochemistry in a studio format.  These materials will 
              include: (a) instructions for in-class studio activities, such as problems to
              be solved, data to be analyzed and graphed via spreadsheets, structural motifs
              to be examined using molecular modeling software, questions to be researched
              for in-class discussion; (b) notes and diagrams in a form allowing computer
              projection as well as viewing on a computer screen, for use in short lectures
              within the studio context; (c) instructions for accessing and using software;
              (d) sample test questions; and (e) interactive multimedia tutorials. The
              tutorials will use a mix of text, graphics, audio, videos and animations to
              illustrate biochemical principles, facts and mechanisms. The learning modules
              will be designed for distribution to students via intranets and/or the World
              Wide Web. They will be used to teach Molecular Biochemistry I and II at
              Rensselaer to a mix of advanced undergraduate and graduate students. A separate
              course to be delivered in summers to high school teachers, will use the same
              materials. Results of quizzes and evaluations to be carried out will guide a
              continuing process of expansion and improvement of the package of instructional
              materials.
