Title       : A Shared Developmental Environment for Science-Based Courseware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9752548

Award Number: 9752548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. McClean phillip.mcclean@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Juell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Slator  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Schwert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernhardt Saini-Eidukat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Courseware tools are typically developed by an individual faculty member for a
              single course.  These tools are often designed to deliver content and are not
              learning based. Consequently it is difficult to assess how effectively these
              tools increase student learning. The goal of this project is to create a
              software-development environment in which science-based courseware tools with
              dynamic learning spaces are produced. This environment will involve an
              interdisciplinary team of faculty who will emphasize shared learning
              objectives, common assessment tools, and mutual software. The first step of the
              development process is for the team to determine which principles and
              intellectual approaches are shared by multiple scientific disciplines. Those
              team members teaching similar scientific principles and approaches will develop
              common design techniques in their courseware tools. Assessment tools will be
              developed to determine if a shared software design effectively teaches these
              principles and approaches in multiple disciplines. Assessment data will be
              collected continually as these tools are developed and released. The assessment
              results will allow the development group to determine which specific
              pedagogical methods span multiple disciplines and may have broad application.
              Therefore, the development of new module to enhance a courseware tool will
              benefit from the entire team's experience.    The team has identified three
              innovative approaches that have promise in terms of improving active student
              learning --- visualization, interface and simulation. Underlying each of these
              approaches will be student interactivity with the course content. Many
              scientific concepts can be presented both spatially and graphically. To
              facilitate learning of these concepts, one development approach will emphasize
              Visualizing Course Content. Specific tools to be developed that emphasize
              interactive visualization include the 3D Virtual Cell, the Visual Computer
              Program, and 3D Water Chemistry. Simulating Course Concepts wil l allow the
              student to travel to places they would never ordinarily experience by
              interacting and modifying the environment. The Geology Explorer is a tool that
              will designed to simulate interactive exploration at a geologic site. Finally,
              Interfacing with Course Content requires more efficient ways of presenting
              information, supporting navigation, and delivering course content. The
              development of Java/MOO Virtual Worlds will define interactive environments
              broadly applicable to different scientific disciplines. To ensure usability,
              design and components of the tools will be continually evaluated throughout the
              development process.    By combining assessment and evaluation with innovative
              learning approaches, the team will produce courseware tools rich in
              discipline-based content that teach principles and approaches common to many
              scientific fields. Collaborations with other universities will provide multiple
              course/multiple location assessment and evaluation data that will strengthen
              the products as they are designed. Because these courseware tools will have
              application in large enrollment general biology, geosciences and computer
              science courses, a broad range of students will be affected. Therefore, the
              developmental environment can serve as a model to define effective pedagogical
              approaches to teach science principles and content by using innovative
              courseware tools.
