Title       : Calculus on the Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9752335

Award Number: 9752335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo A. Mendoza gmendoza@euclid.math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Reich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The investigators are implementing Calculus on the Web (COW), an interactive
              electronic learning system for basic mathematics. It is accessible through the
              internet from any platform capable of running a standard web browser, at
              http://cartan.math.temple.edu/~cow/. The system presents in modular form units
              for study, practice and "hands-on" experimentation for each of the great
              variety of topics in a number of courses. Some key features of COW which
              distinguish it from the current generation of mathematics learning software
              are: (i) the system is not a canned, multiple choice question environment, but
              requires the student to compute and enter a numerical or mathematical
              expression; (ii) the system algebraically analyzes answers and has the
              flexibility to detect partially correct responses and create individually
              tailored replies. For the current project, the system will be developed for a
              complete treatment of calculus, for precalculus and linear algebra.        The
              educational objectives of COW are: 1. To create an interactive platform for
              mathematics skill development and intellectual exploration without the overhead
              of supervision and technical training of students in specialized software. 2.
              To provide an on-line version of assigned, graded homework, particularly useful
              for large or multi-section courses without graders. 3. To offer the electronic
              equivalent of mathematics tutoring, at home or any campus workstation. 4. To
              make the system available for all calculus classes at local high schools, and
              to all other US universities that wish to use it. 5. To do all this with a low
              maintenance, simple-to-use system exploiting existing university facilities and
              internet technology.
