Title       : Mathematical Modules in Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9752555

Award Number: 9752555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean F. Ellermeyer sellerme@kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leon L. Combs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Meghan A. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many undergraduate programs in mathematics and science do not adequately
              emphasize the central role played by mathematics in the investigation of
              problems that originate in biology and chemistry. The central role that
              mathematics plays in the advancement of all branches of science has created the
              demand for biologists and chemists who are quantitatively literate,
              mathematicians who can work with scientists in collaborative problem solving
              efforts, and educators who have a broad perspective on the interplay between
              mathematics and the sciences. This project is developing a library of modules
              through which students majoring in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and
              mathematics education will gain substantial practical experience in the
              application of mathematical methods to biology and chemistry.  Each module will
              be developed through a collaborative effort by mathematics and science faculty
              and will address individual applications at four levels -- precalculus,
              differential calculus, integral calculus, and differential equations. At each
              level, different aspects of the application will be explored depending on the
              mathematical tools available at that level. Through use of the modules in
              mathematics courses and science laboratory courses, science and mathematics
              students will learn to work together as a problem solving team and to
              accurately express the results of their mathematical and scientific
              investigations in writing.  The modules to be developed will be made available
              in hypertext and printed forms and will be disseminated via the World Wide Web.
              Faculty workshops on the use of the modules will be held at appropriate
              national meetings and working relationships with faculty who adopt the modules
              for use in their courses will be cultivated.
