Title       : Project to Reconnect Two and Four Year College Faculty to the Mathematical
               Sciences Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9752776

Award Number: 9752776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph G. Rosenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                              This project seeks to
              "reconnect" to the mathematical sciences enterprise two and four year college
              faculty who lack the time to keep up with research developments. The workshops
              expose them to current research topics in discrete mathematics and theoretical
              computer science that are relevant to their teaching by involving them in a
              research center where much of the relevant research is being carried out. The
              project aims to enhance the ability of faculty to transform their classrooms
              into places that connect up to modern uses of mathematics and computer science
              and to help them produce classroom materials that reflect current research.
              Both summer conferences and a sequence of two-day conferences are taking place.
              The summer conferences, national in scope and directed at two and four-year
              college faculty with some prior exposure to discrete mathematics and
              theoretical computer science,  present recent research results in topics such
              as computational molecular biology, network visualization, clustering, and
              visibility in geometry, and divide the participants into writing groups. The
              two-day conferences, regional in scope and directed at two year college faculty
              with little prior exposure to discrete mathematics and theoretical computer
              science, present an introduction to these fields, with connection to topics of
              current research interest, and also involve the participants in writing
              materials in a six month period between two two-day conferences. Participants
              in both the two-day and two-week conferences are expected to use the materials
              they have written as vehicles to bring discrete mathematics and theoretical
              computer science into their classrooms. Participants are encouraged to make
              their materials available to a broader audience through developing and
              publishing them in the DIMACS Undergraduate Module Series.    *
