Title       : Teaching Mathematics, Science and Technology on the Internet: Strategies,
               Resources and Guidance Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9752803

Award Number: 9752803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92361              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion G. Ben-Jacob mbenjacob@mercynet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mercy College
	      555 Broadway
	      Dobbs Ferry, NY  105221134    914/693-4500

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is evidence that the context for learning is undergoing a metamorphosis,
              and that distance learning is becoming a viable option for furthering one's
              higher education.  Advances in technology, academic research, pedagogical
              innovation, the increase in the chronological age, maturity level and personal
              commitments of the average college student, and geography and demography have
              led to a substantial alteration in the structure of the learning environment.  
               The purpose of this workshop is to aid the participants and their institutions
              to deliver better online courses from the points of view of the institutions,
              the professors, and the students.  By familiarizing the faculty primarily from
              smaller institutions who might not have the opportunity to readily share
              research about the issues and concerns of distance learning with others, we
              will also be providing a network for future research for our participants.   
              The workshop will include the following with respect to online education: 
              discussions and projects of how to teach mathematics and science courses, and
              of associated generic issues, and a substantial component of lab time, both
              guided and open.  Mercy's successful online educational system, MerLIN, will be
              used as a working example throughout the duration of the project.  Our
              follow-through activities will include a reconnoitering of the participants to
              share results of how they integrated the information provided into their
              courses, a dissemination package consisting of a sixty-minute edited video tape
              of the workshop, two study papers, and information of where to find resources
              on the Internet with regard to the virtual university.  In addition we will
              establish a repository of information regarding the teaching of online courses
              that will be available on the Internet.    The second year of this workshop
              series will be taught using distance learning giving participants the added
              advantage of experiencing this instructional mode from the student's
              perspective.
