Title       : In Search of Newton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9752485

Award Number: 9752485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly J. Black kelly.black@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn C. Meredith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project takes place over the next two academic years (Fall 1998 through
              Spring 2000). Each year a small group of students (20-24) take part in a
              combined calculus and physics course. In the first year the students are
              recruited from the physics department and the electrical engineering
              department.  The project team's initial energies are focused on the development
              of course materials. Once the materials are in place, the program expands to a
              include a greater number of students.    The format of the class meetings
              follow a studio setting. A physics course is currently meeting in a studio
              setting, and the experience gained during this current semester are used to
              further develop the course. The activities that take place this summer
              concentrate on the development of the materials for the calculus thread. This
              development begins by examining the materials from the current studio physics
              course, deciding on the order that the calculus materials are introduced in the
              course, and developing the appropriate course materials.    The second summer
              is dedicated to updates and revisions after the first pilot course is given.
              Based on the feedback and evaluation of this first pilot program, changes are
              made as appropriate. As the materials are revised we also take advantage of
              this period by organizing and cataloging the materials. The efforts to organize
              and formalize the materials allow us to offer a workshop during the third
              summer.    The second pilot program will also consist of a small cohort of
              students. The experience offers a test case in order to further refine and
              evaluate the materials assembled. Again, physics students and electrical
              engineering students are recruited for these sections.    During the third
              summer (2000), a workshop is offered for faculty with an interest in
              implementing their own program.  The course materials are assembled and in near
              final form after the third summer.  The materials are distributed at the
              workshop. The workshop offers an important method of disseminati on, and it
              also allows us a chance to test the materials for clarity and usability.
