Title       : C3 Connection, Collection, and Correlation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1997  
File        : a9752658

Award Number: 9752658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederic K. Pfaender   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gloria Delisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The American Society for Microbiology (ASM) is developing and disseminating an
              electronic collection of peer-reviewed teaching and learning resources for
              biology education specifically centered on the microbial world. The primary
              purpose of the electronic collection is to establish a national center of
              microbiological resources for teaching and learning. This electronic collection
              of peer-reviewed educational resources for the undergraduate teaching community
              is analogous to an electronic journal of peer-reviewed science articles for the
              research community.  The collection has two, unique features: 1) All items
              included in the collection are correlated to key microbial concepts and basic
              laboratory skills for undergraduate education; and 2) All items are
              peer-reviewed and selected for scientific accuracy, educational quality and
              visual presentation.  Entries range from the basic sciences to engineering,
              environmental sciences, medicine and public health, public policy, and
              business.    Curriculum development teams connect the national collection of
              microbial resources to the World Wide Web (WWW) and correlate these resources
              to key microbial concepts and basic laboratory skills. The development teams
              identify the resources and link the tremendous collection of educational
              resources to key microbial concepts and basic laboratory skills. The collection
              is updated and augmented regularly.  It can be transported easily into a
              variety of learning environments both nationally and internationally.     The
              collection is a model for other national organizations in science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology and contains specific information related to the
              preparation of teachers well prepared to introduce microbial concepts into
              their classes.
