Title       : A Partnership to Develop Advanced Technology Units on Genomic Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9752037

Award Number: 9752037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599825             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Micklos micklos@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark V. Bloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Reiher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Cockerill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith H. McKenney  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                We propose to develop and disseminate Advanced Technology Units on Genomic
              Biology that will further prepare high school and junior college students to
              participate in the future of applied biology.  The units are based on strong
              science content and practical skills that at once encourage students to
              continue with formal science training and better prepare them for advanced
              technical vocations.  The units stress fundamental themes of evolutionary
              similarity and individual variation in genetic information.  Modern methods of
              gene identification and analysis are illustrated by student experiments with
              human, insect, and plant DNA polymorphisms (''fingerprints'').  Comparative
              genomics and evolutionary biology are illustrated by computer manipulations of
              gene databases -- including on-line projects using student-generated data, as
              well as data from DNA/protein databases.  Students also have the opportunity to
              prepare a key enzyme (Taq polymerase) and construct a key laboratory instrument
              (DNA thermal cycler).  Laboratory experiments with human polymorphisms and
              database manipulations also lead naturally to discussion of the ethical, legal,
              and social issues of genetic testing/databasing.    The project is a
              partnership between the DNA Learning Center (DNALC) of Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory, The Institute for Genomic Research Science Education Foundation (
              TIGR SEF), the Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD), and
              high school and junior college faculty.  The curriculum materials will be based
              on key lab and computer technology developed at the DNALC and the University of
              Chicago that makes DNA fingerprinting by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
              accessible and affordable for student use.  The high school unit, which focuses
              on relatively simple human polymorphisms and statistical analyses, expressly
              articulates with CORD's nationally used Applications in Biology/Chemistry (ABC)
              curriculum.  In this context, the project can upgrade the intellectual content
              of the ABC curriculum and fa cilitate coordinated follow-on instruction in
              higher education.  The college unit extends to more ambitious analysis of
              sequence polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA, open-ended experiments in
              conservation and evolutionary biology, and advanced statistics for DNA/protein
              sequence comparisons between organisms.  Advanced exercises will be based on
              TIGR's informatics software; an extensive collection of human expressed
              sequence tags (ESTs) and complete DNA sequences of the bacteria Haemophilus
              influenzae, Mycoplasma genitalium, and Methanococcus janaschii.  Included is a
              novel Sequencing Service by the partner institutions to generate human
              mitochondrial sequence for student classes.
