Title       : Consortium to Improve Chemistry: Linking Nine Community Colleges with the
               National Science Foundation's Undergraduate Chemistry Systemic Reform
               Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9752885

Award Number: 9752885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Walter mwalter@oakton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bettye Blakney-Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakton Community College
	      1600 East Golf Road
	      Des Plaines, IL  600161234    312/635-1600

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1046,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry faculty from nine Illinois community colleges have formed a consortium
              that serves an annual credit enrollment of over 157,000 students and an annual
              chemistry enrollment of over 6,000 students. The consortium is composed of
              community colleges from urban, suburban, and rural communities: Oakton
              Community College, The City Colleges of Chicago, College of DuPage, College of
              Lake County, Triton College, William Rainey Harper College, McHenry County
              College, Illinois Eastern--Olney Central, and Joliet Junior College. This
              consortium is reforming first-year chemistry curricula on member campuses by
              adapting and adopting the materials produced by the Modular Chemistry
              Consortium and the ChemLinks Coalition to meet the needs of students enrolled
              in community colleges. These materials were developed by two of the projects
              funded by the current National Science Foundation (NSF) chemistry initiative.  
               The new chemistry curriculum is active and inquiry-based, flexible enough to
              address the many learning styles represented by a diverse student population,
              and more relevant to the lives of the students. The process of adapting and
              adopting involves an active collaboration between the consortium faculty and
              representatives of ModularChemistry and ChemLinks. The process also includes
              partnerships with industry and professional organizations.    This project
              extends the impact of the current NSF systemic chemistry initiative by serving
              as a model for other community colleges considering the modular approach to
              reform of the first-year chemistry curriculum. Because nearly half of the
              nation's college students are enrolled in community colleges and a large
              portion of future teachers receive their science education at a community
              college, the potential impact of this project is significant.
