Title       : Integration of Design Project and Aspen Plus Process Simulator Through 4-Year
               Undergraduate Chemical Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9752219

Award Number: 9752219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. Puszynski Jan.Puszynski@sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry G. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this project is to enhance the undergraduate engineering
              curriculum by i) the development of an integrated undergraduate chemical
              engineering design project with a strong linkage between the individual
              courses, and ii) the integration of AspenPlus simulation software throughout
              the chemical engineering curriculum --- from freshman through senior level
              courses.    The early introduction of a complete and integrated design project
              will expose freshman to the "big picture", aiding in their comprehension of the
              nature of chemical engineering while helping them to understand why the
              underlying foundation courses in mathematics, chemistry, and physics are
              important.  Freshman begin the project with simple topics.  As the students
              progress through the curriculum they continue to work on appropriate aspects of
              the design, continually building on the concepts taught in previous courses. 
              Augmenting the four year undergraduate design project is the parallel
              introduction of the AspenPlus process simulator.  With the early use of this
              powerful design tool, students will gain increased knowledge and expertise so
              that by their senior year they will be able to design and optimize complex
              capstone design projects.  Students will use AspenPlus to enhance their
              integrated design efforts, as well as reinforce learning and understanding of
              their engineering course material.    A complementary objective of this project
              is the encouragement and enhancement of the engineering career expectations of
              pre-college, freshman, and disadvantaged groups of people.  These efforts are
              designed to extend and enhance our previous successful outreach experiences. 
              Our focus is on enhanced learning experiences for freshman first.  This is
              coupled with outreach to surrounding secondary schools and tribal colleges,
              with the goal of increasing the awareness and participation of students,
              especially Native Americans and women, in engineering and science programs.   
              The successful implementation and completion of  this project will be shared
              nationwide with other engineering and science universities, through journal
              articles and an active World Wide Web site.
