Title       : The Effective Use of Web-Based Scientific Resources in Teaching & Teacher
               Training: A Collaborative Pilot Program Using Real Data Sets to Explore
               Oceanography & Global...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9752494

Award Number: 9752494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207253             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Malmquist   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony H. Knap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina O. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah K. Steinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Martinez-Perez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The availability of real scientific data via the World Wide Web (WWW)
              affords a unique opportunity for educators to teach science in authentic and
              engaging ways.  This project is exploring ways in which educators can most
              effectively use the scientific resources available via the World Wide Web in
              their curriculum development and teaching.       The project is linking
              scientists and data at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research (BBSR) with
              prospective science teachers in the College of Education at Florida
              International University (FIU). This link is mediated via an existing virtual
              campus operated by the College of Exploration (TCOE). The content emphasizes
              global environmental change as it relates to the oceanographic data in BBSR's
              Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS). The resulting learning environment
              provides opportunities for prospective science teachers in a high-minority area
              to use web-based data sets to conduct inquiry-based learning.  The objective is
              to help prospective teachers gain the skills needed to design additional
              web-based curricula for use in grades 6 to 12 classrooms. Curricula developed
              during this course will be shared with teachers everywhere through a web
              database.      The project is also documenting the most effective design
              process for creating a web-enabled learning environment by identifying the
              components, pedagogies, personnel, and technologies needed to make the
              distance-learning environment effective.
