Title       : Coalition for the Mathematical Preparation of Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1998    
File        : a9752756

Award Number: 9752756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Klespis mth_mlk@shsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia M. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent J. Polito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret R. Crider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sam Houston St University
	      P O Box 2026
	      Huntsville, TX  773412026    713/294-1111

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This 18 month project is extending an existing coalition formed among Sam
              Houston State University, North Harris College, and Tomball College. The
              original coalition was formed to implement changes in the mathematics content
              courses for prospective elementary school teachers.  These changes were given
              impetus by the Guidelines for Mathematics Courses for Prospective Elementary
              School Teachers, a document developed and disseminated in 1996 by the Texas
              Statewide Systemic Initiative (SSI) and consistent with nationally-known
              standards. The original coalition (SSI Coalition) is expanding to a network of
              two-year colleges and universities seeking to revitalize their mathematics
              courses for elementary teachers. The extended coalition is growing from
              institutes and is being fostered by mentoring, electronic mail, a web page,
              follow-through workshops, and a newsletter.    The expanded coalition is using
              the student projects manual and instructor's guide of the SSI Coalition project
              and Ohio State short course materials. The materials developed by  both
              programs integrate substantial mathematical tasks with cooperative learning,
              manipulatives, technology, and writing that challenge students while improving
              their confidence and appreciation of mathematics.     Four members of the SSI
              Coalition faculty and one additional faculty are serving as senior personnel. 
              They are leading 24 other faculty participants who are experiencing the SSI
              Coalition approach and are mentoring participants as they plan for the ensuing
              year by crafting a new course or restructuring an existing course consistent
              with the Guidelines.    The project is employing an instructional consultant
              and an outside evaluator as well as an advisory board to guide the project's
              progress.  Evaluation is being used to refine the instructional approach, to
              customize it to local site conditions, and to measure the success of the
              project.
