Title       : Reforming the Undergraduate Curriculum: Adapting Fruits of the ModularChem
               Consortium and ChemLinks Coalition at Minority Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9752894

Award Number: 9752894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert K. Boggess                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram S. Lamba   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andres Trujillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1046,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                          The goal of this project is to make a sweeping reform in the
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum by adapting the fruits of the two systemic
              reform projects ModularChem Consortium at University of California, Berkeley,
              and Chemlinks Coalition at Beloit College, Wisconsin. Materials and methods
              from these two projects are being adapted for general chemistry and analytical
              chemistry courses. These changes emphasize the relevance of chemistry in modern
              society and it application to real problems.  Some non-science majors who  take
              general chemistry as part of their graduation requirements will also be
              impacted.     Pertinent, locally produced, low-cost equipment are incorporated
              in the laboratory activities. This approach emphasizes the investigative nature
              of science through chemical applications.  The following approaches are being
              used:  (1) adopting and adapting the interdisciplinary modular approach in the
              teaching of general, chemistry, analytical courses; (2) making the laboratory
              more active, facilitating collaborative learning and the centerpiece of the
              student learning experience; (3) providing students with a more accurate
              picture of scientific processes by which scientists organize data, share their
              data and design experiments; (4) aquatinting the faculty with the tools in
              current teaching methods incorporating contemporary information technology.   
              Concentrating on the first two years of the chemistry curriculum, impacts the
              largest number of students, including those who major in chemistry. In this
              process, advanced chemistry courses will also be modified and affected in an
              important way.
