Title       : Integrating Pedagogical and Curriculum Theory with Teaching Practice Throughout
               all Mathematics and Science Courses in the College of Arts & Sciences and
               Evaluating and....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9752185

Award Number: 9752185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Dubinsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn C. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Bevis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ross A. Gagliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Fred Henneike  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since World War II, it has become increasingly clear that the goals for teaching
              and learning mathematics and the sciences are not being met. Graduates emerge
              with at best an ability to manipulate formulas, and at worst attitudes that
              reject these subjects and their applications. Often, computing science
              graduates are ill-prepared for even entry-level positions because of
              deficiencies in general problem-solving, oral and written communication, and
              working in teams.    In this project, Georgia State University (GSU) is
              beginning the process to design, implement, and report on the results of
              systemic change in pedagogy in collegiate-level mathematics, statistics,
              computer science, and physical sciences courses, especially for pre-service
              teachers in keeping with MAA and AMATYC recommendations. One goal of the
              project is to change the basic modus operandi of how courses are taught. The
              initial focus is on the first two years of college mathematics, statistics, and
              computer science while planning for extending the efforts into the physical
              sciences.    The project is being conducted in three phases. First, faculty in
              Mathematics and Computer Science, which also includes statistics, and Learning
              Support Programs are collaborating with faculty from the GSU College of
              Education to coordinate pedagogy taught in education courses with that
              experienced in content courses. Second, faculty from Chemistry and Geology
              departments will begin participating. Thirdly, representative faculty from
              other schools will be encouraged and supported to plan programs for their
              institutions. Products include: an ethnographic study of the entire program; a
              model for colleges interested in such systemic change; and guidelines/practical
              suggestions on ways in which mathematics and science departments can spur joint
              effort among faculty to ensure that innovative curriculum development and
              pedagogical change has a sustained impact. Lastly, a national advisory board of
              prominent professionals is being formed representing the mat hematical and
              physical sciences, education, and other schools.
