Title       : Virtual Courseware for Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9752603

Award Number: 9752603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Novak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to increase the opportunities for the inquiry-based
              learning of science at the national level. This proposal is a plan for the
              development of a library of "virtual courseware"--interactive web-based
              software that engages students in active learning of important scientific
              concepts. The virtual courseware library will be designed and implemented by a
              group of 13 faculty from the California State University system and California
              Community Colleges. Fifteen virtual courseware applications will be developed:
              six for biology and three each for chemistry, earth science and
              physics/astronomy. Each "virtual application" will: (I) be Webbased and easily
              accessible, (2) be appropriate for introductory science courses, (3) reinforce
              scientific methodology, (4) be interactive, intuitive, and inquiry-based, (5)
              be vertically scalable so that it can be used by college majors and nonmajors,
              and (6) be modular and self-contained. Two prototypes, Virtual FlyLab and
              Virtual Earthquake, developed by the principle investigators are already be
              used by thousands of students at over 200 of the nation's colleges and
              universities. The California State University system recognizes the potential
              of the virtual courseware paradigm and has committed to matching funds to this
              project. Project evaluation will be conducted by the Center for Usability in
              Design and Assessment at California State University, Long Beach. A capstone
              conference will be organized to encourage the use of the virtual courseware
              library in the natural science curriculum. Because of the web-based nature of
              the project, dissemination will be widespread, with the potential to affect
              many thousands of students. The products of this project will make science
              education more accessible, promote learning, and provide the possibility for
              reducing the costs of education. Those three features of virtual courseware are
              also objectives of the nation's colleges and universities and the National
              Science Foundation .
