Title       : An Interdisciplinary Approach to Teaching Mathematics and Composition Through a
               Course Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9752632

Award Number: 9752632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Kirtland joe.kirtland@marist.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pau-San Haruta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marist College
	      3399 North Road
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  126011328    845/575-3000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 This project is designed to strengthen mathematical and writing skills among
              first-year college students who indicate that they will not major in a field
              with specific mathematical requirements. The project is developing an
              integrated teaching approach, where the same students are enrolled in both an
              introductory level mathematics and writing class. The mathematics class is
              providing students with the skills necessary (basic number theory, vectors,
              functions, permutations, and some basic group theory) to understand and create
              check digit schemes. Not only is the single topic of check digit schemes being
              explored in depth, but the uses of mathematics in other academic disciplines
              are also being investigated by students in the course.  Applications to
              cryptography, finance, art, and science are being explicitly explored. In the
              writing course, the students are guided in the writing process and compose six
              formal essays, whose content come from the mathematics class. As a result, the
              students are learning the value of writing to research and to express an
              understanding of a mathematical topic. Electronic resources are also being
              developed to support this approach.    This project supports first-year
              students at Marist College for years to come as it is associated with the
              Cluster Program, a program vigorously supported by the College. It also has
              national implications as a number of selected institutions are testing this
              approach and the material generated by this project. The project is resulting
              in a book that supports the approach as well as two publications, one on the
              pedagogical methods developed and one on the evaluative designs used. Formative
              and summative evaluations of the project are being performed by a national
              advisory board, a materials evaluation consultant, and a Marist College
              evaluation team.    To more fully address students enrolled in the teacher
              education program at Marist and to use the project as an avenue to enhance K-12
              education in the future, Marist is dedicated to  the following two preservice
              teacher education initiatives associated with this project.  They are (a)
              enrolling a number of teacher education freshmen in the cluster each year, and
              (b) using education students who have completed the cluster to serve as mentors
              or undergraduate teaching assistants.    8
