Title       : Rich Problem Solving Contexts: Integrating Mathematics and Reading Curricula for
               Preservice Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9752288

Award Number: 9752288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay Reinke kreinke@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kouider Mokhtari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The importance of mathematical problem solving for all students, including
              preservice teachers, has been well documented.  The integration of mathematics
              and reading is a natural way to explore the actual contexts of problems.  The
              main goal of this project is to enhance preservice teachers' problem solving
              and mathematics learning by integrating the teaching and learning of
              mathematics and reading in rich, authentic, contexts.      The goal of the
              proposed project will be accomplished by focusing on the following primary
              objectives: (1) coordinate curriculum offerings in three inter-related courses
              for preservice elementary teachers (mathematical content, mathematics methods,
              and reading methods); (2) create and field test new curricular materials for
              use in the targeted courses; (3) evaluate the completeness and appropriateness
              of the courses and materials developed; and (4) disseminate the curriculum
              materials to teacher education faculty locally, regionally, and nationally.    
              This development work will be supported by collaboration with the NSF-funded
              Oklahoma Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation, known as "O-TEC,"
              and the principal investigator of that project, Dr. Robert Howard.   This
              collaboration will ensure that the development work in this project is fully
              aligned with the goals and needs of O-TEC and will also assist in the
              dissemination and implementation of the projects products.        Under this
              proposal, a series of "rich problem solving contexts" will be developed and
              field tested under the guidance of an outside evaluator.  Briefly, this will be
              an inter-related set of mathematical ideas and educational activities designed
              to build a full context for meaningful learning.  It is anticipated that the
              proposed project will provide valuable data which will have important
              implications for the design of reading and mathematics curricula for preservice
              teachers.  The resulting curriculum materials will be disseminated through a
              variety of media including paper presen tations, journal articles, and a
              professional development conference which will serve as a vehicle for
              establishing a network for the exchange of information among teacher education
              faculty and other interested individuals locally, regionally, and nationally.
