Title       : POWRE: Mechanisms of Organelle Autophagy in the Yeast S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9752962

Award Number: 9752962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane S. Robinson jsrobins@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1132,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9752962  Robinson     This is a POWRE Research Enhancement Award.    During
              cellular remodeling, a process known as autophagy plays a role in transporting
              superfluous cytoplasmic proteins and organelles to the lysosome for
              degradation.  Such cellular remodeling occurs during differentiation, nutrient
              deprivation, metamorphosis, aging and transformation; autophagy also removes
              abnormal organelles that may accumulate for various reasons.  Thus, autophagy
              is a vitally important process.  During autophagy, a double membrane structure
              surrounds or engulfs a region of cytosol containing the material to be
              degraded, creating  a double membrane bound organelle, the autophagosome. 
              Autophagosomes deliver their contents for degradation by fusing the outer
              membrane with the lysosomal or vacuolar membrane.  The objective of this
              project is to unravel the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in
              organelle autophagy.  The experiments will be performed in the yeast,
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  This organism is commonly used as a model for cell
              biological studies because of the advantages it offers for genetic, cell
              biological, and molecular analyses.  The experimental approach will be to label
              the peroxisomes of the yeast cells with green fluorescent protein (GFP) and use
              digital time-lapse fluorescent microscopy as well as quantitative fluorimetry
              to observe and measure peroxisome autophagy.  Some of the planned experiments
              will test whether autophagy can be a selective process where specific
              superfluous structures are selectively targeted to the autophagic pathway.  To
              do this, rates of peroxisome and mitochondrial degradation will be
              simultaneously measured under conditions where one organelle, but not the
              other, is required for cell viability.   A second hypothesis that will be
              tested is that general membrane trafficking components as well as key
              components of the cell's cytoskeleton play a role in the formation, transport
              or function of the autophagosomes in yeast.  These experiments will combine
              assa ys for organelle autophagy with methods available in yeast to specifically
              inhibit specific protein functions.  The experiments will specifically assess
              potential roles in autophagy of  two proteins involved in membrane fusion, NSF
              and Kar2p, and two components of the yeast cytoskeletal system, microtubules
              and actin.  Finally, genetic screens will be carried out to identify new
              molecules involved in autophagy.  Fluorescence-activated cell sorting will be
              used to enrich for mutant cells that retain GFP-labeled peroxisomes due to
              delayed or abolished autophagy.  The characterization of mutants collected by
              this screen is part of the longer term goal of understanding the molecular
              mechanisms of autophagy but is beyond the scope of the present award.  This
              project represents a return to active cell biological  research for the
              Principal Investigator, after a major hiatus in her career.  The support from a
              POWRE award will allow the Principal Investigator to develop the necessary
              preliminary results for a novel and promising avenue of research.  ***
