Title       : Native American Environmental Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9752076

Award Number: 9752076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $775049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Burns dburns@nsf.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Oriero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwest Indian Coll
	      2522 Kwina Rd
	      Bellingham, WA  982269278    206/738-0136

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Northwest Indian College, in collaboration with three other post secondary
              institutes within the Pacific Northwest region, is carrying out the
              development, testing, and transfer of an advanced technical education program
              in Native American Environmental Technology.  This two year AAS degree program
              meets a critical need among area Tribes to increase the number of Native
              Americans working within tribal natural resource and environmental management
              programs.  Northwest Indian College has brought together for this project those
              post secondary institutes within the region that have a track record and
              commitment of working effectively to meet the postsecondary education needs of
              Native American students and tribal communities.  These institutions include
              the Evergreen State College, and Huxley College and Fairhaven College, both at
              Western Washington University.  In addition, Mesa State College and Navajo
              Community College are providing assistance through their ATE grant which also
              prevents duplication.  The project model consists of curricula development,
              pilot testing student internships, and articulation agreements with four year
              institutes.  Program methods have been developed specifically to support Native
              American learning styles, and the need for development of transferable
              technical skills that can lead to meaningful career employment, in the area of
              environmental science and management.  These methods include: hands-on
              learning; emphasis on speaking and writing skills; group projects;
              multi-disciplinary courses; and an internship program.  The College is hosting
              a symposium in year three to formally present the project findings and work
              products.  This symposium is open to tribal colleges and other post secondary
              institutes and tribal organizations.
