Title       : An Undergraduate Curriculum for Cognitive and Information Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9752299

Award Number: 9752299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Shiffrin shiffrin@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Goldstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Jon Barwise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Cognitive and Information Sciences (CIS) program offers a model
              undergraduate curriculum designed to expose students to the study of
              intelligent systems.  It is intended as a model for the development of similar
              programs at other institutions as they begin to move into this emerging field. 
                 The core of the newly proposed major concerns formal theories of mind and
              information that integrate computer science, psychology, philosophy,
              neuroscience, and mathematics. The curriculum gives students training in the
              basic skills of this new field (writing, mathematics, experimentation, and
              computer programming), but also fosters the development of expertise in
              particular sub-fields such as human cognition, learning and instruction, logic,
              and computation.  Newly designed courses will expose students to both basic
              scientific theories and to applications of these theories to education, system
              design, and database retrieval.     The program will be assessed internally by
              pre/post exams within courses and exit interviews upon graduation, and
              externally by quarterly site visits by expert consultants and a comprehensive
              third-year review by consultants from Indiana University's School of Education.
              The tangible products of this proposal will include general information on the
              CIS degree and its requirements and materials for specific courses in the form
              of syllabi, lecture notes, slides, bibliographies, assignments, and exams.    
              Most important will be the course software and laboratory software developed
              for all four of the core CIS courses, and several others; this courseware will
              emphasize interactive, hands on learning through doing, and will be in a form
              easily usable by other programs that are beginning or being planned in this
              area. These products will be disseminated through our existing technical report
              series and newsletter, through electronic media, web sites, and contacts at
              other universities, and will be provided upon request of other institutions
              starting such programs.
