Title       : UFE: Workshop on Innovative Physics Experiments for Beginning College Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9752701

Award Number: 9752701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deva D. Sharma sharmad@wssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winston-Salem State Univ
	      
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27110    919/761-2011

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      A week-long workshop is being held to develop innovative and inexpensive
              physics experiments and physics-at-home activities for Freshman level General
              Physics courses. Most U.S. universities offer such courses and generally these
              courses have large enrollments. In order to reduce the cost of offering such
              courses and to provide innovative, hands-on laboratory experiments and home
              activities, twenty-five such exercises to twenty-five physics faculty members
              from HBCUs in the Southeastern U.S have been developed, tested, evaluated, and
              disseminated. Based on the positive feedback from earlier workshops, the
              present workshop will develop, test, evaluate, and disseminate about
              twenty-five more innovative, hands-on physics experiments and home-activities
              to twenty-five beginning physics faculty from other two-year and four-year
              colleges and universities.      All fifty innovative physics experiments
              (twenty-five old and twenty-five new) will be field tested by the participants
              of the workshop. Each participant will select at least ten experiments for
              field testing and evaluation in his\her courses. The results of field testing
              and evaluations will be compiled by the director. All experiments will be
              refined and ranked by the participants in numerical order and the top ten
              experiments will be presented at AAPT meetings by their originators and
              developers. All experiments will be stored on electronic media and compiled
              into a book format. Each participant will receive copies of the experiments in
              both formats.
