Title       : Undergraduate Faculty Workshop for the Integration of Chemistry and Art into
               Liberal Arts, Chemistry and Teacher Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9752769

Award Number: 9752769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia S. Hill pshill@marauder.millersv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the summer of 1996 a Chautauqua Short Course entitled "Chemistry and Art:
              A Science Course for Non-science Majors" was developed and presented by the
              PI's. The short course received highest praise from all 23 undergraduate
              faculty participants. This Chautauqua program was based upon two separate
              laboratory science courses in chemistry and art for undergraduate non-science
              majors; one developed in 1990 at Millersville University of Pennsylvania and
              the other developed and offered at Brandeis University in 1992. The Brandeis
              course has received development support from NSF (DUE/CCD #92-54291 and
              #96-53252) and The Sloan Foundation. The Chautauqua Short Course will be
              repeated again in June 1997 for 25 science faculty. However, another eight to
              ten faculty are on the course waiting list. The course obviously meets a need
              but it cannot adequately meet the demand because each year the size of the
              waiting list grows.     Three week long workshops for undergraduate science,
              science education, art, art education, archaeology and anthropology faculty on
              chemistry and art are being held in the summers of 1998-99. These workshops
              offer significant advantages over the three-day Chautauqua course. They provide
              a sound foundation for disseminating courses in chemistry and art by giving
              participants an intensive, participatory experience in not only the content of
              integrated science and art but of effective pedagogical strategies for teaching
              the content to diverse student populations. This project goes beyond the
              confines of the Chautauqua short course and allows intensive work with
              undergraduate faculty to (a) develop courses for non-science majors in
              chemistry and art, (b) to develop example applications in art for the teaching
              of chemistry to scientists, and (c) to develop and disseminate curricula in
              chemistry and art for use in high schools. These goals will be achieved by
              holding two different type  workshops.  The first workshop, held in the summer
              of 1998 at Millersville University, brings toge ther faculty from the physical
              sciences, technology, art, anthropology, and archaeology to develop courses in
              chemistry and art for nonscientists based upon the model courses. The second
              and third workshops, held at Millersville in the summer of 1999 involve science
              education faculty, art education faculty, and pre-service or in-service high
              school teachers to develop the use of chemistry and art in the high school
              curriculum. Teaching and learning activities, lessons, and laboratory
              experiments generated by faculty as a result of participation in these
              workshops are disseminated by a variety of means including an electronic
              listserver, a Chemistry and Art website, publications in professional journals,
              and symposia on chemistry and art held at national, regional, and local
              professional meetings.
