Title       : GIS Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1998     
File        : a9752688

Award Number: 9752688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason L. Steinitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh W. Calkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Erie Cmty Col
	      6205 Main Street
	      Williamsville, NY  14221    716/851-1416

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                As technology diffuses through
              local government agencies and industries, the need for trained Geographic
              Information Systems (GIS) technicians and analysts continues to expand, as does
              the need for individuals in other fields to become aware of GIS and how it
              applies to their workplace.    This project, developed jointly by Erie
              Community College (N.Y.) and the State University of New York at Buffalo's
              Geography Department, addresses this need using a two-pronged approach. First,
              the GIS Curriculum Development Project will create a GIS Certificate Program
              for students to complete as part of their two-year degree program, or as a
              stand alone certificate. The project will develop a core of three (3)
              GIS-specific courses and a three (3) credit hour internship to provide students
              with a field experience component in their GIS Studies.    Secondly, this
              project will establish a GIS Infusion Program to train faculty in a variety of
              curricula to use GIS in their own courses within specific modules or
              applications. This will allow ECC students to develop experience and awareness
              of GIS and to learn how GIS technology relates to their own field of study. The
              GIS Infusion program will also develop a process for supplying GIS output
              directly to faculty for use in their classroom. This will allow GIS technology
              to reach a broader audience.      Two leading GIS educational institutions, the
              State University of New York at Buffalo and the University of California at
              Santa Barbara have agreed to lend their expertise in GIS technology, GIS
              curriculum development and faculty training to this project. The National
              Center for Geographic Information and Analysis (NCGIA) at the University of
              Buffalo will be also serve as project site for ECC students enrolled in the
              newly created GIS courses.
