Title       : A Probability/Activity Approach for Teaching Introductory Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9752428

Award Number: 9752428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank Wattenberg                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Albert albert@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The problem addressed by this proposal is how to teach an introductory
              undergraduate statistics course more effectively. The traditional lecture and
              homework format of teaching statistics are not conducive to learning. In
              addition, it is hard to communicate the basic classical concepts of sampling
              distributions, interval estimation, and hypothesis testing. This project will
              develop curriculum materials for a new "probability/activity" statistics
              course. This class would be taught using a workshop format in which the
              students learn data analysis, probability, and inference material by means of
              directed activities. The inferential content of the class will be taught using
              a Bayesian perspective. A textbook will be written that contains a collection
              of classroom and homework activities for learning concepts of probability and
              elementary inference. In addition, an instructor's manual will be developed
              that gives a description of the important concepts and advice on how to
              encourage the collaborative learning in the classroom. The effectiveness of
              this new statistics class will be assessed by the performance of the students
              on tests measuring knowledge of basic concepts in statistics and the general
              attitude of the students about the discipline of statistics. This new
              statistics class will be compared with the traditional class with respect to
              the success of the course in reaching particular achievement goals.
