Title       : Digital Signal Processing and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9752735

Award Number: 9752735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rulph Chassaing chassaing@email.msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Digital signal processors, made possible through advances in  integrated
              circuits, have added a new element to the environment of  digital signal
              processing (DSP).  They have found their way into a  number of applications
              including communications and controls,  graphics, instrumentation, speech, and
              image processing.  These  processors are found in cellular phones, modems,
              automotive and  security/identification systems, noise cancellers, etc.  They
              have  emerged as a response to the ever-increasing number of real-time  DSP
              applications across a wide range of disciplines.    This workshop addresses the
              need to add or integrate DSP techniques into courses such as Digital Signal
              Processing, Controls, Signals and Systems, Senior Design Project, etc.  It will
              combine both the lecture and laboratory components of DSP, with a special
              emphasis on the laboratory component to provide the participants valuable
              hands-on experiences.  While a theoretically oriented DSP course can be found
              at a more convenient location to the participant, the strength of this workshop
              is derived from its laboratory emphasis. The faculty participants will
              implement a wide range of experiments and mini-projects on finite and infinite
              impulse response filters, adaptive filters, and the fast Fourier transform
              using both simulation and real-time techniques.  DSP tools and techniques will
              be provided to the participants who will quickly realize how software and
              hardware experiences can be used to motivate their students.  They would then
              be able to integrate these software and hardware experiences at their home
              institutions.
