Title       : Water on the Web: Monitoring Minnesota's Lakes on the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9752017

Award Number: 9752017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $656576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Munson   (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Host  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Axler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Hagley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Increased pressure on natural resources worldwide and shrinking budgets are
              causing environmental management organizations to rely increasingly on advanced
              technology.  There is a clear need for the training of highly-skilled,
              multi-disciplinary environmental professionals, able to utilize advanced
              technology to achieve environmental management goals.   The purpose of Water on
              the Web is to contribute to a more scientifically and technologically competent
              work force through a comprehensive educational program for high school and
              community college students and teachers.  This goal will be achieved by
              developing curriculum modules that teach basic science concepts illustrated
              through the use of real-time remote sensing technology, Geographic Information
              Systems, and the Internet.  Multi-disciplinary teams of academic, science, and
              technology specialists (including representatives from universities, community
              and tribal colleges, secondary schools, natural resource and research agencies,
              and industry) will cooperatively develop this curriculum.  Through this project
              students will conduct interactive inquiries of widespread environmental systems
              using newly-developed, real-time, remote sampling technology linked with
              classrooms through cellular communication and Internet networks and participate
              in industry-sponsored internships.   Final curricula will be disseminated
              through printed materials, and an interactive CD-ROM distributed through the
              National Sea Grant network, materials in electronic format available through an
              Internet node, in-service training workshops, presentations at professional
              conferences, and, finally, a national conference on the use of real time data
              and emerging technologies in undergraduate science education.
