Title       : Developing Computer-Based Multimedia Examination Formats for the Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9752326

Award Number: 9752326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kappelman jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The process of evaluating student learning and performance lies at the core of
              teaching in K-12 grades and also at the college and university levels. However,
              paper and pencil exams offer neither an interactive or authentic contextualized
              format. Testing should ideally he an integral part of learning.     We propose
              to use advances in multimedia software to develop for the first time truly
              interactive evaluations that will permit us to better assess learning and
              improve teaching. The content of each assignment, quiz, or exam can draw from
              the full range of materials from lecture, the readings, and laboratories, and
              can incorporate the most recent discoveries in the sciences, thus blurring the
              distinction between teaching and research.     Short answer and interactive
              problem-solving questions will be integrated with text, 2-D images, video
              clips, sound, and 3-D animations. Exam templates will be produced so that the
              instructor can "copy, cut, and paste" their materials into the format to
              produce their exams. The program will be designed to randomly select questions
              that are sorted by content as well as level of difficulty so that each student
              receives a "unique but uniform" exam. A review program will rerun the exercise
              for the student and display the question along with the student's response, the
              correct response, and a justification for the correct response. Grades will be
              automatically calculated and reported as the last screen of the exam for
              immediate feedback to the student.     This proposal will build applications in
              five different science disciplines at the middle school, high school, and
              university level. Our effort will impact large numbers of students in the large
              undergraduate science courses at the University of Texas, and a significant
              proportion of these are women and ethnic minorities. The program and the
              templates will also be useful in most other disciplines, and the publication of
              these templates at the completion of the project will make our results readily
              available to oth er instructors. It is anticipated that computer-based
              multimedia examinations will soon become the standard for evaluating student
              learning and performance.
