Title       : Incorporating Research and Theory into the Undergraduate Computer Science
               Curriculum through Practical Case Study Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9752671

Award Number: 9752671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Dianne Martin                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Krone krone@denison.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denison University
	      P O Box F
	      Granville, OH  430230607    614/587-6262

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is to develop a pilot, senior level course that uses a combination
              of methods proposed by the PI's to address 6 points of need in undergraduate
              Computer Science education that have arisen in several recent reports. These
              reports have dealt with the interaction of theory and practice as well as
              academia and industry within the context of Computer Science education and
              research.      The eventual aim is to introduce the proposed methods into lower
              level CS courses. For this purpose, it is expected that the experience gained
              and problems encountered during the proposed project - involving the more
              controlled, but representative, senior-level student population at 3
              institutions - would be crucial, if not indispensable.    The course to be
              developed will be based entirely on case-studies. These are not artificially
              contrived or token exercises, but are to be obtained from raw case-study
              material collected (in consultation with industrial partners) from past and
              ongoing projects in industry. These case-studies are carefully chosen and
              designed (i) to expose students to a broad variety of large, prototypical,
              real-world projects, (ii) to apply, in a noncompartmentalized manner, a
              combination of formal and theoretical concepts, techniques and results in real
              situations, (iii) to illustrate recent theoretical research results in the
              context of a chain of applications leading to the solution of a real-world
              problem, and (iv) to involve the student in significant software implementation
              while being conscious of its role in the larger context of an industrial
              case-study project.    The main results of the project will be twofold: (1)
              Industrial case-study material in a uniform format, usable also by schools with
              no industrial contacts, along with supplementary formal and conceptual
              material, teaching tips etc. (2) Pilot methodology to be used by schools who
              are interested in developing their own bank of case studies. These
              methodologies will be documented and also conveyed via a conference pape r, as
              well as a one day workshop, possibly at DIMACS.
