Title       : World Wide Web-Based Modules for Introduction of Molecular Simulation into the
               Chemical Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a9752243

Award Number: 9752243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Rowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Kofke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Lacks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Maginn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan J. De Pablo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall Q. Snurr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Athanassios Z. Panagiotopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cache Corporation
	      P.O.Box 7939
	      Austin, TX  787137939    512/471-7445

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Design requirements for high-value products and processes by chemical engineers
              have shifted recently from the large-scale requirements of traditional
              industries to a much finer scale characteristic of today's high-tech
              commodities. The current chemical engineering curriculum is not adequately
              preparing students to face the emerging challenges accompanying this shift in
              scale. There is currently little linkage in the chemical engineering curriculum
              between the molecular concepts taught in lower division chemistry courses and
              the macroscopic processes taught in the upper-division engineering curriculum.
              Introduction of important molecular simulation concepts into the  undergraduate
              curriculum is important to meet design demands of emerging technologies, but it
              is hampered by an already full curriculum and a lack of teaching resources and
              undergraduate faculty familiar with molecular concepts.  As a major step toward
              remedying these curriculum deficiencies and incongruities, we propose the
              development of 24 World-Wide-Web modules that would facilitate introduction of
              molecular simulation into the chemical engineering undergraduate curriculum.
              These teaching modules will be integrated directly into the chemical
              engineering core undergraduate courses, supplying for the instructor and the
              student the appropriate linkage material between macroscopic concepts and the
              molecular simulations. Because the modules are web-based, they can be easily
              distributed, can provide direct links to other related materials and topics,
              and can be readily used by students and faculty alike. They will provide visual
              simulations illustrating key concepts in the core undergraduate courses and
              they will be self-contained with instructor materials, fundamental instruction,
              a tutorial, computer simulations, student problems, and assessment materials.
              Because of their capability for visual and exploratory learning, the modules
              are designed to provide learning experiences for students with a variety of
              learning styles  Harb et  al. 1993 .   This project is a multi-institutional
              endeavor involving eleven chemical engineering faculty from nine different
              institutions. The goals of the project are endorsed and support by CACHE
              corporation, a non-profit organization that promotes cooperation among
              universities, industry, and government to develop and distribute
              computer-related educational materials for the chemical engineering profession.
