Title       : Institute in the History of Mathematics and its Use in Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9752755

Award Number: 9752755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149992             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Frederick Rickey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor J. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the mathematics reform of the past decade, there has been growing recognition
              that the history of mathematics should be an integral part of the teaching and
              learning of mathematics at all levels. Mathematicians who teach the history of
              mathematics and who use this history to improve their teaching are in need of
              more knowledge and resources to prepare to teach their students.    The
              Mathematical Association of America (MAA) will continue the successful
              Institute in the History of Mathematics and its Use in Teaching (IHMT) the goal
              of which is to increase the presence of history in the undergraduate
              mathematics curriculum.  At the same time the IHMT will target teacher
              preparation programs developing materials for use in K-12 classrooms and
              materials for use in teacher preparation programs.  Faculty involved in teacher
              preparation will be important participants in the IHMT.    Through an ongoing
              year-round program of activities which include intensive two-week programs in
              one summer with a follow-up week in the successive summer for mathematics
              faculty new to the use of history; a two-week program each summer for faculty
              with experience in the use of history; a vigorous email discussion group
              together with the 80 participants in the original institute; supervised
              research by IHMT alumni; new participants will be prepared to teach courses in
              the history of mathematics and to use history to improve their teaching of
              standard undergraduate mathematics courses, especially teacher preparation
              courses; experienced faculty will publish materials to assist all faculty in
              introducing history.    Fifteen historians of mathematics, all of whom are
              known to be excellent teachers, will lead explorations of the history of
              mathematics from antiquity through the twentieth-century, stressing
              applications and links between different areas of mathematics. Specific
              techniques for incorporating history into undergraduate mathematics courses
              will be a central theme. Through presentations at national and regional ma
              thematics meetings, publications, and electronic communications, the
              information and techniques of IHMT will be disseminated nationally making
              changes in the teaching of mathematics.
