Title       : Multi-Media Software for the Development of 3-D Spatial Visualization Ability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9752660

Award Number: 9752660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl A. Sorby sheryl@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne F. Wysocki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly J. Baartmans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main purpose of this project is to develop multimedia software modules for a
              PC/Windows platform which focus on the development of 3-D spatial visualization
              skills.  This project builds on a previous NSF project in which the PIs wrote a
              textbook titled "Introduction to 3-D Spatial Visualization" with an
              accompanying computer lab manual.  The software to be developed could be used
              either as stand-alone exercises in the development of 3-D spatial skills or as
              a supplement to the text.  The text, which was written primarily for freshman
              engineering students, is also appropriate for college freshmen in general
              and/or for high school students.  The computer lab manual from the original
              project, however, is written for use with I-DEAS software and Unix baxed
              workstations.  Consequently, it is unlikely that the computer component
              developed for this text could be used by most high schools and by those
              colleges without Unix based workstations or access to I-DEAS software.  The
              development of stand-alone, multimedia software modules was not part of the
              original project.  This project represents a significant software development
              effort -- it is not merely the conversion of existing software from one
              platform to another.  Development of stand-alone software modules for the PC
              will enable larger dissemination of the computer component of this course and
              has been requested by many teachers.      A secondary purpose of this project
              is to develop a workbook that students will write in as they are using the
              software.  The workbook will contain spaces for sketching objects and answering
              questions as they work through the software modules.    Prentice-Hall has
              agreed to assist in the dissemination of these materials.  If possible, the
              software that is developed as a direct result of this project will be made
              available on the World Wide Web.
