Title       : Vector Calculus via Linearization: Visualization and ModernApplications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9752453

Award Number: 9752453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Kawski kawski@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a radically new approach to vector calculus that is
              completely aligned with recent reform efforts in other college entry-level
              math, science, and engineering (MSE) courses. As part of this larger MSE
              curriculum, it brings more coherence and consistency to it, emphasizing the
              common foundation for much of these courses. Sophisticated computer
              visualization is vigorously exploited as it has opened a completely new avenue
              to vector calculus, allowing to reconnect the concepts of vectorial derivatives
              back to their foundation, local linearity. Students now can see the curl by
              zooming. Connections to concepts of linear algebra and differential equations
              perspectives are omnipresent. The curriculum is ideally suited for cooperative
              learning environments where students are guided to make many key discoveries
              themselves via often dramatic computer experiments. The new course is also
              broadening the range of applications (beyond the traditional EM and fluid
              dynamics) by drawing on modern geometric control which has ubiquitous
              applications, even connecting to recent research achievements that fit into
              this sophomore course. The curriculum is being implemented in the form of
              interactive texts, and is using modern electronic media and the WWW for rapid
              dissemination. Assessment of the enhanced learning experiences is an integral
              part of the project. This curriculum is having a high impact on both MSE majors
              and future math and science teachers by conveying a coherent and modern view of
              advanced mathematics.
