Title       : CCD: Linking Undergraduate Geoscience Research Programs and Teacher Education
               Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9752489

Award Number: 9752489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149998             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Dickey   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Frank W. Ireton  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dean A. McManus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monte D. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall M. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In research universities students who have declared a major in one of the
              geosciences are often ineligible to take the education courses necessary for
              state certification.  In order to enroll in education courses to meet the
              state's Department of Education course requirements for a teaching credential,
              these students must drop their geoscience major and declare an education major.
              Students enrolled in education programs often face a similar program in that
              advanced science major course work is not available to them.  As a result,
              universities too often produce science majors with a weak pedagogical
              background, or education majors with a weak geoscience background.  Moreover,
              there is little collective university faculty attention paid to pre-college
              teacher preparation.  Spurred on by the National Science Standards, the demand
              for earth science teachers in our schools far exceeds the number of available
              enormous.  In this project, The American Geophysical Union, brings together
              geoscience and education faculty, and appropriate administrators, from four
              higher education institutions for the purposes of finding and developing a
              viable undergraduate curriculum that will lead to teacher certification for
              geoscience students.  These four institutions, and the programs they develop
              and implement, will serve as models for other institutions.  This initiative
              will present ways in which  a four-year, science- based major can effectively
              integrate a professional education component.  This initiative, an accompanying
              report, and special teacher preparation session(s), held at the annual meeting
              of the American Geophysical Union, will serve as an important implementation
              model for other institutions working to develop similar programs.
