Title       : TECH SPAN: Fulfilling Lifelong Learning Through Flexible Manufacturing Technical
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9752082

Award Number: 9752082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Timmer wtimmer@waukesha.tec.wi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna H. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G.E.O. Widera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Rockwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shajan M. John  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Murray Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Waukesha County Tech Col
	      800 Main Street
	      Pewaukee, WI  530724601    414/691-5566

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Work requires that schools prepare the workforce with certain basic and
              technical competencies.  Business, industry and its workers are demanding that
              these competencies be made available in easily accessible learning formats in
              order to accommodate the pace of technological change.  Schools, however, are
              faced with rising costs and the service needs of changing student groups.   
              The mission of the TECH SPAN Program is to develop applied manufacturing
              curriculum which provides for the flexible delivery of technical education to
              first time and returning students, and workers in an internationally
              competitive environment.    TECH SPAN will develop manufacturing curriculum in
              technology-supported instructional packages.  TECH SPAN will create a framework
              on which to base a sustainable system of curriculum development and delivery at
              the undergraduate and secondary school levels, especially for technicians being
              educated for the high performance workplace.  This project will result in major
              improvements in advanced technological education in manufacturing, serve as a
              model for other institutions and states, assure that secondary and
              postsecondary students acquire strong foundations in mathematics and science,
              and produce nationally-usable educational products.    The TECH SPAN Program
              will a) develop 11 manufacturing technical core competencies into modules and
              instructional materials using the Wisconsin Instructional Design System (a
              computerized, performance-based instructional design system); b) research the
              most effective delivery method/materials for providing manufacturing technician
              training in multiple delivery formats (i.e., traditional, audio, visual,
              digitized, CD-ROM, Internet, etc.); c) produce computerbased, self-paced,
              multi-media manufacturing curriculum, d) develop educational professionals in
              traditional and non-traditional educational delivery systems; and e)
              disseminate information on the process and the educational products developed.
