Title       : Hypermedia Fluid Mechanics: Teaching Modules for the Next Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2000  
File        : a9752199

Award Number: 9752199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598261             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Homsy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan Aref  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simone Hochgreb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose the conception, development, production, evaluation and dissemination
              of a series of interactive modules for the teaching and learning of fluid
              mechanics for undergraduates in science and engineering. The modules focus on
              fundamentals and will have impact across the curricula of Chemical, Mechanical,
              Petroleum, Aeronautical, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Oceanography,
              Meteorology, Geophysics, Applied Mathematics and Applied Physics. The primary
              objectives are to enhance student learning in the areas of (i) problem solving,
              (ii) intuition about complex flow phenomena, and (iii) retention of knowledge.
              These objectives will be met by providing experimental visualizations and
              computational simulations of fluid flow phenomena in an interactive medium,
              including student exercises and problems to be solved based on the material in
              the module.    Three modules will be produced, with emphasis on Basic Concepts
              I & II, and Boundary Layer Phenomena. The modules will be developed, tested,
              evaluated and refined over a one year period, resulting in a final CD-ROM
              version. The final version will be disseminated through a commercial publishing
              house such as John Wiley and Sons.    The project represents a national effort
              centered at MIT, Stanford University, and the University of Illinois, and
              involving researchers and educators drawn from the community at large. The
              organization consists of a working group of seven investigatorts, including
              undergraduate teachers of fluid mechanics, writers of successful textbooks, and
              researchers with specific expertise.  The evaluation will involve both
              formative and summative components, and be conducted using graduate students
              from the Stanford School of Education.
