Title       : Development of Instructional Materials to Teach Concepts of Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1997  
File        : a9752398

Award Number: 9752398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80618              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Scott Owen sowen@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a two-year project  to develop curriculum materials to teach the
              concepts of Visualization, i.e., the use of computer graphics to display
              information. It is a joint project between the National Science Foundation
              (NSF) and the ACM SIGGRAPH Education Committee (SEC) and is international in
              scope. This project builds on several previously funded NSF and SEC projects,
              and on a project funded by the United Kingdom Advisory Group on Computer
              Graphics (AGOCG).    While in one sense Visualization has been around for
              hundreds of years  TUFT83 , in another sense, it began as a formal discipline
              only recently  MCC087 . It was initially specific to scientific computing
              applications, but has been extended to many other areas such as general data or
              information visualization. The basic concepts of Visualization are transferable
              to, and important for, many different areas such as mathematics, science,
              business, education, and others. An estimated fifty percent of the brain' s
              neurons are associated with vision and Visualization exploits this "gigabit
              bandwidth of the eye/visual cortex system"  MCC087  to facilitate the
              understanding of both simple and complex concepts in many different application
              areas.    While Visualization has been previously used in many different areas,
              such as education, it has only been in the past few years that a large amount
              of research has gone into many of the underlying principles and components of
              the field. We are proposing to take the knowledge gained in these research
              efforts, create instructional materials that capture this knowledge, and make
              them available to a wide audience. The successful implementation of this
              project will provide the basic materials to teach the important concepts of
              Visualization and can be used at many different levels in college and K-12
              courses.
