Title       : POWRE: Introducing Interactive Case Studies in the Advanced Materials Science
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9752990

Award Number: 9752990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rochelle P. Ondracek rondracek1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9177,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9752990       Interactivity has been introduced to introductory physics  courses
              with dramatic success.  Instead of just reinforcing the  students' preconceived
              ideas about motion, an interactive physics  classroom gives students a deeper
              and more conceptual understanding  of technical material.  This project will
              introduce interactivity  through real-life case studies in an advanced
              materials science  laboratory offered through the Mechanical Engineering
              Department.   In addition to the interactive activities, however, students will
               also get the opportunity to develop important job skills such as  writing,
              oral presentation, working on teams and open-ended problem  solving. 
              Specifically, case studies based on real-life situations  will be introduced to
              the students in an interactive computer  program.  After learning about the
              problem and what is at stake,  students will be asked to place themselves in
              the case study as  engineers or consultants in industry given the task of
              resolving a  problem.  They will collect data using actual materials testing 
              equipment and interpret the data for the rest of the class in the  form of a
              written and oral presentation.  Pre- and post-tests are  suggested to assess
              the success of this new format.  The new case  studies that are proposed are
              all fictional, but efforts will be  made to find actual case studies from
              industry to incorporate into  the laboratory exercises.       The goals of this
              project are two-fold:  to design laboratory  exercises with case studies so
              students can associate laboratory  activities with real-world problems and to
              develop important job  skills in the process of participating in the
              laboratory.  Students  should finish the course with a better appreciation for
              materials  testing methods and what they mean and improved job skills, which 
              ultimately makes them more employable and better engineers.
