Title       : Project Sherlock: An Interactive Multimedia Program in Forensic Science to
               Enhance Introductory Chemistry (Science)Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a9752526

Award Number: 9752526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Kaplan lkaplan@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PI instituted innovative teaching techniques in an elementary chemistry
              course called "Chemistry and Crime: From Sherlock Holmes to Modern Forensic
              Science" for the non-science major. In the lecture hall, this approach involved
              stimulating the student's interest in the science topic to be discussed by
              first discussing a crime in which the "science" was instrumental in its
              resolution. In the laboratory, the same principle manifested itself by
              stimulating the student's interest in conducting a series of experiments in a
              cohesive investigation rather than simply assigning a collection of unrelated
              exercises. The experiments helped the "investigative unit" resolve a crime to
              which they had been called and which scene they had processed. The "discovery
              method" used in the laboratory has received national attention and many
              colleagues have instituted similar innovations. However, many institutions do
              not have the resources to develop laboratory programs along these lines and, as
              times have changed, are increasingly concerned with exposing the students to
              situations now recognized as potentially dangerous.    Since the PI has
              demonstrated that forensics can be used to spark interest in science and since
              it is a given that young people are intrigued by computer graphics, it was
              decided to use computer animated simulations to allow extensive, intensive
              investigation of scientific evidence collected at simulated crime scenes and
              studied using simulated scientific instruments. With support from the NSF, a
              computer animated crime scene module and three computer animated
              instrumentation/procedure modules are under development. These will be
              incorporated into an interactive CD-ROM (and most like linked to the world wide
              web) based instructional tool. By using these modules, the student will be able
              to process the crime scene and collect physical evidence for later analysis. In
              the computer simulated crime lab, the student will be able to use the
              instrumentation modules to analyze the evidence. In addition  to the data
              generated by using the instrumentation/procedure modules, the CD will contain
              subroutines instructing the users in the necessary theory and background of
              both the instrument and the analytical method. While these modules are intended
              to be used as a package, they could be used individually and the animated
              instrumentation modules will enhance not only the laboratory program in the
              forensic science course but also could be used in the laboratory programs in
              introductory science courses for majors.    The PI will guide the development
              of the computer animated modules, develop the story board and oversee the
              computer interfacing and the integration of the components into the curriculum.
                  Additional support will be used for the development of additional modules
              for the analysis of other types of physical evidence. It is anticipated that
              this multimedia form of computer/world wide web based instruction, as part of
              an overall program including actual laboratory experience, will enhance science
              education by stimulating interest and engendering enthusiasm instead of
              promoting the stereotype that science is boring and hard. This project is
              expected to have an impact on undergraduate education because, in addition to
              the informative content and its visualization in space and time, the virtual
              laboratory components will enhance critical thinking, quantitative skills, and
              science writing skills.
