Title       : A New Learning Environment for Computer Science 1 Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9752222

Award Number: 9752222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Carver rcarver@cs.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              First semester computer science (CSI) courses are taught today using the same
              instructional model as was used twenty years ago - standup lectures continue to
              be the only contact between instructors and students and the primary method for
              delivering instruction. Lectures limit interaction and set a lock-step pace for
              the entire class. Because of the large enrollments in CSl courses, students
              receive little graded feedback about their progress and many fall far behind
              without realizing it. Student performance and interest drops due to their
              inability to get individual problems addressed, a lack of nurturing, and a lack
              of motivation. Lectures are filled with basic instruction, which allows little
              time for highlighting the interesting research and exciting applications that
              bring students to the CS program in the first place.    We propose to address
              these problems by adding a significant courseware component to CS1. Our
              objective is to create a new learning environment with increased interaction,
              higher student performance, greater flexibility and more feedback. We can also
              increase access to CS1 instruction for non-CS majors and high school students.
              We have developed a courseware package called ALECS, which consists of
              hypertext, graphics, voice annotations, animations, exercises, case studies,
              and closed labs. We have used ALECS to make dramatic changes in the structure
              of CS1. In this project, we will extend ALECS to better support our new
              learning environment, add tracking and reporting features to help us assess
              ALECS' impact on learning, and make it easier for other university and high
              schools to adapt ALECS to their own needs. We have already begun partnerships
              with several high schools. High school teachers have been using ALECS in their
              classrooms and for their own training.
