Title       : Integrating Mathematics and the Sciences in Teacher Education Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9752285

Award Number: 9752285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry L. Shipman harrys@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Skopik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A committed group of thirteen people from thirteen institutions if reforming our
              own teacher preparation courses, making them student-centered, inquiry based,
              and aligned with the national K-12 science standards.  The team includes
              mathematicians, science educators, and scientists, all developing and giving
              courses for pre-service teachers.  The three institutions (a research
              university, a technical/community college, and a historically black university)
              include students from a variety of SES's (socio-economic starting points).  We
              integrate the pre-service courses for elementary teachers with each other and
              with mathematics.  We progress towards our goals through specific initiatives
              targeted to the needs of each campus, course, and faculty member.  Big
              Projects, where students design and conduct their own investigations over a
              period of weeks, are becoming self-sustaining and are exported to other courses
              and other campuses.  One pair of physical science and biology courses is being
              thoroughly integrated in content and pedagogy, with instructors in one course
              teaching in the other, and with joint staff meetings.  A summer retreat and
              some cross-disciplinary teaching will facilitate integration of mathematics and
              science at all three campuses.  Our research on the successful treatment of the
              Nature of Science in one of our courses will support curriculum development in
              other courses.  A laboratory manual is under contract with a commercial
              publisher, and we are seriously negotiating with another for a full textbook
              package.  We will also disseminate our findings through workshops and
              publications, addressed to scientists, science educators, and university
              faculty in other disciplines.
