Title       : Image Processing for Teaching in Advanced Technological Education: Faculty and
               Teacher Development and Curriculum Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9752101

Award Number: 9752101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $708968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie Magisos   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Kolvoord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Center for Image Processin
	      630 North Craycroft, Suite 104
	      Tucson, AZ  85711    520/322-0118

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The federal initiative of the past decade to reform science and mathematics
              education at the K-12 levels has resulted in greater emphasis on inquiry,
              active learning and new uses of technology at pre-college levels.  It has
              become imperative that current students be more engaged in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology education.  Educators are being
              challenged to develop teaching tools that engage students' imaginations and
              provide a platform for integrating technology into technical and non-technical
              undergraduate curricula.    This project is a two year renewal of a successful
              project started in l995 by the Center for Image Processing in Education.  The
              current project introduces digital image processing as a learning tool for
              educators serving students studying for careers as technicians.  The project
              was designed to accomplish three activities: conduct professional development
              for technological education faculty at the high school and community college
              levels; build on the work of the University of Arizona's Image Processing for
              Teaching project to develop instructional materials for technological
              education; and establish a linking infrastructure to deliver the workshops and
              materials, provide strong follow-up support, and reach out to potential users. 
                Objectives for the renewal period include:  1.  Continuing to provide high
              quality professional development opportunities tailored to the needs of
              educators involved in technology oriented fields such as biotechnology,
              environmental technology, and agricultural technology at the high school and
              community college levels.  2.  Continuing development of instructional
              materials for technology education, both completing materials begun during the
              first period of funding and developing new materials in areas identified by
              educators and the project's Advisory Board.  3.  Maintaining and expanding the
              effective infrastructure for disseminating workshops and materials, and
              continuing to provide strong follow-up support and reach out t o potential
              users.  4.  Developing a strong summative evaluation program that effectively
              employs quantitative and qualitative analyses.
