Title       : WebLab! A Web- and Java-Based Laboratory for Animated, Interactive Exploration
               of Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9752673

Award Number: 9752673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Dianne Martin                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rockford J. Ross ross@cs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A substantial body of work by a number of researchers has been done in program
              animation, algorithm animation, and computer science concept animation that
              could be used as the basis for laboratories in the lower-level undergraduate
              computer science curriculum. In spite of the impressive nature of this work,
              however, it has been slow to be adopted for one primary reason: the animation
              software runs only on specific computer platforms with specific operating
              system support. To solve this problem, work has begun by various researchers on
              adapting computer science animation systems to the World Wide Web using HTML
              and Java. The project of this proposal, called WebLab, will combine work done
              by the PI in computer science animation into a model laboratory curriculum that
              is animated, dynamic, interactive, and usable by virtually any computer science
              program. All that will be needed is a computing environment that supports a
              Java-ready browser, such as Netscape. The WebLab project will result in an
              infrastructure for introductory computer science laboratories. The Web-based
              infrastructure will consist of a set of laboratory exercises along with a user
              interface supporting animation that is based on HTML and Java, a Pascal program
              animator developed over the past number of years by the PI, an animator for a
              more modern programming language (C/C++), and a set of computer science concept
              animations (work already in progress by the PI). Algorithm animations developed
              by other researchers will also be incorporated into WebLab, making WebLab a
              comprehensive laboratory environment. Since WebLab will be developed around
              HTML and Java, it will be available incrementally over the Web as the project
              progresses. Final versions of WebLab will be available via the Web as well as
              in self-contained CD-ROM form for distribution with textbooks and lab manuals.
              The universal nature of the World Wide Web will ensure that WebLab is widely
              disseminated and used.
