Title       : Linearity I & II: Connected Learning of Differential Equations, Linear Algebra
               and Multi-variable Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9752650

Award Number: 9752650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly J. Black kelly.black@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. C. Leitzel  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lee L. Zia  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A year-long integrated course of study organized around the fundamental concept
              of linearity and the process of linearization is being developed at the
              University of New Hampshire (UNH). The goals of this sequence are: 1) to unify
              the learning of the core ideas and techniques normally studied in a separate
              fashion in ordinary differential equations, linear algebra, and multivariable
              calculus, by captitalizing on the rich interconnections among the three subject
              areas, and 2) to maximize student opportunities to engage in contextual
              learning of these key concepts. To achieve these goals, mathematical sciences
              faculty are collaborating with colleagues from mechanical engineering,
              electrical engineering, and physics, to develop "bench-lab experiments" for use
              in the classroom. These experiments are drawn from the application areas
              studied in many of the courses in which students are concurrently enrolled, and
              enable the restructuring of the normally static learning environment into a
              dynamic one employing a "studio" or laboratory approach. Teaching and learning
              materials based on the set of "bench-lab" experiments are being developed for
              commercial publication. Pilot testing will begin with a group of mechanical
              engineering, electrical and computer engineering, and applied mathematical
              sciences students. Full implementation of this approach is expected to impact
              all students in the UNH College of Engineering and Physical Sciences.
