Title       : HBCU Inter-Disciplinary Project-Based College Algebra Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9752519

Award Number: 9752519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188089             (Estimated)
Investigator: Della D. Bell aasmddbell@tsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Southern University
	      3100 Cleburne
	      Houston, TX  770044501    713/527-7011

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A consortium of nine Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in
              Texas and Louisiana is engaged in a four-year innovative initiative to develop
              a new inter-disciplinary, project based College Algebra program and to change
              the culture surrounding the present College Algebra courses. The Consortium,
              headquartered at Texas Southern University in Houston, Texas, comprises three
              universities, five four-year colleges, and a community college. The Consortium
              schools are Texas Southern University, Prairie View A & M University, Grambling
              State University, Huston-Tillotson College, Jarvis Christian College, Paul
              Quinn College, Texas College, Wiley College, and Central College of the Houston
              Community College System. Each school's involvement is under the direction of a
              Local Coordinator.    College Algebra is the basic mathematics course in these
              schools in the sense that it is the first mathematics course to carry college
              or university credit. It is a prerequisite for the large majority of majors and
              programs and it has an enrollment that is three to four times as large as all
              other credit mathematics courses combined.    The two goals of the consortium
              are to:     (1) Develop a new course that will (a) be project-based-small group
              projects developed by inter-disciplinary teams of faculty members; (b)
              incorporate a strong technology component; (c) develop communication skills;
              and (d) develop students' mathematical self-esteem and confidence as problem
              solvers.    (2) Change the culture surrounding the present College Algebra
              program. This will involve (a) developing a sense of ownership and pride in the
              College Algebra  program in each member of the full-time mathematics faculty
              teaching  College Algebra in the consortium schools; (b) energizing faculty to
              develop modes of instruction that actively engage students in their own
              learning; (c) developing a sense of involvement and responsibility for the
              College  Algebra program on the part of faculty in disciplines that require 
              College Alge bra for their majors; and (d) developing administrative support
              for the new program in terms of  reduced class size, equipment purchase, and
              technical computer  assistance.    The project evaluation focuses on changes in
              the culture associated with the College Algebra Program and in the College
              Algebra course.
