Title       : Teaching Scientific Reasoning Skills in Physics: Students and Computers Coaching
               Each Other
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9752204

Award Number: 9752204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Reif freif@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill H. Larkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1338,7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students in science courses often receive far too little guidance to allow
              reliable learning of needed reasoning skills. As a result, many students fail
              to acquire flexibly usable scientific knowledge (even with modern well-designed
              instruction and materials). Furthermore, students often lack some basic
              cognitive abilities needed for complex intellectual tasks (e.g., making
              well-considered decisions or adequately assessing their own performance).   
              The goals of this project are to improve science instruction by the following
              approach:  1. Use cognitive analyses to specify the procedural knowledge needed
              for effectively applying scientific concepts or principles and for solving
              problems.  2. Help students learn such procedural knowledge, teach them
              explicitly the basic cognitive functions of deciding on an action, implementing
              it, and assessing the result.  3. Do this by adapting a "reciprocal-teaching
              strategy" (very effective in teaching reading) where a student and tutor trade
              roles, alternately (a) deciding and assessing or (b) implementing.  4. Develop
              novel computer programs ("PALs", i.e., Personal Assistants for Learning) that
              can play the role of the tutor--so that students and computers coach each
              other. Such PALs, which involve careful instructional design but no artificial
              intelligence, can provide every student with good individual guidance and
              feedback. (Preliminary experiments suggest that such PALs might achieve
              instructional effectiveness approaching that of expert human tutors.)    This
              work is expected to lead to the following results:  1. Production of PALs of
              demonstrated instructional efficacy and utility in basic physics.  2. Effective
              methods for developing PALs, in physics as well as in other domains.  3.
              Increased understanding of relevant cognitive and human-computer interaction
              processes.
