Title       : "A New Course in Statistical Process Control Integrating an Industrial
               Production Facility as The On-line Laboratory"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9752622

Award Number: 9752622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89083              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Garrett garrettr@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Providing a meaningful applied statistics learning experience in a traditional
              classroom setting is a dilemma faced by colleges and universities that offer
              courses in manufacturing engineering or applied statistics. One of the major
              challenges is in engaging all students as active learners. Another challenge of
              educators in the quality control field is in getting students to think
              critically about applications at a full-scale production facility. Both of
              these challenges can be addressed by giving students an opportunity to
              participate in projects and to ask a broad range of questions to professionals
              in the field. This  initiative is resulting in the creation of a new course in
              Statistical Process Control (SPC) that incorporates uploading real-time quality
              data directly from the factory floor of a production facility operated by an
              industrial sponsor. Computers located at the sponsor site will electronically
              transfer the data to a university computer laboratory in a matter of seconds.
              Students will: (i) be shown how to upload current quality data from the factory
              floor, (ii) complete four multi-week team projects, and (iii) make oral
              presentations and submit written reports to the professors and to industry
              representatives. Essentially, each student performs as a member of the quality
              control team for industry. This project represents an opportunity for industry
              to share their expertise and their billions of dollars in equipment investment
              with academia. Since good data is a critical need of applied statistics
              courses, the solution proposed offers an affordable source of real-time
              production data for several applied statistics courses. In addition, this
              approach is highly transportable to other institutions. The cooperative climate
              between industry and academia resulting from this project is novel. It will
              show students how to apply statistics to help make American industry
              competitive at a global level.
