Title       : A Web-Based Electronic Laboratory for Operating Systems and Computer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9752165

Award Number: 9752165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Robbins srobbins@cs.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The geometric increase in computer power and the ubiquitous availability of
              network connectivity are revolutionizing computing. A computer science
              curriculum based on old teaching techniques may seem dull and irrelevant to the
              modern student. Instruction in the undergraduate curriculum for the most part
              does not make active use of new technology. A multimedia presentation during a
              lecture by an instructor is considered to be a passive use of technology. In
              contrast, a student who can control a multimedia visualization is making active
              use of such technology. The difference between passive and active use of
              technology is similar to the difference between watching a laboratory
              demonstration and performing an experiment. Aside from making the learning
              experience more interesting, a well-designed experiment can challenge the
              student and encourage creativity. A user-controlled animation can have a
              similar effect and provide the student with a virtual laboratory environment. A
              Colleague and I have already successfully redesigned about half of the
              curriculum for an undergraduate operating systems course by constructing a
              series of programming projects that enable students to experiment with
              congruency and communication. This work has been recently published in a book
              by Prentice Hall and is gaining acceptance at prestigious universities. The
              remainder of the curriculum in a traditional operating systems course does not
              easily lend itself to exploration using programming projects that can be
              completed by a student in a short period of time. I will design a curriculum
              for this second part of operating systems and for computer networks in which
              students perform experiments in a virtual laboratory setting. The laboratory
              experiments will use animated simulations written in the Java language allowing
              them to be run on virtually any computer connected to the Internet. A framework
              for developing active animations will be set up so that these animations can be
              efficiently produced.    *
