Title       : An Innovative Mathematics, Science, and Technology Program for Pre-Service
               Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9752432

Award Number: 9752432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Thornton stt@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn C. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A model, innovative program to restructure the elementary preservice teacher
              preparation program at the University of Virginia involves over twenty
              Education, Arts & Sciences, and Engineering faculty.  Because Virginia's new
              teacher liscensure requires the number of math and science credit hours to be
              increased from 12 to 24, sic new math and science content courses stressing
              hands-on activities are being developed, and three other courses are being
              restructured to be more aligned with National Math and Science Education
              standards.    After the preservice students have completed the six new math and
              science courses, they will take a capstone research/design experience being
              developed with the present NSF funding:  a six credit hour, two semester course
              of integrated math, science, and technology (including engineering and possibly
              medicine).  The first semester course will include completion of math and
              science content not previously taken, especially the integration of material
              including data analysis and presentation.  The students will also complete
              several mini-projects to acclimate them to research problem solving, and
              prospective faculty mentors will present possible student projects for the
              second semester.  During the second semester each group (3-4 students) will
              complete a research project under the direction of a faculty mentor. 
              Instructional technology will be emphasized in all phases of the project.    An
              independent evaluation/advisory committee will probed guidance and assessment
              on the project's quality and impact for both the project staff and for the
              preservice elementary education group of the NSF Teacher Preparation program
              that is supporting this effort.
