Title       : Preparing the New Generation of Geoscience Faculty: Workshops to Shape the
               Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9752809

Award Number: 9752809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83014              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Heather Macdonald rhmacd@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Because most graduate programs in the geosciences focus on developing
              students' research abilities, most new faculty members are not well prepared to
              teach undergraduates and, in addition, tend to teach primarily by lecturing. To
              address these problems, we propose to develop a four-day workshop for early
              career geoscience faculty that will be offered three times during the
              three-year project. The workshop will include plenary sessions, mini-workshops,
              and break-out groups on the following topics: the basics of teaching, active
              learning strategies, integrating research and research-like experiences into
              all geoscience classes, supervision of undergraduate research, grading and
              assessment, and life as a new faculty member. In addition, we will provide
              examples of syllabi, assignments, and activities for introductory and
              upper-level geoscience courses, and participants and presenters will meet to
              share ideas and strategies for teaching those courses. Follow-up activities
              will include opportunities for continuing electronic discussions, progress
              reports by participants, and panel presentations by and for early career
              faculty at professional meetings. Resources materials, including information on
              various science teaching resources, examples of course-specific activities and
              assignments, and an advice column for early career faculty will be placed on a
              Resource Website. The audience for this project will include faculty members in
              their first four years of teaching. Participants will leave the workshop better
              prepared to provide an excellent education to undergraduate students. We
              anticipate that these early career faculty can become agents for change in
              undergraduate teaching at their home institutions. This proposal is being
              submitted in parallel with proposals from the University of Arizona and
              Hamilton College.
