Title       : Great Lakes Research Consortium Practicum in Applied Environmental
               Problem-Solving: New Approaches and Techniquesfor Undergraduate Teaching
               Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1997  
File        : a9752783

Award Number: 9752783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Smardon rsmardon@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack P. Manno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Pagano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Engel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9268,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The goals of the Great Lakes Consortium Summer Practicum in Applied
              Environmental Problem-Solving are to encourage participants to revise or create
              new multidisciplinary environmental science courses based on applied
              environmental problem solving; and to expose participants to innovative new
              theoretical and practical techniques being used in the Great Lakes basin and to
              introduce faculty to involved scientists. The project theme--environmental
              impact analysis--ties together the methods necessary for analyzing and solving
              environmental problems. The project also addresses the gap existing between the
              availability of up-to-date information about a major national resource--the
              Great Lakes-St. Lawrence ecosystem--and what is currently taught at the
              undergraduate level. The practicum is familiarizing participants with related
              developments in environmental analysis; cascading trophic dynamics,
              particle-size spectrum theory, and endocrine system-disrupting pollutants; and
              environmental sampling, analytical methods, and mass balance/bioenergetics
              modeling of toxic chemical dynamics in aquatic ecosystems. Scientists with the
              Great Lakes Research Consortium who have made significant contributions in
              these fields are leading each of the practicum's modules. Although the Great
              Lakes are used as an example, the theories, methods and models learned are
              applicable anywhere. The three week practicum in June 1998, combines field/lab
              experience, classroom instruction and skills development exercises in four
              course modules: I) Great Lakes Ecosystem Science/Issues and Lake Ontario
              Environments; 2) Techniques for Analyzing Toxic Chemicals Commonly Found in the
              Great Lakes, 3) Ecosystem Modeling with Spreadsheets: Mass
              Balance/Bioenergetics 4) Writing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and
              Developing Problem-Solving Curricula for Undergraduates.
