Title       : Advanced Technological Education: Curriculum Development and Faculty Enhancement
               Synthesizing Technological and Business Management Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9752083

Award Number: 9752083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Meier rlmeier@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne L. Merrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Saaf  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Illnois State University, in partnership with Des Moines Area Community College
              and a business/industry advisory council, is directing a curriculum and
              materials development project designed to infuse business knowledge, skills,
              and attitudes into community college advanced technological education programs.
               This project addresses the need for preparing a multi-skilled, technically
              competent workforce with teamwork skills and an understanding of business
              competitiveness issues.  The intent of the project curriculum is to enhance
              student school-to-work experiences and then ensure greater lateral and upward
              mobility within their advanced technical occupational arenas.  The curriculum
              uses a modular design and allows the instructor flexibility in using the
              modules as stand-alone units or together as an articulated sequence with
              existing programs.    The methodology encompasses a best-practice curricular
              content review, industry-led curriculum content analysis and development,
              module development, multiple pilot tests, and project evaluation by an external
              consultant.  The main deliverable will be a set of three cross-disciplinary
              modules with content determined by an industry/business advisory council.  An
              activity-based instructional learning cycle is used employing constructivist
              views of learning.  The curriculum emphasizes problem solving, real-world
              applications, and connections among the disciplines. Each module is highly
              interactive and experiential in nature to provide a variety of experiences to
              enhance student learning.  Instructional materials employ and integrate the
              latest advances in computerized role-plays and simulations, interpersonal
              role-plays, interactive CD ROM, video conferencing, Internet and world-wide web
              applications, cases for analysis, strategy formulation, and decision making. 
              In year two, industry-led curriculum development and pilot test data on student
              learning enhancement are being disseminated via publications, workshops, and
              seminars.    The primary goal of this p roject is to develop curricula,
              instructional materials, and faculty enhancement activities base upon input
              from an industry/business advisory council.  This industry input is used to
              create and develop cross-functional curriculum content that reflects the real
              world interconnections among business and advanced technological education. 
              This integrated and synthesized, activity-oriented curriculum is congruent with
              emerging business and industry trends.    The goals of this project also
              include investigation of research questions which can be grouped according to
              whether they relate to integrated knowledge, skills, and attitudes, or problem
              solving, or staff development.
