Title       : Bringing Theory and Practice Together in Engineering Classrooms: A Research
               Project to Develop Cost-Effective Instructional Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9752353

Award Number: 9752353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan P. Gosink                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212500             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. K. Raju pkraju@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chetan S. Sankar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Halpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glennelle Halpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              American industries are increasingly emphasizing that a successful engineer
              must, in addition to possessing strong technical capabilities, understand the
              non-technical forces that profoundly affect engineering decisions.  The current
              engineering teaching methodologies do not adequately develop these capabilities
              and understandings of the students.  This multi-disciplinary project is being
              proposed to address this problem.  The goals of this project are to develop and
              test instructional material for a sophomore course that will bring theory and
              practice together in engineering classrooms, develop the higher-level cognitive
              skills of the students, and be cost effective.  A review of instructional
              methodologies and results from a pilot project showed that the case study
              method of instruction is the most suitable for achieving these goals. During
              the first year of this project, six engineering case studies along with
              background competency materials, instructor's manuals, WWW sites, and videos
              will be developed in partnership with industries.  During the second year, the
              instructional materials will be tested at Auburn University during three
              quarters.  The reusability of the material will be tested by running this
              course at Alabama A&M, a minority institution.  The effectiveness of using this
              instructional methodology will be evaluated by an outcomes-based model and also
              with an experimental and comparison group research design.  Throughout,
              quantitative and qualitative data from the students and faculty will be used in
              the ongoing formative evaluation of the materials and methods.  Outcome
              measures related to project goals will be analyzed in the summative evaluation.
               The dissemination aspect of this project will involve publishing the
              instructional materials, updating the WWW site, and publishing papers in
              academic and practitioner journals.  This project, built around active learning
              methods, has the potential to make a revolutionary change in engineering
              education, thereby fulfilling the demand s of industry to bring theory and
              practice into classrooms.
