Title       : Engineering and Technology Literacy for High School Science and Math Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9752186

Award Number: 9752186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Sami Fadali fadali@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In today's world of global economic competition, the US is trying to maintain
              its competitive edge among industrial nations by training a sufficient number
              of engineers.  However, the number of trained individuals graduating from US
              colleges does not meet our current and projected needs.  In addition, the
              number of females and minority graduates with engineering degrees is
              unacceptably low and the attrition rate in engineering programs is unacceptably
              high.      The causes include (i) the inadequate preparation of our high school
              graduates, (ii) unfavorable attitudes toward engineering and other science
              based careers, and (iii) the absence of continuity in the transition from high
              school to college.  Some additional preparation for science and math teachers
              as well as high school courses that are more friendly to engineering and
              technology would address the above perceived causes.  To this end, this project
              will develop a new three credit hour class to address these problems. This
              class will be a capstone course that introduces fourth year pre-service
              teachers in mathematics and science education to engineering problem solving
              through specific practical applications.  The courses will include projects to
              be completed by teams of students and lectures by the instructors and guest
              lecturers.  The course will cover activities performed by practicing engineers
              and the related ethical, social and environmental issues within the rubric of
              Science, Technology and Society (STS).  It will also emphasize science literacy
              and inquiry learning as suggested by the new National Science Education
              Standards.    The proposed course will include an introduction to the practice
              of engineering rather than its theory.  The course will set up problems,
              present simplified solutions and avoid complex theoretical developments.  In
              addition, the business aspects of engineering, which are a prerequisite for a
              successful engineering career, will be introduced.  This business aspect fits
              within the suggested school to work  programs that are becoming a part of
              Nevada pre-university education.  A business plan or cost analysis will be
              completed for each project undertaken by the students.
