Title       : Polymers: Stereochemical Studies and Chiral Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a9975471

Award Number: 9975471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Green mgreen@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is made to Polytechnic University in support of the research of Prof.
              Mark M. Green by the Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division and
              the Polymer Program in the Division of Materials Research. The objective of the
              research is to develop stereochemical approaches for elucidating the nature of
              polymers and the materials states they form. The material states investigated
              will be single polymer chains in solution, lyotrophic liquid crystals from
              concentrated solutions, thermally reversible gels, and the amorphous glassy
              state. Single chain studies will show how polymers amplify chirality.  Liquid
              crystal studies will probe the mechanism of how nematic states are converted to
              cholesteric states. Studies with thermally reversible gels will define the
              responsible aggregate states unique to stiff chains and how to predict and
              control polymer properties. In all cases, chiral pendant groups attached to the
              polymers will be used as probes to influence and modify polymer
              properties.

The study of the role of chirality on polymer properties will
              have both fundamental and technological impact. Chiral amplification in
              polymers can provide a basis for optical switching, how conversion of liquid
              crystals between the nematic and twisted nematic states relates to LC display
              devices, and how the effect of temperature on polymer chirality can be used to
              optically measure temperature. More broadly, chiral amplification may provide
              clues to the relationship between circularly polarized light in outer space and
              the origin of optical activity on earth.

