Title       : Collaborative Research: Policy Evolution Within an Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9975942

Award Number: 9975942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody L. House jhouse@ece.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research focuses on organizational learning
              using an evolutionary model to provide managers with a set of rules or
              guidelines that will permit their companies and organizations to evolve more
              rapidly in desirable directions.  These rules might deal with the appropriate
              number of business units, promotion policies, or team-based decision making,
              among other organizational characteristics.

The researchers see a useful
              analogy between genes and decision rules.  A decision rule produces a
              continuing stream of decisions that direct activity and in some sense determine
              the identity of an organization. This work involves understanding how abstract
              evolutionary mechanisms are (or can be) actually embodied in organizations and
              shaped by managers

The researchers would perform evolutionary audits to
              collect data on the evolutionary potential of several partner companies.  The
              evolutionary audits will aid in the development of a computer simulation model
              of organizational evolution. The data collected and the model built will form a
              foundation for in-depth explorations of how managers can create an organization
              that will evolve quickly in the direction they desire. 

Partner companies
              including Price Waterhouse Coopers, Arthur Andersen, Pugh Roberts Associates,
              Eastman Chemicals, and General Motors.

The results of this study would
              provide a set of guidelines that will permit organizations to evolve more
              rapidly in desirable directions.

