Title       : Acquisition of a Traveling Solvent Floating Zone Furnace for Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975898

Award Number: 9975898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Blackstead blackstd@rems1.phys.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. McGinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek K. Furdyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Schiffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975898
Blackstead
This grant will support in part the acquisition of a
              float-zone image furnace is proposed for the growth of high quality crystals to
              support materials research by augmenting and facilitating efforts of
              researchers from the Colleges of Science and Engineering at the University of
              Notre Dame. The motivation for the acquisition of this system is to supplement
              and greatly extend the crystal growth capability at the University.  The common
              requirement of these various research programs is the need for high quality
              bulk single crystals for fundamental materials properties studies, of
              sufficient size to permit the use of sophisticated local probes, including:
              Muon Spin Rotation (mSR), inelastic neutron diffraction, Raman scattering,
              Mossbauer spectroscopy Scanning -Tunneling Microscopy (STM), and nuclear
              magnetic resonance as well as the more common techniques such as
              Magneto-optical studies, SQUID magnetometry, magneto-transport, microwave
              resonance (ESR), and field and temperature dependent microwave surface
              resistance. Among the materials to be grown are high temperature
              superconductors, novel perovskite compounds, boracites and materials for
              electro-optics.

This equipment will enrich the training and education of
              graduate and undergraduate students in a very needy area, processing of
              scientifically and technologically important materials.
%%%
This is a most
              important acquisition, which will significantly enhance crystal growth
              capability and training of students.

