Title       : Computation in Nonlinear Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9975354

Award Number: 9975354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. T. Yau yau@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9973247

We suggest problems in computational and applied linear algebra that
              come under three headings. (i) Under the first heading come two problems on
              parallel computations.  The first concerns a divide and conquer approach to the
              problem of computing the mean first passage matrix for Markov chains, work that
              was started in the case when the process is a random walk with an underlying
              cutpoint graph structure, e.g., a tree.  The second problem is to investigate
              the speed-up due to the addition of processors, when the number of blocks
              (natural partitions) is kept fixed, in a model of asynchronous iterations.  One
              factor here is the type of coefficient matrix to which the model is applied. 
              
(ii) Under the second heading  comes a problem encountered when working
              on
convergence of infinite products of matrices.  It is known that in
              iterative methods for computing a solution to singular systems, e.g., in
              computing the stationary distribution for a Markov process, the magnitude of
              the subdominant eigenvalue determines the asymptotic rate of convergence.  We
              have noticed that for random stochastic matrices the subdominant eigenvalue
              seems to decay exactly as the square root of n.  We suggest investigating this
              behavior.  (iii) Here we suggest two problems on approximating the algebraic
              connectivity of a graph which is the second smallest eigenvalue of its
              Laplacian matrix.  Estimates of this quantity are used in various graph-based
              algorithms such as the spectral separator method.  In the first problem we
              suggest investigating bounds derived from the generalized group inverse of the
              Laplacian which seems to yield good lower bounds. In the second problem we
              propose studying the algebraic connectivity of random graphs on n vertices. 
              Throughout the proposal we give examples from the literature for the
              applications of the problems set forth.

Because many practical problems are
              very intricate, we need to build models to represent them and then develop a
              way of understanding and handling the models.  Such modeling frequently results
              in large arrays of numbers or, what is often associated with the arrays, a
              system with many equations and many unknowns.  The numbers in the array can be
              of a random nature if the model represents a physical situation (scientific,
              economic, social or statistical) in which there is some randomness involved. If
              the model represents a more deterministic physical situation, there will be
              definite numbers with some relations between them.  Once we have a model, 
              there may be many parameters and features which we need to measure and compute.
              This proposal suggests seven problems.  Two of the problems concern certain
              high-performance computing with these models.  The computations are to be
              performed in parallel so as to achieve speed-up of the computation and, if
              possible, a reduction in the number of computations.  Two examples of questions
              are: If a problem partitions naturally into a number of subproblems which are
              called blocks, and if we begin to increase beyond the number of blocks, the
              number of computers/processors applied to solve in parallel the entire problem,
              do we necessarily continue to increase the speed of calculations, or is a point
              of saturation reached after a while and what do we do then?  A common situation
              in which such a problem arises is in data-fitting, sometimes known as the
              least-squares problem.  Another problem for computation in parallel is in
              physical systems which have states with a probability of going from one state
              to another.  An example is various types of population concentrations such as
              urban, suburban, rural, etc. with a probability of moving from one type of
              region to another.  We may be interested in the distribution of the population
              in the different conurbations after a short term.  It turns out that such
              predictions  may be done in parallel under certain underlying assumptions.

