Title       : RUI: DNA Modification and Regulation over Patterned Hetercyst Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9975002

Award Number: 9975002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Elhai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               The cyanobacterium Anabaena grows on a source of fixed nitrogen as
filaments
              of seemingly indistinguishable cells, but when nitrogen is
removed from the
              medium, differentiated cells, heterocysts, appear within
one or two generation
              times at nearly regular intervals. This simple
pattern provides the
              opportunity for a deep understanding of pattern
formation in a multicellular
              organism. Evidence has accumulated that
favors a model in which pattern
              evolves in two stages: (a) nonrandom
initiation in groups of cells already
              predisposed to differentiate,
leading to a crude initial pattern, and (b)
              resolution of differentiating
groups by the action of a diffusible inhibitor,
              leading to a pattern of
isolated heterocysts. The position of a cell in its
              cell cycle may be a
factor that determines the ability of the cell to
              differentiate.

     One way to test this idea is to perturb DNA replication
              and note how
heterocyst differentiation and spacing of heterocysts are
              affected. To
this end, three genes (dmnA, dmnB, and dmnC) from Anabaena,
              encoding
previously uncharacterized DNA modification enzymes, have been
              cloned.
Attempts to mutate dmnA indicate that the gene is essential for
              viability,
but even partial inactivation alters the heterocyst spacing
              pattern.
Mutation of dmnB yields a strain that is blocked in
              heterocyst
differentiation at a very early stage.

     In order to examine
              the connection between DNA modification and
patterned heterocyst
              differentiation, two of the genes, dmnA and dmnB will
be conditionally
              expressed in Anabaena and the resulting mutants
characterized by genetic and
              biochemical means. Suppressor mutations of a
dmnB- mutant that enable the
              mutant to grow on N2 will be sought, hoping
to gain insight into the 
              mechanism by which failure to modify DNA leads
to blockage of differentiation.
              Experiments also are aimed at testing
directly the connection between cell
              cycle and competence of a cell to
differentiate by monitoring cell division
              and differentiation in
individual cells within filaments.


