Title       : Functional Genomics of Hemicellulose Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a9975815

Award Number: 9975815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher A. Cullis                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natasha V. Raikhel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis Wilkerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With rapid progress in obtaining gene sequences for several plant species, the
              major challenge in plant genomics will shift to analysis of the functions of
              genes and the proteins they encode. This task will be especially challenging
              for the numerous genes whose function cannot be predicted based on sequence
              similarity to genes of known function in other organisms. Undoubtedly, this
              problem will be most obvious in areas where plants are unique, for example, in
              plant cell wall biosynthesis. Although other organisms such as bacteria and
              yeast have cell walls, their walls are fundamentally different in composition,
              structure, and function from those of plant cells, and therefore what is
              learned in those systems is not readily transferable to the study of plants.
              

Biochemical approaches have been largely unsuccessful in identifying the
              components associated with cell wall biosynthesis. However, genomic approaches
              are well suited to addressing the problems of identification and functional
              characterization of plant genes responsible for hemicellulose biosynthesis.
              Several strategies are available for identifying the genes whose products are
              putatively involved in cell wall biosynthesis and for developing testable
              hypotheses regarding their biochemical function. 

This award will support
              the analysis of a cell wall biosynthesis in a representative dicotyledonous and
               monocotyledonous plant.  Such a comparative study is justified because
              hemicelluloses from these different groups of plants are structurally distinct.
               The dicot will be Arabidopsis, the preeminent model dicot for experimentation,
              and the monocot will be maize, also an excellent plant for genetic,
              biochemical, and genomic research. The specific objectives are to: (1) identify
              candidate genes for cell wall biosynthetic enzymes; (2) analyze candidate genes
              for possible involvement in hemicellulose biosynthesis; and (3) investigate the
              function of specific genes. The award will support a comprehensive analysis of
              hemicellulose biosynthesis in plants that will integrate a variety of modern
              biological methods and concepts, including bioinformatics, polysaccharide
              biochemistry, cell and molecular biology, and genetics. 

