Title       : Individuation in Language and Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9975198

Award Number: 9975198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Wisniewski edw@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Individuation is a basic and fundamental aspect of cognition which 
pervades
              everyday thinking and perception. We treat some 
things and not others as
              distinct individuals. For example, looking out 
onto a beach, we may perceive
              a barking, furry, four legged thing as "a 
dog." We treat the dog as a
              distinct individual. However, we do not 
individuate the sand below the dog. 
              Instead, we construe sand as a 
nonindividuated entity. These and other
              observations suggest that there 
are two fundamentally different kinds of
              things in the world -individuated
entities and non-individuated entities. The
              proposed research addresses
individuation in a variety of ways, including a
              cross-cultural approach. 

What perceptual and conceptual factors lead people
              to individuate 
some aspects of their world but not others? People appear to
              individuate
things across diverse domains that appear to have little in common
              and 
within domains that appear to have much in common. For example, some
              abstract concepts are individuated (e.g.,idea, wish) but others are not (e.g.,
              evidence, insanity). Some events are individuated  (e.g., party, explosion) but
              not others (e.g., sleep, running). We will conduct studies which identify the
              causal factors of individuation. Experiments will also be conducted to clarify
              the role of language in individuation by conducting studies with adult Japanese
              speakers that parallel those with adult English speakers. This issue is of
              interest because languages vary in how and to what extent they signal
              individuation. English uses count/mass syntax to signal individuation. In
              contrast, Japanese uses classifiers and certain quantifying modifiers and shows
              less tendency to explicitly signal individuation. The results of these
              experiments should allow us to make significant progress in developing a
              general theory of individuation. From a practical point of view, the
              cross-cultural work may improve second-language learning. In addition, the
              roposed methodologies may eventually be adapted to diagnostic tools for very
              basic language and thought disorders.

