Title       : Legal Institutions and Institutional Change: An Empirical Investigation into the
               Evolution of California Water Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9975281

Award Number: 9975281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77661              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Kanazawa mkanazaw@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      This research project advances our understanding of the institutional
              factors that influence how scarce water resources are developed and allocated
              across competing uses. The development of the common law of water rights has
              played a key role in determining how water has come to be allocated throughout
              the arid American West. The factors that influence court rulings, and the
              resulting economic consequences, remain imperfectly understood by economists.
              My recent research into the genesis of water laws in l9th-century California is
              strongly suggestive that in certain important ways, the courts actively
              promoted reallocations of water to higher-valued uses as economic growth
              occurred over time. However, currently we still lack a coherent picture of key
              economic trends which may have influenced court rulings on water rights. In
              addition, very little systematic evidence exists regarding the actual effect of
              these rulings on water use patterns and the creation of institutional
              arrangements to develop and share water.

        The objective of the
              proposed project is to fill these gaps in our understanding by conducting field
              research in California to collect data on the establishment of water claims,
              exchanges of land and water, lower court rulings, cross-sectional and temporal
              patterns in water availability, surface- and groundwater use, and the costs of
              water production, transportation, and distribution. This would require visits
              to a number of different county records offices around the state, since during
              this time period no central agency collected any of this information. One key
              set of hypotheses involve the extent to which court rulings clarified relative
              property rights in water, thus reducing transactions costs and encouraging
              exchanges of water and land. To examine this issue, I would correlate the land
              and water exchanges in my database with the timing of certain key rulings.
              Another set of hypotheses concerns how the nature and frequency of conflicts
              over water affected the propensity of the California supreme court to hand down
              rulings which changed the direction of the law. Water conflicts will be
              characterized and quantified using information on lower court cases, the
              geographic distribution of claims, and trends in water cost and availability. A
              third set of hypotheses concerns the extent to which conflicts were formally
              resolved through litigation, as opposed to other means such as out-of-court
              settlement, avoidance of inflicting damages, and the creation of alternative
              institutional arrangements. Information on the location and timing of claims
              could, for example, be used to examine the extent to which claimants tried to
              avoid inflicting damages rather than risk costly litigation.

