Title       : Molecular Evolution of Male Reproduction in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a9975106

Award Number: 9975106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-I Wu ciwu@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A new site-specific insertion procedure will be used to study the
              phenotypic effects and fitness consequences of a male reproductive gene,
              Acp26Aa, of Drosophila melanogaster. The product of Acp26Aa is a protein that
              is transferred from males to females during mating. Recent studies have shown
              that Acp26Aa has evolved at a very high rate that is achievable only through
              positive directional selection. By inserting different alleles into the same
              genomic site, competing hypotheses concerning the action of selection can be
              tested. The allelic comparisons will be between the wildtype and a null allele,
              between alleles of different species and, most interestingly, between the
              inferred ancestral type and a common allele that has replaced it in nature.
              Various phenotypic differences (egg-laying, sperm utilization, sperm
              competition, etc.) will be measured in order to gain insight into the
              mechanisms of selection and to test the hypotheses that sexual selection, which
              drives the evolution of Acp26Aa is in the form of 1) male-female cooperation,
              2) male- female antagonism or 3) male-male competition. The various phenotypic
              measurements affecting fitness will also be tested in toto in long
              term-population cages.  A population genetic survey of DNA variation of Acp26Aa
              in D. mauritiana will be done. Since prior evidence suggests that D. mauritiana
              has experienced stronger sexual selection than its sibling species, it is
              hypothesized that the signature of positive selection will be exaggerated at
              the Acp26Aa locus of this species.

An important aspect of evolution is the
              substitution of new and better genes or alleles for the old ones in the
              population. How that process of natural sexual selection takes place for any
              given gene is central to our understanding of evolution. To understand the
              mechanisms by which the inferred selection operates would require experimental
              assays that compare different alleles at an identical site in an identical
              genetic background and that has recently been made possible in Drosophila
              melanogaster by new technological developments. In the last decade, several
              lines of evidence have shown that many genes pertaining to male reproduction
              are evolving at an unusually high rate. An important reason for this rapid
              evolution may be the intense selective pressure on males' reproductive
              performance which, unlike females' can vary greatly from male to male. It is an
              opportune time to introduce molecular technology to study this most classical
              and fascinating question

