Title       : Election Timing in Parliamentary Democracies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9975352

Award Number: 9975352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alastair M. Smith Alastair.Smith@Yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	In many parliamentary systems, the timing of the next election is at the
              discretion of the current government.  Leaders are not required to wait until
              the end of their term; rather, they are free to call elections when it is
              advantageous to them - when they expect to win.  The proposal outlines a
              theoretical and empirical research design to explore when governments call
              elections and how the timing of elections influences the electoral
              result.
	The decision to call an election is modeled using game theory.  At
              each stage, leaders must choose between calling an election or waiting.  If
              they wait, then the voters get a further opportunity to assess the government's
              performance.  Thus, a popular governments that waits risks having its
              popularity undermined by poor outcomes.
	The decision to call an election,
              rather than wait, depends on a leader's beliefs about her electoral future. 
              Suppose that the incumbent leader is currently popular and trying to decide
              whether to call an early election.  If the leader believes that her party is
              competent and has the appropriate policies to address her country's problems,
              then she risks little by waiting.  Her party is likely to perform well which
              enhances, rather than diminishes, her electoral fortune.  Yet, for a leader
              less confident in her abilities, waiting jeopardizes her electoral prospects. 
              She anticipates poor performance, and expects her future popularity to decline
              if she waits.  Hence, it is the least competent leaders, those who do not
              expect to perform well, who have the greatest incentive to call an early
              election.
	The inherent feature of the model is that leaders choose whether to
              call elections based on their expectations about future performance.  This
              modeling platform is flexible to a variety of assumptions.  One modeling choice
              is that a leader's expectation could be based simply on her assessment of
              government competence.  Alternatively, a leader's beliefs could stem from early
              access to information.  A particularly important form of this is when the
              government has manipulated policy instruments for short-term gains (political
              business cycles).
	Although it is the least competent leaders who always have
              the strongest incentive to call an early election, there are conditions under
              which even competent leaders do not want to delay.  These condtions, such as
              size of majority, unity of opposition, and level of public opinion, generate
              hypotheses about when early elections are likely to occur.  Whether these
              factors do hasten elections can be tested empirically using duration
              analysis.
	Since the least competent leaders are the ones with the least
              incentive to wait, elections called earlier than the public expects signal the
              incumbent's doubts about future performance.  In terms of the empirical model,
              when elections occur much earlier than anticipated, that is, the estimated
              harzard is low, then the government is likely to suffer a decline in popular
              support.  In addition, the theory also predicts that government performance is
              likely to be poor following unexpectedly early elections.  This project
              provides more than empirical estimates of when elections occur; it develops and
              tests theoretical linkages among election timing, government performance, and
              electoral outcomes.  

