Title       : Planning for the Development of a Distributed, Internet Database System for
               Biodiversity Data Sets from the International Network of Conservation Data
               Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9975496

Award Number: 9975496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry B. Baker bcubed@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pradip Srimani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Mehlhop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1364,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              DBI 9975496; Planning for the Development of a Distributed, Internet Database
              System for Biodiversity Data Sets from the International Network of
              Conservation Data Centers.

Project Summary

Planning grant for Phase I of
              a multi-year, phased project to explore and address the need for a functional,
              distributed data system for the International Network of Conservation Data
              Centers. Expert biologists, information scientists and managers, computer
              scientists, Internet specialists, and GIS programmers will be invited to
              evaluate the latest technological developments and determine how to make
              multi-jurisdictional Conservation Data Center data available to researchers and
              other users through hyperlinks to a main Web page. The result will be an
              implementation plan for a dynamic, distributed data set that would form the
              basis for Phases II and III of this project. Phase II is expected to consist of
              development and curation components in a prototype, multi-state and provincial,
              distributed data system. Phase III envisions the full rollout of a validated,
              distributed data system for the entire Network of Conservation Data Centers.
              

The goal of the workshop is to define the need and set the framework for an
              integrated database for the Conservation Data Center Network. Specific
              objectives include: identification of the priority issues driving the need for
              an integrated database system using distributed Web technology, evaluation of
              distributed database models in the context of the current and future needs for
              conservation, the design of a framework for a prototype integrated information
              system, and development of a strategic action plan and targets for
              implementation. The proposed five-day workshop will be held in November 1999 in
              Tucson, Arizona and will include experts in conservation biology, information
              management, computer information science, Internet design, and GIS. The format
              will consist of presentations by invited speakers with opportunities for
              questions and general discussion, panel discussions, round table discussions,
              and breakout sessions. Invited and contributed papers and summaries of the
              discussion will be compiled into a proceedings that will be published
              electronically via the Web.



