Title       : Seismic Design Criteria and Plans for Large-Scale Testing of Composite RCS
               Frames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a9975501

Award Number: 9975501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory G. Deierlein ggd@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Structural systems consisting of reinforced concrete columns with steel beams
              (so-called RCS systems) have been shown to be cost-effective comparing to
              traditional steel or reinforced concrete construction.  However, the lack of
              behavioral information and design criteria for RCS systems has hindered their
              use in high seismic regions.  

This project will synthesize the latest
              research information about RCS and to prepare design criteria and guidelines
              that will enable practicing engineers to design RCS systems that will reliably
              survive large earthquakes.  Work is needed to careful study and analyze the
              latest Japanese research so as to quantify the underlying mechanics and
              behavior of RCS systems.  Questions such as whether component testing and
              analyses sufficiently demonstrate the reliability of RCS frames for high
              seismic regions, etc will be addressed.  

Specific tasks to be undertaken in
              this project are:

Assemble, review and study available data from the
              US-Japan Projects on RCS connections and systems, and synthesize these into
              seismic design criteria for composite RCS frames.  The design criteria will
              consider two formats-one that follows procedures used in current codes and
              standards in the US, and a second that explores performance-based approaches
              following related initiatives within the earthquake engineering
              community.

Assess the potential objectives, merits and limitations of
              large-scale frame testing of RCS systems using pseudo-dynamic and shake table
              methods.  This would include a review of prior US-Japan projects where
              large-scale frames were tested and assessment of how large-scale frame tests
              may answer unresolved issues for RCS frame structures.

Subject to the
              findings of objective (2), develop a detailed planning document for one or more
              large-scale frame tests that could be conducted in the future.



