Title       : Development of a Cluster-Deposition System for Nanoscale Magnetic Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9975909

Award Number: 9975909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Sellmyer dsellmyer1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              You Qiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sy-Hwang Liou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Doudin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diandra L. Leslie-Pelecky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975909
Sellmyer
This grant will provide partial support for the development
              of  a new cluster-deposition facility for the synthesis of a variety of
              magnetic nanostructures. The facility will be capable of producing nearly
              monodispersed clusters with mean sizes ranging from 200 to 15,000 atoms, and to
              deposit these clusters onto a substrate alone or in combination with different
              elements or alloys. The resulting films are expected to have nanostructures of
              different types including homogeneous amorphous or crystalline alloys or
              compounds, multilayers, and mesoscopic nanocomposites. The sizes of the
              clusters and their concentration can be varied over wide ranges, and the matrix
              materials of the nanocomposites can be chosen independently. The clusters
              themselves may have properties significantly different from bulk materials of
              the same composition. This allows excellent control of the properties of the
              films through those of the clusters and their interactions.

The potential
              impact of these magnetic nanostructures on materials research and
              magnetic
technologies is significant. The production of independent or weakly
              interacting superparamagnetic particles is possible, thus paving the way for
              basic studies including spin-glass-like phase transitions.  Novel
              nanoparticulate, high-anisotropy and high-coercivity films will be made with
              high potential to increase the areal density of magnetic-recording media by a
              factor of ten. New types of structures for the study of tunnel
              magnetoresistance and Coulomb blockade will be possible. There is an excellent
              chance that model exchange-coupled hard-soft permanent magnets will be
              achievable with world-record energy products.

The new cluster-deposition
              system will simultaneously benefit the research and education of a large group
              of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as several postdoctoral
              research associates. The University of Nebraska has a large and diverse
              experimental and theoretical group in nanostructured magnetic materials that
              heretofore have been prepared by other techniques. The combination of this
              group and expertise in cluster-deposition instrumentation can be expected to
              significantly advance the field of nanomagnetism and its
              applications.
%%%
This is an ideal "integration of research and education"
              enterprise.  It is expected it will have significant 

