Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Ultracentrifuge and a High Temperature Gel
               Permeation Chromatograph for Research and Education in Polymer Science and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9975762

Award Number: 9975762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacques Penelle penelle@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helmut H. Strey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Hoagland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhandapani Venkataraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975762
Penelle

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition
              of two analytical instruments, a high-temperature GPC (gel permeation
              chromatography) and an analytical ultracentrifuge.  These instruments will be
              added to a newly created 'molecular weight characterization' facility hosted by
              the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Univeristy of
              Massachussetts, Amherst, and will allow them to determine molecular weights
              even for "problem" polymers such as self-associating polymers, polymers poorly
              soluble under classical conditions (i.e., in an organic solvent at room
              temperature) and water-soluble polymers.  The co-PIs (four main users and three
              minor users) have research projects in the field of polymer synthesis,
              biomaterials, and polymer characterization that are summarized in the research
              section and will strongly benefit from a direct access to these
              instruments.

The new facility is administered under the same rules as the
              current Materials Research Science and Engineering Center - Polymer Science &
              Engineering facilities, with full access to the about twenty-five research
              groups at the University of Massachusetts with research interests in the field
              of polymeric materials (Departments of Polymer Science and Engineering,
              Chemistry, Physics, and Chemical Engineering).  Access to the ultracentrifuge
              will also be provided to researchers in the Molecular Biology program.  Both
              instruments will contribute to the success of research programs at other places
              in the country, in particular at Howard University via the participation of one
              of the minor users.

The equipment will be integrated into the educational
              programs of students at all levels (i.e., graduate and undergraduate, high
              school outreach, and K-12 programs).  The instruments will also be used in the
              U. of Massachusetts Materials Research Science and Engineering Center supported
              workshops, where K-12 teachers learn how to introduce polymer science and
              engineering concepts into their classroom curricula.
%%%
The instrumentation
              will be used for polymer science and engineering research and educational
              activities at University of Massachusetts and Howard University.
***

