Title       : Collaborative Research: Basic and Applied Research Leading to a Linguistic
               Probability Translator (LPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9975360

Award Number: 9975360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179982             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Budescu dbudescu@psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to develop a Linguistic Probability Translator (LPT),
              initially as a useful research tool and subsequently for use as a decision aid
              within a communication community (defined as a collection of providers and
              receivers of risks estimates or forecasts).  The LPT will improve the
              communication of subjective judgments and forecasts from experts to decision
              makers (DMs), and therefore also improve the resulting decisions.  When fully
              realized, LPT will use quantitative methods based on empirical research to
              translate from one or many experts' individualized lexicons of uncertainty to a
              DM's individualized lexicon in a manner that best preserves the intended
              numerical and non-numerical meanings of the communication.  If required, the
              LPT will translate the phrases into numerical probabilities or probability
              intervals, or from a numerical forecast into an appropriate phrase in a DM's
              lexicon.  If there are multiple forecasts, LPT could translate each one into
              the DM's best phrase, or aggregate them and select a single best
              expression.

The creation of LPT will require basic and applied research, as
              well as software development.  The basic research will focus on issues of
              measurement and human information processing regarding the formation and
              communication of uncertain judgements.  The software development will focus on
              the actual construction of LPT, and the applied work will examine the
              effectiveness and quality of the system.  Overall, this research will advance
              basic theory regarding the measurement and communication of opinion, and will
              result in a computerized decision aid to improve decision making in the
              field.

