Title       : Public Valuation of Lifesaving: The Controllability Issue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a9975194

Award Number: 9975194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne J. Goldie   (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Graham  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Public Valuation of Lifesaving: The Controllability Issue
Abstract

Risk
              analysts frequently use cost-effectiveness analysis to make decisions about the
              relative value of different policy options.  Embedded in these analyses is the
              assumption that one life saved is equal to any other. Research has shown,
              however, that people think about the value of lives as affected by other
              qualitative factors, such as the risks people take and whether those risks are
              controllable by the individual or undertaken voluntarily.  This project will
              explore how controllability and voluntariness influence peoples' valuation of
              lives in policy contexts.

Specifically, an instrument will be developed to
              measure people's preferences for the valuation of lives.  Like values or
              beliefs, preferences are challenging to measure because people can be unsure of
              or reluctant to reveal their preferences, and hence unable to answer survey
              questions.  Previous researchers have devised a variety of techniques to
              overcome these difficulties, with varying success.  Focus groups, cognitive
              interviews and survey pre-testing will be used to explore different methods for
              measuring preferences, and to develop an approach that produces stable and
              unbiased results of peoples' valuation of lives that are exposed to
              controllable or uncontrollable, and voluntary or involuntary risks.

Three
              real-world, lifesaving scenarios will be used to elicit preferences: (1) airbag
              design to preferentially protect belted versus unbelted drivers, (2) liver
              transplant in persons with liver damage secondary to alcohol use versus other
              causes, (3) and regulatory priority for indoor versus outdoor sources of air
              pollution.  Real-world topics that are well-defined and compelling offer the
              best opportunity to develop appropriate tools because they are familiar and
              interesting to people.  The final product of this research will be a survey
              instrument that can measure how much the controllability and voluntary nature
              of risk-taking affects how people value lives saved by risk prevention and risk
              reduction policies.  Once collected, this measurement could be directly
              incorporated into policy analyses that inform decisions about which policies
              are most desired by the public.  This may allow policy decisions to be adjusted
              for people's preferences about the nature of lives that are saved by risk
              prevention and risk reduction policies.

