Title       : Molecular Origins of Adhesion in Soft Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9975468

Award Number: 9975468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Shull k-shull@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975468
Shull

This grant supports work on the origins of adhesion in 'soft'
              polymers, including elastomers, uncrosslinked polymer melts, and ultimately,
              biological systems.  These materials are used in a variety of applications, and
              a fundamental understanding of the relationship between their molecular
              structure and their resulting adhesive properties is highly desirable.  Model
              systems based on acrylic block copolymers will be used in order to make this
              connection.  These self-assembling systems have tunable structural features
              which enable their bulk mechanical and rheological properties to be carefully
              controlled.  Model polymeric substrates will be used in order to probe the
              factors which affect adhesion of these model systems to different surfaces. 
              The project includes synthesis of the model acrylic polymers, in addition to
              measurements of their mechanical and adhesive properties, utilizing techniques
              developed by the principal investigator at Northwestern University. 
              Experimental results will be coupled with a fracture mechanics analysis in
              order to develop general models applicable to the adhesion of soft
              materials.

A variety of scientific and educational outcomes are expected as
              a result of this work.  The fundamental scientific goal is to develop a design
              strategy which can be used for the synthesis of improved adhesives.  While the
              research will center on the use of acrylic materials (which are commercially
              important as pressure sensitive adhesives), these ideas can be applied to a
              variety of adhesive formulations, including bioadhesive materials used for
              wound repair.  The research will be conducted primarily by Ph.D. students, with
              significant involvement by undergraduate students as well.  A continued
              collaboration with French scientists working on related problems will also play
              a role in this work.

