Title       : Social Functions of Signature Whistles and Whistle Imitation in Bottlenose
               Dolphins, Tursiops truncatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9975523

Award Number: 9975523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Tyack ptyack@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Samuels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:		Tyack, Peter L.
Proposal #:  	9975523

For years, scientists have known
              that each bottlenose dolphin has an individually distinctive vocalization
              called a signature whistle. It is thought that these whistles allow dolphins to
              recognize each other and remain in contact in murky water. Dolphins also
              imitate the signature whistles of others. There are two ideas about why
              dolphins do this: imitating another dolphin's whistle may be a way to initiate
              a friendly interaction, or to aggressively challenge another dolphin.  It has
              been difficult to confirm these ideas about dolphin communication because we
              humans cannot localize the source of sounds underwater, and dolphins make few
              visible signs to tell us which one is vocalizing.  We propose to resolve this
              problem by studying dolphins in a naturalistic captive setting, where we can
              use computers and an array of underwater microphones to locate each whistle,
              and an overhead video system to simultaneously locate each dolphin.  Knowing
              which dolphin is making a sound while observing their behavior will allow us to
              identify the social contexts in which dolphins make their own signature whistle
              or imitates another's whistle, and to determine how other dolphins respond to
              these whistles.

Dolphins are unusual among non-human mammals in their
              ability to imitate sounds. Imitation is critical for the development of human
              language and music, but there is little evidence for this ability even among
              our closest primate relatives. Thus, comparative studies of dolphin
              communication may help us to understand the evolution of vocal imitation in
              mammals.


