Title       : RUI: Sex, Age and Hormonal Factors in Endogenous Pain Inhibition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9975175

Award Number: 9975175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Sternberg wsternbe@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although pain sensation is an adaptive function that protects us from injury and
              promotes healing, there are situations during which experiencing pain would be
              detrimental to survival. During acutely stressful "fight-or-flight" encounters,
              animals (including our evolutionary ancestors) that were able to ignore pain
              resulting from injuries were more likely to survive. This phenomenon, known as
              stress-induced analgesia (SIA) occurs in both humans and other animals and can
              be studied in the laboratory. A complete understanding of the physiology of
              brain analgesia mechanisms can open the door for the development of novel
              treatments for (difficult to treat) chronic pain conditions that take advantage
              of the brain's own pain killing abilities.

This project is concerned with
              understanding sex differences in the brain chemicals (neurotransmitters) that
              are responsible for producing analgesia in response to stress. Both males and
              females exhibit SIA, however, we have shown that males and females use
              different neurotransmitters to inhibit pain. These studies will focus on
              sex-specific analgesia pathways in laboratory mice. We will determine how
              female sex hormones like progesterone influence the neurotransmitters that are
              used to produce SIA by administering progesterone and its metabolites to male
              and female mice that have undergone removal of their own hormonal influences
              via surgical excision of ovaries or testes. We will then assess which
              neurotransmitters are used to produce pain inhibition in response to stressful
              situation (a forced swim in cold water). A complete understanding of the
              hormonal basis for an important sex difference in analgesia pathways is
              necessary for the possible development of effective treatments of pain in both
              men and women that may be derived from the research laboratory.

