Title       : Modeling Matched Job-Worker Flow Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9975207

Award Number: 9975207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale T. Mortensen d-mortensen@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9975207
Mortensen

The creation and publication of job creation and job
              destruction statistics (See Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) and Davis and
              Haltiwanger (1998).) has stimulated new interest in the different labor force
              dynamics of employing establishments, the differentials in wages paid by these
              establishments, and the role played by each in the process by which workers are
              allocated across productive activity. A set of theoretical tools that have been
              fruitful for the purpose of interpreting these data, models developed by
              Pissarides (1990), Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), and Bertola and Caballero
              (1994), and Burdett and Mortensen (1998) among others, come in a box sometimes
              labeled the "matching approach" to labor market analysis. As explicit
              equilibrium theories of labor market activity, versions of these models,
              calibrated to be consistent with the stylized facts about jobs and workers,
              have also been used to study the effects of labor market policies. (For
              example, see Millard and Mortensen (1997) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1998).)
              However, the credibility of the approach, both as a tool for the interpretation
              of job and worker raw data and as a guide to policy making, is limited by the
              lack of empirical validation for the specific functional forms and parameters
              values used.
Recently, matched employer employee panel data sets have become
              available in several different countries. (See Abowd and Kramarz (1998) for
              descriptions of the data sets and for reviews of research based on them.) These
              data permit the observation of worker flows into, out of, and among employing
              establishments and the wages paid to individual workers with known
              qualifications. The richness of information available in these data sources
              suggests that they may be able to provide the empirical basis needed for
              matching theories of worker and job reallocation. The construction of an
              equilibrium framework designed to address these data and the development of
              estimation strategies using the data is the purpose of this proposal.
The
              representation of an establishment's labor force as a stochastic process with
              laws of evolution determined by the search, recruiting, quit, and layoff
              decisions of individual workers and employers is an intended innovation of the
              research proposed. This representation will permit the derivation of
              statistical relationships between employer characteristics, productivity say,
              and job and worker flows like those found in cross section data, on the one
              hand, and will provide a strategy for estimating the deep structural parameters
              underlying these correlations, on the other. The panel nature of matched
              employer-worker data will also facilitate estimation of a matching function
              representation of the process by which workers and jobs meet to form matches.
              The goal is to construct a rich family of empirical labor market equilibrium
              models of the process that induces worker flows among firms and between the
              employment states that will add to our understanding of job creation and
              destruction, unemployment, and wage differentials.





1

