Title       : Next Generation Software: An Integrated Framework for Performance Engineering
               and Resource-Aware Compilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a9975019

Award Number: 9975019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499330            (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine D. Polychronopoulos cdp@csrd.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

EIA-9975019
Polychronopoulos, Constantine
University of
              Illinois-Urbana

Next Generation Software: An Integrated Framework for
              Performance Engineering and Resource-Aware Compilation

This proposal will
              perform research to develop systematic and synergistic approaches for
              developing an integrated performance engineering framework and resource aware
              compilation and run-time system, and they propose to perform this research in
              the context of testing, validation and demonstration of the developed these
              technologies on important applications, a vision application being a focal one
              in this proposal.  

 With respect to the performance engineering framework
              for complete distributed and parallel computing systems the efforts include
              modeling languages of hardware and software components for developing
              heterogeneous component models, means of combining these models to represent
              the hardware and software system and views of that system.  To create such
              capabilities they will develop composition techniques that enable models to
              interact with each other, share state, events or results, and ability for
              scalable modeling.

The compiler and runtime support system will design
              resource-aware algorithms for program transformations, a multilingual
              resource-aware optimizing compiler, and low-overhead, adaptive run-time support
              to be generated by the compiler and embedded in user code.  By using
              information about application internals and knowledge of the target
              architectures will develop techniques that will produce executable code that
              scales dynamically and is responsive to reconfigurations in the type and number
              of system resources.

The modeling, compilation and runtime techniques above
              will be synergistically combined to obtain an integrated
              compiler/runtime/performance engineering framework, and they will demonstrate
              the abilities of such a framework with applications like face-tracking, video
              filtering and indexing. 

