Title       : Development of an Atomic Force Microscope and Nano-Indenter with a Magnetically
               Levitated Tip for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9975624

Award Number: 9975624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evangelos Manias manias@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975624
Manias

The introduction of the Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) has
              revolutionized the research of surfaces at the nanometer length scale by
              facilitation many new and versatile surface exploration approaches.  However,
              the use of a metal cantilever to support the scanning tip -explicit in all
              AFMs- is responsible for a number of instabilities and limitations.  The
              development of a magnetically levitated tip will eliminate these instabilities
              caused by the cantilever spring (such as abrupt snaps of the tip into the
              sample -jump-to-contact) and limitations in operation (for example the force
              modulation technique is limited to the studies of samples with surface
              elasticity comparable to the cantilever spring constant).  At the same time the
              new system will provide several new measurement capabilities beyond the ones
              available in conventional AFMs:  (1) ability to measure tip-surface
              interactions down to atomic contact, and thus provide accurate quantitative
              determination of intermolecular forces and adhesion; (2) versatility in
              attaching any "tip" without being limited by shape, size, or material,
              furnishing great adaptability to specific experimental needs; (3) direct
              magnetic force applied to the tip -over mm distance and in magnitudes greatly
              exceeding any current AFM performance- rendering it a very powerful
              nanoindenter, and; (4) ability to tune -in situ- the resonance frequency of
              vibration and apply direct force modulation to the tip, providing unmatched
              sensitivity in force modulation studies, and enabling the study of samples with
              surface modulus inhomogeneities, and samples undergoing transitions.

This
              AFM/Nanoindenter equipped with the magnetically levitated tip will be
              integrated in the user facilities of the Mateials Characterization Lab (MCL),
              and will be located in the building of the Materials Research Institute.  The
              MCL provides analytical services, specialized instruments, personnel and
              expertise in materials characterization in support of research and training
              throughout the Pennsylvania State University, with a strong emphasis in surface
              charactierization.  At the same time, researchers, especially graduate and
              undergraduate students, are trained to use facilities and
              instrumentation.
%%%
This instrumentation is expected to significantly
              enhance research, as well as training of students.
***

