Title       : SGER: Quantum Electronic Properties of Ultraviolet Laser Phosphors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1999     
File        : a9975542

Award Number: 9975542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Rand scr@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975542
Rand

This project investigates fundamentally new, quantum optical
              properties of strongly scattering powders of oxide nanocrystals doped with rare
              earth ions.  Mirrorless laser emission is produced by excitation with electrons
              in the energy range 1-10 keV in the strong, multiple-scattering regime. 
              Powders of alumina nanocrystals containing ultraviolet-emitting ions are
              synthesized by spraying alkoxide precursors through a flame, in a process that
              results in excellent particle uniformity, controllable size, and high purity. 
              The use of soluble metallorganic precursors yields unagglomerated powders with
              compositions identical to the solution compositions and average particle
              diameters in the 5-100 nm range, at rates of over 250 g/h.  The emissive
              properties of these materials are then examined by cathodoluminescence in
              ultrahigh vacuum.  An important objective is to explore the fundamental
              mechanisms responsible for optical gain in media so highly attenuating that
              electromagnetic radiation undergoes "recurrent" scattering events and is
              strongly localized.  Excellent training of graduate and postdoctoral students
              in an emerging cross-disciplinary field is thereby provided.  Suitable
              transitions and experimental conditions are being studied for efficient,
              continuous generation of ultraviolet and visible stimulated emission in
              nanophosphors, utilizing coherent optical techniques to probe their scattering
              properties. Ultraviolet laser phosphors are expected to be quite unlike other
              stimulated emission sources by generating speckle-free, incoherent
              light.
%%%
This project investigates fundamentally new, quantum optical
              processes encountered in strongly scattering powders of very small, oxide
              single crystals.  Electrical generation of continuous, ultraviolet and visible
              laser emission from nanopowders is expected to lead to numerous applications in
              conformable light sources, displays, lithography and improved phosphors.  This
              inter-disciplinary research provides a challenging training ground for graduate
              students and postdoctoral research associates in an emerging technology area
              combining state-of-the-art chemistry, electron spectroscopy, and coherent
              optical measurements.
***  



