Title       : Development of Facility for Measurement of Single and Multicomponent Gas/Vapor
               Transport through Polymeric Materials and for Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2001    
File        : a9975774

Award Number: 9975774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei I. Nazarenko sin@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Baer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Hiltner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975774
Nazarenko

This award will provide partial support for the
              development of a new facility in the Department of Macromolecular Science at
              Case Western Reserve University for measurements of single and multicomponent
              gas/vapor transport through polymeric materials.  This facility will be at the
              core of new "Gas Permeation, Separation and Barrier Laboratory."  Several
              commercial and instruments for accurate and routine permeation measurements of
              oxygen, carbon dioxide, water and aromas will be purchased.  These instruments
              will be used for accurate and routine characterization of macromolecular
              structures.  Additionally, a universal diffusion apparatus with
              mass-spectroscopic detection, capable of measuring single and multicomponent
              gas/vapor transport over a wide range of pressures and temperatures, will be
              designed and constructed for fundamental studies of diffusion mechanisms and
              solid state structure of glassy and semicrystalline polymers.  Finally,
              accurate analysis of multicomponent transport of aromas and flavors will be
              achieved by networking a commercial aroma transport device with a state of the
              are gas chromatograph equipped with cryogenic trapping and an
              MS-detector.

The facility will enhance the collaborations among researchers
              in the Department of Macromolecular Science and other departments of Case
              Western Reserve University such as Chemical Engineering, Biomedical
              Engineering, Chemistry, Physics and Medicine.  The areas of collaborative
              research will address the fundamental science of small molecule transport in
              polymers and also explore new materials concepts leading to the developing of
              new barrier systems and structures.  The facility will have a broad impact on
              education at Case Western Research University through fundamental research
              training of graduate and undergraduate students and through its use in general
              laboratory courses.  The facility will be instrumental in bringing a new
              interdisciplinary and environmental flavor into our polymer science and
              engineering training.
%%%
The facility will significantly enhance the
              collaborative research and educational interactions and opportunities for
              students and faculty.
***

