Title       : IIA Valuation and Collaboration: The Uses of Economic Research in Negotiated and
               Participatory Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9975770

Award Number: 9975770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Sagoff ms2@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project will analyze the interplay between economic studies, such as
              cost-benefit analyses, and participatory, discursive, and deliberative
              processes, such as stakeholder negotiations, in environmental decision making.
              A great deal of research during the past two decades has sought to improve the
              techniques of economic valuation and value solicitation; a smaller though
              significant body of research addresses participatory approaches to
              environmental problem solving. This project will identify and classify ways in
              which economic analyses of different kinds have proven useful in negotiated
              environmental rulemaking and in other deliberative and collaborative efforts to
              solve environmental problems. On the basis of historical, conceptual, and
              normative research, this project will recommend approaches to economic
              valuation intended to increase its relevance for participatory and deliberative
              efforts to resolve environmental disputes. The project employs, first, a
              conceptually informed historical and inductive method to develop and review
              case studies of environmental negotiations in which cost-benefit and other
              economic analyses play an important role. The proposal describes two examples:
              1) negotiations under way to establish a system of tradable grazing rights to
              forage on public lands; and 2) the negotiated regulation requiring strict
              emission controls at the Navajo Generating Station in Arizona. The project
              employs, second, the methods of normative and conceptual analysis to examine
              within the context of democratic political theory the relation between current
              efforts to "reinvent regulation" through more participatory, decentralized
              decision-making structures and efforts to "reform regulation" through the use
              of more and better scientific, technical, and economic analysis. The research
              proposed here seeks to show how regulatory decisions could draw legitimacy from
              both approaches if they were better aligned with each other. This project thus
              intends to respond in part to the perennial problem of the legitimacy of
              environmental regulation (as distinct from common-law protections) in view of
              the delegation (or overdelegation) of legislative authority to administrative
              agencies since the New Deal.
