Title       : Development of a Near-Field Scanning Photoemission Microscope for Materials
               Identification and Dopant Imaging and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9975543

Award Number: 9975543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. Hallen Hans_Hallen@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Rowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant will provide partial support for the development of a
              near-ultraviolet, near-field-scanning-optical-microscope system using the probe
              as a collector of photoelectrons with ~10-50 nm resolution in three dimensions
              will be developed.  Voltage biasing of the probe will be used for
              voltage-assisted photoemission and, through the unique geometry provided the
              metal probe aperture in close proximity to the surface, the voltage bias can
              drive a field internal to a semiconductor.  The latter capability permits
              measurement of the local dopant density.  Materials systems impacted by this
              instrument include:

1) Materials identification in sample volumes
              approaching 102 nm3.  This addresses a long-standing weakness of the scanning
              probe microscopes - that material identification of unknown samples is
              difficult and/or slow.  The instrument will enhance ongoing studies of
              particulate matter from the air.

2) Single dopant imaging in semiconductors
              under ambient conditions.  Counting dopant atoms is perhaps the ultimate way to
              study dopant distributions near surfaces.  This instrument will permit such
              studies in air, on industrially relevant samples.

3) High-resolution dopant
              profiles in two dimensions.  The next few generations of devices require
              imaging metrology of dopant profiles on the 10-50 nm resolution level. There
              are not many techniques that can hope to successfully perform such mapping.
              This instrument opens a unique venue to such measurements, and will impact
              device research on silicon and gallium nitride.

4) Passivation of
              semiconductor surfaces is very important in optoelectronic devices.  This
              instrument will pinpoint defects in the passivation at high resolution so that
              their nature can be identified and actions taken to correct the process.
              Currently, efforts in wide bandgap systems are in need of such
              instrumentation.

5) Educational opportunities arise from the training of the
              students involved and from use of the instrument in an advanced teaching
              laboratory environment. The latter will elucidate the materials effects in the
              behavior of metal-insulator-semiconductor devices through its unique variable
              geometry that allows changes in the ratio of voltage dropped in air to that
              dropped in the semiconductor.  It will also be used in the course to
              investigate voltage-assisted photoemission.
%%%
The development of this
              system will significantly enhance research capabilities and educational
              opportunities for students.


