Title       : Functional and Comparative Genomics of Disease Resistance Gene Homologs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9975971

Award Number: 9975971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2530000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Michelmore rwmichelmore@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Genes encoding NBS-LRR containing proteins are one of the most prevalent classes
              in plant genomes, comprising an estimated 1% of all genes in Arabidopsis and at
              least as many in rice.  However, little is known of their function. Sequence
              motifs indicate that they act at the beginning of signaling pathways. The only
              demonstrated function for these genes is in disease or pest resistance, but
              they may also be involved in other aspects of plant biology including
              development and response to the environment.

	The objectives of this project
              are to complete a detailed functional analysis of NBS-LRR genes in Arabidopsis
              and a comparative analysis of representatives in maize and rice.  Broad
              functional classes of NBS-LRR encoding genes will be established and the
              specific functions of a subset of these classes will be characterized.  Genes
              induced by the action of NBS-LRR gene products will be identified.  NBS-LRR
              encoding genes identified in the Arabidopsis genome sequencing project will be
              characterized in a high-throughput format using ligand-independent approaches
              involving either over-expression or gain-of-phenotype variants. Microarrays
              will be used to determine changes in global expression patterns caused by
              expression of NBS-LRR genes and will also look for gross developmental and
              physiological changes.  The expression array data will provide an 'induced
              expression signature' for each gene that will indicate its function as well as
              allow them to be assigned into functional classes.  The expression signature of
              known resistance genes, such as RPM1, RPS2 and RPP5, will be characterized and
              compared to the expression signatures of the unknown genes. 

Homologs
              representing each functional class identified in Arabidopsis will be studied in
              an analogous fashion in rice and maize.  Homologs will be obtained from
              databases or amplified de novo using conserved oligonucleotide primers. Using
              parallel approaches to those employed for Arabidopsis, induced expression
              signatures for each homolog will be determined using diagnostic microarrays for
              rice and maize.  These diagnostic arrays will be developed by selecting clones
              of cereal sequences available in the database using expression data from
              Arabidopsis plus other putative defense genes from each of these species.  Each
              NBS-LRR homolog will be mapped onto the consensus genetic map for each species
              relative to a variety of phenotypes. 

	This global approach will efficiently
              provide functional information on approximately 1% of the genes in the model
              plant, Arabidopsis, and will extend this information to two important crop
              species.  The work will define the different classes of resistance genes and
              identify those with other functions; this will establish how many act as
              resistance genes and how many control processes unrelated to defense. It will
              also identify sets of downstream genes regulated by each class.  This will
              provide the basis for detailed studies into the action of specific NBS-LRR and
              downstream genes.  It will provide tools to facilitate the practical
              manipulation of plant disease resistance and may  ultimately provide the
              ability to manipulate diverse aspects of plant development and
              physiology.



