Title       : Studies of Pattern Formation using Electroconvection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9975479

Award Number: 9975479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Dennin mdennin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This work focuses on the study of pattern formation in anisotropic systems.
              Pattern formation refers to the occurrence of regular spatial variations in
              systems that are driven out of equilibrium. The specific system used in this
              research is electroconvection in nematic liquid crystals. A range of open
              questions in patterns formation will be studied including localized patterns,
              the interaction of a discrete number of degenerate modes, and the role of
              spontaneous symmetry breaking. A significant effort will be dedicated to
              studying examples of spatio-temporal chaos. Electroconvection provides a unique
              system for addressing this major problem in nonlinear dynamics. Because the
              system is driven electrically, spatial and temporal modulations of the control
              parameters are easily produced. This provides a means of probing the robustness
              of the spatio-temporal chaos and exploring issues of control of spatio-temporal
              chaos. Also, pixelated arrays of electrodes will be used to probe the system on
              small spatial scales and to study the connection between the spatial degrees of
              freedom and the temporal dynamics. Finally, this research will include
              quantitative comparison between theory and experiment, something that is not
              possible in most examples of spatio-temporal chaos, that will provide important
              insights into the nature of spatio-temporal chaos.
%%%
This work focuses on
              the study of pattern formation in anisotropic systems. Pattern formation refers
              to the occurrence of regular spatial variations in systems that are driven out
              of equilibrium. Patterns are ubiquitous in nature, occurring in a wide range of
              systems including traffic flow, the weather, chemical signals on the heart,
              spread of disease, and population dynamics. A particularly important class of 
              patterns are those that exhibit spatio-temporal chaos. Spatio-temporal chaos
              refers to patterns that have irregular behavior in space and time. For example,
              common failure modes of the heart involve spatio-temporal chaos of the chemical
              signals that control the heart rate. This project uses precision experiments in
              electroconvection in nematic liquid crystals to probe fundamental aspects of
              the nature of spatio-temporal chaos. In particular, electroconvection is
              uniquely suited for addressing the issue of control of spatio-temporal chaos.
              The results of this study will provide insight into control techniques for
              other systems that exhibit similar behavior. The research will also provide
              important training for graduate students that will enable them to go on to
              careers in either industry or academics.
***

