Title       : Perceptual and Cognitive Processes in Category Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a9975037

Award Number: 9975037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Gregory Ashby ashby@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research funded by this award will investigate how people learn
              new
categories of perceptual objects and events. Categorization is a
              cognitive
process of fundamental importance that all people perform countless
              times
every day. It allows people to read, to select foods that are safe to
              eat,
to use objects and tools in the environment, and to recognize friends
              and
kin. Unfortunately, it is also a fragile process, in the sense that
              a
number of normal and pathological conditions have been shown to
              cause
category learning deficits. These include normal aging, major
              depression,
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, Huntington's disease,
              strokes,
and schizophrenia.  Previous theories of category learning were
              tested
primarily on categorization data from healthy university students.
              To
understand category learning in these neglected populations requires
              an
understanding of the brain structures and pathways that mediate
              this
important skill. Toward this end, this research will test and extend
              the
first neuropsychological theory of category learning, called
              COVIS
(COmpetition between Verbal and Implicit Systems; Ashby,
              Alfonso-Reese,
Turken, & Waldron, 1998, Psychological Review, 105, 442-481),
              which assumes
that category learning is a competition between separate
              explicit and
implicit categorization systems. The explicit system is under
              conscious
control and engages in a systematic process of hypothesis testing
              or
rule-based reasoning. The implicit system, which is largely not
              accessible
to conscious awareness, engages in a form of procedural learning.
              Ashby et
al. (1998) developed a formal version of COVIS that makes
              precise
quantitative predictions in a wide variety of categorization tasks,
              and
also a neuropsychological version that describes the underlying
              neural
mechanisms and pathways that are assumed to mediate category learning.
              The
current research includes many new experiments with healthy young
              adults
that were motivated by the COVIS theory. Some experiments will test
              the
COVIS assumption that normal category learning is a competition
              between
functionally separate explicit and implicit systems. Many of
              the
experiments will isolate the explicit system and investigate
              its
properties, including the rules that govern how it learns, both with
              and
without trial-by-trial feedback about response accuracy. Finally,
              many
analogous experiments will attempt to achieve the same goals with
              the
implicit system (i.e., isolate it and investigate its properties).
              The
completion of these studies will not only provide a rigorous test of
              COVIS,
but regardless of their outcome, it will also provide valuable new
              insights
into the perceptual and cognitive processes and the underlying
              neural
mechanisms and pathways that mediate one of the most basic of all
              human
acts - grouping objects and events in the environment by category.


