Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution Powder X-ray Diffractometer for Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9975652

Award Number: 9975652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prabir K. Dutta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Umit S. Ozkan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon G. Shore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Sandhage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Woodward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975652
Dutta

This grant will provide partial support for the acquisition of
              a high-resolution X-ray powder diffractometer for quantitative structural
              analysis of polycrystalline materials, quantitative phase analysis and
              size/strain analysis.  The instrument will be used to obtain accurate and
              reproducible intensities, high resolution, high signal to noise, and peak
              shapes that can be analytically modeled by chemists, material scientists and
              chemical engineers.  Examples of projects that will use the facility include
              examining how changes in crystal structure and composition influence the
              electronic structure of solid state inorganic materials, primarily complex
              oxide, nitride and sulfide materials.  Determination of structures of
              microporous materials synthesized by novel routes as well as size distributions
              of nanocrystalline zeolites will be carried out.  Quantitative analysis of
              phases present in ceramics used for high temperature sensors will provide
              important information on the sensing mechanisms.  Structures of novel inorganic
              complexes composed of lathanide and transition metals with a variety of
              ligands, including boranes will be determined. Heterogeneous catalysts
              including metal oxides, metal sulfides, metal nitrides, supported metals and
              heteropoly compounds undergo important phase transformations relevant to their
              catalytic properties and will be studied.  In addition, analysis of stresses in
              alloys and how nanocrystalline materials influence polymer properties will be
              examined.

The instrument will be housed in the Analytical Chemistry facility
              of the Chemistry Department.  It will be used to provide comprehensive training
              in powder diffraction methods and for research projects.
%%%
This equipment
              will significantly enhance the research and educational capabilities of this
              institution.
***

