Title       : Development of an Ultralow Temperature Scanning Probe Microscopy System for
               Magnetic and Electrostatic Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975611

Award Number: 9975611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale J. Van Harlingen dvh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Yazdani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975611
Van Harlingen

This grant will provide partial support for the
              development of an advanced system to experiments that address key scientific
              issues in the study of unconventional superconductors, mesoscopic structures,
              and the two-dimensional electron gas.  The invention and rapid advance of
              scanning probe microscopies (SPM) is a recent example of technology driving
              science. These innovative tools are changing our perception of the structure
              and properties of matter on nanometer scales.  Imaging at very small-length
              scales is now possible for all kinds of materials, from semiconductors to
              biological samples to self-assembled devices.  As a result, these microscopes
              are becoming essential tools to scientific research and technological
              development in diverse disciplines - condensed matter physics, advanced memory
              devices, and biology.  The new system will extend the use of scanning probe
              microscopy for magnetic and electrostatic imaging to ultralow temperatures and
              high magnetic fields for the study of fundamental phenomena in condensed matter
              systems.

The developed system will integrate some of the most advanced
              methods of SPM for measuring local magnetic and electric fields with a
              versatile top loading dilution refrigerator.  In particular, scanning SQUID
              (Superconducting Quantum Interference Device), scanning Hall, and scanning
              capacitance microscopy techniques at ultralow temperatures will be implemented
              to achieve magnetic and electrostatic imaging on the microscopic scale.  These
              techniques will allow mapping of electrostatic and magnetic fields on length
              scales of 10-100 nanometers at temperatures down to 20 millikelvin and fields
              up to 10 Tesla.  This program will be a collaborative effort between two groups
              at UIUC with expertise in scanning probe microscopy and shared interest and
              current NSF support in studying fundamental phenomena in superconductors and
              mesoscopic structures at low temperatures.

The experiments performed with
              this instrumentation will elucidate the nature of a wide range of low
              temperature phenomena and provide opportunities for new and exciting
              discoveries.  The initial research plan includes experiments unraveling the
              nature of quantum phase transitions in two-dimensional superconductors, probing
              the structures of vortex lattices in unconventional superconductors, and search
              for secondary superconducting phases in mesoscopic structures resulting from
              the fragility of the order parameter in unconventional superconducting
              materials.

This program will also impact the ongoing educational plans for
              the training of students in scanning probe microscopy and nanoscale imaging. 
              These techniques are beginning to impact industrial development in the areas of
              data storage and future device technology, which remains the largest employers
              of condensed matter physicists in the industrial sector.
%%%
This equipment
              will enable the investigators to undertake very fundamental studies on new
              classes of materials, and to train studies in a very needy area.
***

