Title       : Next Generation Software: A Simulation Platform for Experimentation and
               Evaluation of Distributed-Computing Systems (SPEED-CS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9975050

Award Number: 9975050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suvrajeet Sen sen@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Ciarallo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard P. Zeigler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hessam S. Sarjoughian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Schlichting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-9975050
Suvrajeet Sen
University of Arizona

Next Generation software: A
              Simulation Platform for Experimentation and Evaluation of Distributed-Computing
              Systems (SPEED-CS)

The proposed project seeks funding to develop a workbench
              that will facilitate rapid composition, evaluation, modification and validation
              of distributed embedded systems.  Today's technology requires considerable time
              and effort in programming and verifying performance of embedded systems.  One
              of the major goals of this project is to develop a methodology through which
              software modules used in simulations can be directly exported into the embedded
              environment.  The workbench will allow users to compose applications,
              simulations,  run experiments and, build performance models for distributed
              computing systems.  These tools will make it possible for users to develop
              applications in "plug-and-play" manner, thus reducing the time required for
              software development, and increasing its reliability at the same time.  The
              project team is truly multi-disciplinary with expertise in communications
              systems, embedded systems, simulation and distributed systems modeling and
              performance analysis.  In addition, the new technology will be developed
              through a partnership between researchers at the University of Arizona and
              Modular Mining Systems Inc. (MMSI, a leading software vendor in the mining
              industry.  Finally, a start-up manufacturing company will also use the software
              to verify the generality of our approach.

