Title       : Defect Interactions in Solids: Impact on Microstructure and Materials Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9975384

Award Number: 9975384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Rickman jmr6@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975384
Rickman
This award is a renewal of a prior NSF Young Investigator
              award.  The current grant is for theoretical modeling to assess the impact of
              mutual interactions among point and line defects on defect microstructures and
              associated materials properties.  Crystalline defects, when present in large
              quantities, can dramatically alter the thermal and mechanical properties of
              materials; a quantitative understanding of the factors governing defect
              structure, mobility, and chemical environment is essential to explain observed
              phenomena and to engineer new materials with desired characteristics.  The
              focus of the proposed work will be on mesoscale and continuum descriptions of
              the thermodynamics and kinetics of ensembles of mutually interacting vacancies,
              interstitials, and dislocations.  Equilibrium and metastable properties of
              these ensembles can be treated using statistical mechanics methods and linked
              with corresponding macroscopic defect densities using a coarse-graining
              procedure.  Several complementary computational and analytical techniques will
              be used in this project, including kinetic Monte Carlo simulations and
              mean-field theory simulations.

This award is a renewal of a prior NSF Young
              Investigator award.  The current grant is for theoretical modeling to assess
              the impact of mutual interactions among point and line defects on defect
              microstructures and associated materials properties.  Crystalline defects, when
              present in large quantities, can dramatically alter the thermal and mechanical
              properties of materials; a quantitative understanding of the factors governing
              defect structure, mobility, and chemical environment is essential to explain
              observed phenomena and to engineer new materials with desired characteristics. 
              The focus of the proposed work will be on mesoscale and continuum descriptions
              of the thermodynamics and kinetics of ensembles of mutually interacting
              vacancies, interstitials, and dislocations.  Simulation results for
              metallurgical processes can be incorporated into a sophomore-level course on
              computational methods in materials science.


