Title       : Development of a New Mechano-Thermo-Magnetic Testing System for Smart Materials
               and for Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9975848

Award Number: 9975848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minoru Taya tayam@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kanryu Inoue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975848
Taya

This award will provide partial support for the development of
              a new experimental capability necessary for the experimental study of a new
              class of smart magnetic materials that exhibit coupling among the mechanical,
              thermal and magnetic behavior: magnetostrictive alloys, magnetostrictive alloy
              fiber and particulate actuated polymer matrix composites and homogeneous
              ferromagnetic shape memory alloys and their composites.  These magnetic smart
              materials are increasingly important, as they constitute a key actuator element
              for smart devices and structures thanks to their fast and powerful response at
              the time of actuation.  Accurate characterization of these magnetic smart
              materials will provide precise data for the constitutive equations of the
              materials, which will be used by the engineers designing such smart
              devices.

The testing system will allow testing under a very broad range of
              magnetro-thermo-mechanical loading.  For instance, it will be possible to
              perform constant stress - increasing magnetic field or constant magnetic field
              - increasing applied stress and magnetization experiments in which the stress
              and field axes are parallel or orthogonal to one another.  Finally, the
              electromagnet may be used separately for the measurement of magnetic properties
              at constant temperature and stress free hysteresis behaviors.  The instrument
              will be used for short, intermediate to long-term purposes.  The short to
              intermediate term purpose includes use of the instrument to characterize the
              magnetoelastic properties of the ferromagnetic shape memory alloys under
              magneto-thermo-mechanical loading, as a part of the current research project,
              design of shape memory alloys for actuator system of helicopter blades, in
              collaboration with aerospace companies.  For the intermediate to long-term
              purpose, the proposed instrument will be used for characterization of the
              ferromagnetic SMAs with transformation temperatures close to a human body
              temperature with applications to biomedical implant devices.  Students and
              faculty engineers at several local companies, at the University of Washington,
              and researchers at the National Institute of Standards and Testing (NIST),
              Boulder, Colorado will use the instrument.

The instrument will also be used
              for undergraduate education allowing a new course in magneto-rheological design
              to be developed, and magnetic modules to be added to existing materials science
              courses. 
%%%
The developed facility will significantly enhance the research
              capabilities and collaborative interactions of faculty and students at the
              University of Washington the private sector, and a Federal government
              laboratory.
***



