Title       : A Theory of Banking, Bank Capital, and Financial Crises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9975209

Award Number: 9975209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raghuram Rajan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Diamond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite a growing recent interest in both the micro-economics of banking and the
              micro-macro links, there is very little work on why the institutional form of
              the bank - the financing of illiquid loans with demandable demand deposits -
              makes sense. But this issue is at the center of almost all questions about bank
              regulation. It is also central to recent work on the transmission of monetary
              policy. If the lending channel shuts down because demandable deposits become
              prohibitively costly, we have to understand why it is critical that loans be
              financed with demand deposits. Why is short term commercial paper not an
              adequate substitute? In a sense, many of the recent models addressing these
              issues are incomplete because they address important issues without a fully
              specified rationale for the form of the banking firm.  With notable exceptions,
              prior theoretical work has skirted these issues by focusing on one side or the
              other of the bank's balance sheet. This project develops a model of the bank
              that rationalizes its institutional form. Through demand deposits, banks
              provide more value to depositors than the market value of the illiquid loans
              they hold. Moreover, banks' ability to issue demand deposits helps them shield
              borrowers from sudden demands for liquidity from investors. Taken together, the
              bank's institutional structure enables it to create liquidity on both sides of
              the balance sheet. Breaking up the bank into a separate finance company and a
              money market fund is a sure way to kill the bank's liquidity creation role.
              This new theory is developed fully and tested empirically

More specifically,
              the first part of the project develops the rationale for a bank in a world
              where the bank effectively faces no uncertainty. The bank can be financed
              entirely with demandable deposits. Subsequent work adds bank-specific
              uncertainty to this model. It turns out that with uncertainty, the bank has to
              partly fund through non-demandable sources of finance that we term capital.
              Capital here acts as a buffer, but also endogenously raises the overall cost of
              financing. Interestingly, the level of bank capital affects the amount that can
              be recovered from borrowers. This augmented model can help us understand the
              implications of various kinds of regulatory capital requirements, the matching
              between borrowers and banks, as well as the effects on lending of raising the
              costs of deposits. The next part of the research introduces aggregate
              uncertainty in the liquidity needs of firms or individual investors. Embed in
              model is a world with aggregate liquidity shortages: fluctuations in the excess
              supply of funding for banks and firms. This will enable the investigators to
              focus better on systemic financial crises, and the role of central banks in
              preventing and alleviating them. Furthermore, since this theory some fragility
              is necessary for banks to perform their role, the policy analysis will depart
              substantially from the past. Lender of last resort, monetary policy, and even
              deposit insurance, all of which try to ensure a safe system, also affect the
              bank's functioning, resulting in interesting tradeoffs

