Title       : Geographic Categories: An Ontological Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a9975557

Award Number: 9975557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199689             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mark dmark@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The results of this study will contribute to our understanding of geographic
              objects and associated cognitive categories. This will be achieved through the
              development of a formal ontology, which in turn will be based on rigorous,
              cross-linguistic empirical research using human subjects. Preliminary studies
              have indicated that geographic objects have important ontological features
              distinct from those of objects encountered at table-top scales, and that these
              features are salient for purposes of categorization. Evidence regarding the
              nature of cognitive categories has up to now been based primarily on studies of
              categorization of entities at scales similar to the human body and its
              parts--small animals and plants, artifacts and tools, etc.. The present project
              is the first to extend inquiries of this sort in systematic fashion to the
              domain of geographic objects. It thus has the potential to contribute to our
              understanding of human cognitive categorization in general, as well as to
              specific features of cognition in the geographic realm. Parallel studies will
              be conducted in several languages and regions, so that the resulting ontology
              will be multilingual.

The project will contribute to the development of
              geographic information systems (GIS), especially to spatial data transfer and
              semantic interoperability of geographic software and data. Most current GISs,
              and spatial data infrastructures, are based on geographic objects (entities),
              and an improved theory of the nature of geographic objects and their categories
              will improve the effectiveness of feature coding schemes that are a key part of
              geographic data. The multilingual aspects of the research will contribute to
              international geographic information exchange, and to the effectiveness of
              multinational projects in environmental, social, military, and commercial
              domains. The proposed research can be of practical importance in at least the
              following ways: (1) It can help us to understand how different groups of people
              exchange, or fail to exchange, geographic information. (2) It can support the
              development of knowledge-interchange standards by providing the basis for
              spatial databases with stable category systems and formally rigorous underlying
              structure. (3) It can provide default characteristics for geographic
              information systems (GIS) in ways that may contribute to their broader
              usability by non-experts.

