Title       : Trade and Trade Policy in Late Nineteenth Century America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9975208

Award Number: 9975208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Irwin douglas.irwin@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the late nineteenth century, the United States imposed high protective
              tariffs on imported manufactured goods. This period also saw the rapid
              industrialization of the United States, including a sharp shift in its trade
              structure, as it became a net exporter of manufactured goods for the first time
              in its history.

This period in U.S. economic history has recently become the
              source of controversy. Some current advocates of protectionism have sought to
              justify their position, in part, by arguing that the late nineteenth century
              U.S. experience demonstrates that high tariffs proved beneficial before and
              therefore should be considered again. Surprisingly, economists and economic
              historians have had little to say about the interaction between trade policy
              and industrialization and the factors accounting for the shift in U.S. trade
              position in manufactures.

This research aims to deepen our understanding of
              U.S. trade and trade policy during the pivotal period of the late nineteenth
              and early twentieth century. The research, which will be a part of the National
              Bureau of Economic Research's programs on the Development of the American
              Economy and International Trade and Investment, will address three main
              issues.

The first issue is the relationship between tariffs and the growth
              of infant industries.  The research will focus on evaluating the role of
              tariffs in promoting the tinplate industry, which has often been referred to as
              the best example of a successful infant industry policy during this period. 
              The approach will be to examine the counter factual question of whether and
              when the industry would have developed in the absence of tariff protection.
              This question is rarely posed or answered, yet it is key to determining the
              effects of infant industry protection.

The second issue is the political
              economy of the tariff. While there have been several studies that examine the
              economic and political factors behind specific tariff legislation during this
              period, the focus here will be on trying to evaluate the trade policy
              preferences of the mass electorate.  The presidential election of 1888, which
              is generally believed to have hinged on the tariff issue, will be studied. The
              two main political parties nominated candidates that had deeply opposing views
              on tariff policy. Cross-state or -county voting for the parties can be related
              to the economic and social characteristics of those states and counties and
              thus potentially reveal information on what accounts for the variation in the
              degree of support for higher or lower tariffs.

The third issue is the sharp
              change in U.S. comparative advantage in the mid-1890s that enabled the United
              States to become a net exporter of manufactured goods. Trade economists
              generally focus on changes in technology and factor endowments as altering
              trade flows. Neither productivity advances nor capital accumulation appear to
              account for the timing of the abrupt shift in U.S. comparative advantage toward
              manufactures around 1895. This research will focus on iron and steel exports,
              which were the main driving factor behind the U.S. manufactured export surge,
              and highlight the role of resource endowments (specifically, iron ore prices as
              a result of the Mesabi discoveries).  A simultaneous three-equation system that
              includes U.S. and U.K. production costs and foreign demand in a third market
              (Canada) will be developed to disentangle the various supply and demand factors
              at work in stimulating U.S. exports.

