Title       : Preferences for Time, Risk, and Future Generations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9975083

Award Number: 9975083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen B. Chapman gbc@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,9278,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Time preferences indicate how much decision makers value future outcomes
              relative to more immediate outcomes.  They can be quantified as a temporal
              discount rate (the increase in value necessary to offset a delay).  The current
              research extends previous research by the PI by addressing two related research
              questions.  First, how and why do individual discount rates differ from
              societal and intergenerational discount rates?  Whereas most previous research
              has concerned time preferences that individuals display for outcomes that occur
              (usually to themselves) in their own lifetime, many important societal
              intertemporal choices involve outcomes that occur to future generations (e.g.,
              pollution, global warming).  Several theorists have argued that the discount
              rate applied to intergenerational choices should differ (be lower) than that
              applied to intragenerational decisions, but little empirical research has
              explored this distinction.  Four experiments test two descriptive theories
              about how and why inter- and intra- generational discount rates might differ.
              The second question addressed is: can biases in intertemporal choice and choice
              under uncertainty be explained by common mechanisms?  Although there is a
              sizeable body of research on intertemporal choice, most decision research
              continues to address choice under uncertainty. Three experiments extend
              previous work in drawing parallels between intertemporal choice and choice
              under uncertainty and test the idea that the same decision processes underlie
              biases in these two domains.   These two research questions provide both a
              basic and an applied focus.  These two foci are related because policy outcomes
              with very long delays almost invariably involve uncertainty as well as delay.
