Title       : Genetics, History, and Ethnicity in Daghestan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9975449

Award Number: 9975449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Harpending henry.harpending@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn B. Jorde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to (1) develop new methods for analyzing gene distributions
              within and between populations and relating these to population history and
              relationships, (2) type a large collection of DNA from different ethnic groups
              from Daghestan, and (3) use  these genetic data to study history and
              relationships of the peoples of the Daghestan region. 

Genetic methods for
              studying population history have been compromised by  the inability to separate
              effects of small population size from population genetic isolation.  Two
              populations that separate accumulate differences at a rate proportional to time
              divided by population size, and the inability to know population size has
              required researchers to  assume equal population sizes for all populations
              studied.  This is not an acceptable assumption.  The new availability of large
              numbers of highly diverse markers will allow the estimation of  relative
              population effective sizes separately from genetic distances among populations,
              then use the effective size estimates to scale distances.  

The
              investigators will type 60 short tandem repeat markers and several hundred Alu
              marker loci in approximately 400 samples from Daghestan.  Short tandem repeats
              are free from the ascertainment bias that has obscured global patterns of human
              diversity ascertained from classical markers and single nucleotide
              polymorphisms.  Alu insertions enjoy the property that the ancestral state at
              the locus, absence of the marker, is always known.  This property will be used
              to disentangle old from recent genetic isolation of populations.
. 



