Title       : Electromigration Investigations of Al-Cu Interconnect Reliability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9975893

Award Number: 9975893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209559             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Heskett dheskett@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Tammaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9975893
Heskett

With the continual shrinking of semiconductor devices,
              failures due to electromigration-induced damage in metal interconnects have
              become a significant problem and concern.  It has been known for some time that
              the addition of small amounts of copper in aluminum interconnects increases
              their resistance to electromigration.  However, the exact role of this copper
              is not well understood.  In this proposal the PIs will combine theoretical
              modeling with a variety of experimental techniques to examine and clarify the
              role of copper in the early stages of electromigration-induced damage of
              aluminum alloy interconnects.  Furthermore the PIs will develop a reliable
              method for extrapolating the results of accelerated stress tests to normal
              operating conditions.

Specific outcomes of their work will include the
              following:


1. Development of a microscopic model of the electromigration
              process.

2. Reevaluation of the conventional model used to extrapolate the
              results of accelerated stress tests. (Determination of the correct temperature
              dependence in "Black's Law".)

3. Determination of the physical meaning of
              the stress-induced activation energy for copper and aluminum diffusion in Al-Cu
              metal lines.

4. Determination of copper and aluminum-copper precipitate
              mobility in these systems as well as the specific role they play in blocking
              aluminum diffusion.

5. Rutherford Backscattering measurements of the
              current-induced diffusion of copper in Al-Cu interconnects.

6. Focused Ion
              Beam measurements of the role of film morphology (i.e. grain size distribution)
              in electromigration.

These studies will directly address a real world
              problem in the microelectronics industry and will result in a significant
              advance in current understanding of metal diffusion under highly stressed
              conditions.
***

