Title       : (EGB) Natural Estrogens in Spring Water in the Ozark Plateau Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9975380

Award Number: 9975380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Wicks wicksc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9975380
Wicks

In the karstic Ozark Plateau region of Missouri and Arkansas,
              numerous springs are used as the water supply for fish hatcheries.  In
              addition, streams fed by spring water are good habitat for many non-game fish
              species; also, two species of endangered cavefish have been found to live
              within the karstic aquifers.  At relatively low concentrations, the naturally
              occurring estrogen compounds (17-B estradiol (E2 ) and estrone (E1 ), which are
              discharged from livestock and sewage wastes, lead to feminization of fish, and
              at somewhat higher concentrations to failure of vital organs and death.  Thus,
              contamination of the groundwater and spring waters by wastes that contain E2 )
              and E1 ) could adversely impact the health of game fish, non-game fish, and
              cavefish.

Our first goal is to determine the geographic distribution and the
              extent to which the spring waters of the Ozark Plateau are contaminated with E2
              and E1  by establishing a sampling and storage protocol for measuring their
              concentration in spring waters using ELISA technique.  Preliminary sampling at
              four springs within the Springfield Plateau have found E2  concentrations
              ranging from 10 to 65 ng/L.  These concentrations are within the range having a
              deleterious effects on biota (50ng/L).  We have not yet found a spring that
              does not have E2  contamination.

This data will be presented to State level
              agencies.  Also, by determining the distribution and extent of the
              contamination, we will be able to focus subsequent research on six springs (the
              three that exhibit the lowest concentrations of E2 and E1 and the three that
              exhibit the highest concentrations of E2 and E1).

Once the springs are
              selected, we will determine the mass flux of E2 and  E1 discharged from the
              karstic aquifer by measuring discharge by using standard surface water gauging
              techniques and stage recorders. Since the concentrations of E2 and   E1  can be
              reliably determined down to 20 ng/L, the mass flux of E2  and E1  out of the
              basins can be determined.  These basins are fed by large losing streams that
              supply 90% of the discharge.  For each basin, the losing stream will be located
              and gauged.  Errors on mass flux calculations can be minimized by careful
              stream gauging, careful analytical work, and by making sure all losing streams
              (if these are multiple losing streams) are gauged.

Because the cavefish live
              in the aquifer and the sampling measures discharge from the aquifer, the
              cavefish might be exposed to higher concentrations due to degradation in the
              aquifer.  Our third goal is to determine whether E2  and  E1   are degraded at
              typical spring water conditions (chemical and physical) and to determine the
              concentration and dosages experienced by the cavefish.  

