Title       : Genome-Wide Restriction Map of Rice by Optical Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9975606

Award Number: 9975606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1529544            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Schwartz dcschwartz@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The grasses provide more than 80% of the world's edible dry matter.  Among the
              grasses, rice has become the model monocot plant, having a relatively small
              genome (430 Mb),  the ability to be transformed, high density genetic maps
              based on molecular markers, and physical maps from large fragment clones under
              development.  Comparative analysis among the grasses has shown that large grass
              genomes of important crop plants such as wheat, barley, maize, sorghum, oat and
              sugarcane share extensive synteny with the genome of rice, thus making detailed
              study of the rice genome relevant to all grasses.  

This award supports the
              construction of an optical restriction map of the genome of rice (O. sativa L.
              japonica variety Nipponbare) as a first step toward development of a
              comprehensive understanding of the genome organization of O. sativa L.  This
              variety has been selected by the international plant genome community as the
              template for a rice genome sequencing effort.  Direct restriction mapping of
              the rice genome will be performed on large, random fragments of genomic DNA,
              isolated cells, or nuclei mounted on specially prepared surfaces.  Ordered
              restriction maps prepared from individual DNA molecules will be assembled into
              a continuous map covering the entire genome.  Successful application of this
              approach has already led to the rapid development of optical restriction maps
              for the genomes of Escherichia coli (4.3 Mb) and Plasmodium falciparum (26 Mb).
               Efforts are currently underway to map the human genome (3,000 Mb).  It is
              anticipated that a complete optical restriction map of diploid rice can be
              accomplished in 3 years.  The resulting map will be linked to available genetic
              and physical maps through comparison of restriction fragment patterns of
              selected BAC clones of Nipponbare DNA, developed elsewhere, and by localization
              of existing molecular markers in the rice genetic map to these clones.  This
              approach will complement those currently underway by providing critical linking
              data to fill gaps in BAC contigs as well as a means to organize DNA sequence
              information generated from a random genome sequencing approach.     

