Title       : Indonesian National Election Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9975671

Award Number: 9975671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R William Liddle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research examines the partisan choices of Indonesian voters in the June,
              1999 parliamentary election, which is the first democratic election in
              Indonesia in 44 years.  A national probability sample of 2,500 randomly chosen
              respondents is interviewed directly about their choice of party and the factors
              affecting that choice.  These factors include:  (1) religious beliefs and
              affiliations, (2) ethnic and regional loyalties, (3) social class and economic
              interest position and perception, (4) attachment to national party leaders, (5)
              attentiveness of local opinion leaders, and (6) retrospective evaluation of
              party performance in power.

	In broad theoretical terms, the first three
              factors are in the tradition of the sociological analysis of voting behavior,
              whereas the second three are more psychological in that they focus on more
              narrow or face-to-face ties and personal evaluations, either of leaders or
              issues.  Although sociological factors, especially religion, clearly play a
              prominent role in Indonesian politics, psychological factors have not be given
              their due, in part because no systematic surveys have been conducted that would
              enable analysts to get beneath the surface appearance of group voting to the
              deeper level of individual choice.  Individuals' assessments of national party
              leaders, their exposure to local opinion leaders, and their judgments of the
              performance of the party in power are hypothesized to have an impact on party
              choice to some degree independent of, and sometimes in conflict with,
              sociological factors.

The study also is set in the context of elections in
              newly democratizing countries.  Two issues are paramount here.  First, what is
              the legacy of decades of authoritarianism on political and social life:  a
              permanently flattened organizational landscape or temporarily frozen
              organizations, built on deep social and cultural cleavages that now are
              returning to life?  Second, what are the consequences for democracy of party
              systems that narrowly reflect social and cultural divisions versus those that
              reach across or bridge them?  This question is addressed by assessing the
              extent to which the evolving Indonesian party system, in the minds of our
              respondents, is reflective  or bridging, and by linking that assessment to the
              behavior of party leaders. 

