Title       : Contracts, Relationships, and Real Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9975277

Award Number: 9975277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garey Ramey gramey@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wouter Denhaan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
    The aim of this project is to provide a new understanding of markets for
              capital, labor 
and other productive inputs, based on developing a clear
              accounting of the factors shaping long-term relationships that make up the
              markets. This inquiry focuses on two key dimensions. (1) The success of
              relationships depends on their ability to overcome contracting imperfections,
              such as limited liability, limited liquidity, and limited verifiability of
              actions. (2) Market outcomes are determined by the processes that bring agents
              together to form relationships, as well as the success of relationships in
              solving their contracting problems. Economic productivity, propagation of
              shocks, and the effectiveness of policy intervention are all tied to the
              formation, operation and breakdown of long-term relationships.
The project
              consists of three main parts. The first part consists of a new theoretical
              model of credit markets in which liquidity is channeled from lenders to
              entrepreneurs through long-term relationships, and lenders may be constrained
              in their short-run access to liquidity. Relationships are subject to
              inefficient breakdown due to limited liability and limited liquidity. Outflows
              of aggregate liquidity induce persistent damage to financial structure by
              breaking up relationships. Complementarily between returns to investment and
              the structure of intermediation leads to multiple steady-state equilibria
              having different levels of aggregate liquidity, including a collapse state that
              may become the unique equilibrium outcome following a severe negative shock.
              The model is extended to consider relationships between multiple entrepreneurs
              and lenders, and the dynamics of policy intervention will be analyzed
The
              second part formulates and tests empirical implications of the model. The model
              predicts that greater availability of loanable funds to the banks in a state,
              as proxied by bank deposits or bank capital positions, should relate positively
              to real activity in the state. Further, greater cross-sectional dispersion of
              funds across banks should reduce real activity. The proposed research will test
              these implications using bank balance sheet data and state-level measures of
              economic activity as well as assessing the significance of liquidity allocation
              for the transmission of monetary shocks.
The third part develops a stochastic
              dynamic monetary equilibrium model that couples the theoretical model of credit
              markets with the limited participation mechanism for producing nominal
              rigidity. The expanded model will yield important improvements in the amount of
              persistence of output responses, and the sluggishness of price responses,
              following monetary shocks, relative to previous models.

