Title       : Analyses of the Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii Genome: A Model, Unicellular System
               for Analyzing Gene Function and Regulation in Vascular Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9975765

Award Number: 9975765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Lefebvre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn D. Silflow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1112      GENES AND GENOME SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9975765
Grossman

The personnel involved in this project are Arthur Grossman
              (PI, Carnegie Institution of Washington), Paul Lefebvre and Carloyn Silflow
              (Co-Pls, University of Minnesota), John Davies (Co-PI, Iowa State University),
              Elizabeth Harris (Co-PI, Duke University), David Stem (Co-PI, Boyce Thompson
              Institute, Cornell University), and Ronald Davis (Co-PI, Stanford
              University).
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular haploid green alga, has
              been and will continue to be a very important model system for elucidating
              basic biological processes in plants. Experimentation with Chlamydomonas is
              particularly important for the dissection of photosynthetic processes since
              this alga can be grown rapidly on an exogenous source of fixed carbon and is
              the only genetically tractable eukaryote for which mutations that affect all
              aspects of photosynthesis and carbon assimilation are conditional rather than
              lethal. The application of sophisticated genome-wide methodologies to studies
              of Chlamydomonas will augment its utility as a model for the analysis of
              photosynthetic function and regulation. Specifically, as a first goal,
              normalized Chlamydomonas CDNA libraries will be generated using RNA isolated
              from cells grown under a variety of environmental conditions. The 3' and 5'
              sequences of the cDNAs will help generate unique sets of ESTs that will be
              arrayed onto polylysine coated slides. These arrays will be used to examine
              global gene expression under conditions that markedly alter the activity and
              biosynthesis of the photosynthetic apparatus. The microarrays will also be used
              to analyze gene expression in those photosynthetic mutants that appear to be
              regulatory in nature (to identify potential gene targets for regulatory
              elements). Furthermore, full-length sequences will be generated for most of the
              cDNAs, which would represent almost the complete coding capacity of the
              Chlamydomonas nuclear genome. A second goal is to establish a partial physical
              map of the nuclear genome that is aligned with the genetic map with the aim of
              using the information to perform rapid and efficient map-based cloning of
              genes. The mapping studies will focus on specific regions of the nuclear genome
              that are centered around mutations that define genes having critical functions
              in photosynthesis. A third goal is to complete the sequence of the chloroplast
              genome, generate and analyze strains that are deleted for each of the
              chloroplast open reading frames, and use microarrays containing each of the
              chloroplast open reading frames to characterize global expression of
              chloroplast genes under different environmental conditions. The microarray
              technology will also be used to evaluate the abundance of all chloroplast mRNAs
              in nuclear mutants that exhibit aberrant transcriptional and
              post-transcriptional control of plastid gene expression. Much of the
              information and many of the tools that will be developed during the course of
              this work will allow studies of photosynthesis to attain a global dimension,
              which is critical for elucidating the dynamic nature of chloroplast function
              and the mechanisms involved in regulating chloroplast gene expression.

