Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced CCD X-Ray Detection System for the Advanced Polymers
               Beamline at the National Synchrotron Light Source for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9975663

Award Number: 9975663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Hsiao bhsiao@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Chu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975663
Hsiao

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition of
              an advanced x-ray CCD
detector to be used in the Advanced Polymers Beamline
              (the APB, X27C) at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS), Brookhaven
              National Laboratory (BNL).  The current area detector systems at the APB
              include multi-wire proportional counter (MWPC) detectors and imaging plate
              detectors, both cannot meet the stringent requirements of certain time-resolved
              and in-situ experiments that need high spatial resolution and high through-put
              rate (high detection efficiency and fast read-out time).  These experiments
              include the study of structure-function relationship in skeletal muscles,
              deformation of synthetic and biological fibers, flow-induced crystallization
              and rheology/x-ray investigation of complex polymeric fluid systems.

The
              Advanced Polymers Beamline is ideal for carrying out polymer studies of
              fundamental and practical importance, and for exploring new materials research
              opportunities.  The major benefit of this facility to the community is that no
              extensive synchrotron experience and equipment preparation is required from the
              general users to carry out cutting-edge experiments.  One of such examples
              includes the recently developed simultaneous small- and wide- angle x-ray
              scattering (SWAXS) techniques to characterize structural changes of isotropic
              polymers with dimensions from 1 to 1000 Angstroms.  However, the lack of an
              advanced CCD x-ray detector has prevented investigators from taking full
              advantage of the unique research opportunities in the APB.  The CCD x-ray
              detector will not only complement the existing area detection systems (MWPC,
              imaging plate) for many on-going projects, but also offer new research
              opportunities for dynamic studies of anisotropic systems that are becoming the
              forefront of current materials studies.
%%%
The acquisition of this detector
              will significantly enhance research capabilities, and enable academic,
              government, and industrial scientists with no previous x-ray experience to
              carry out cutting-edge x-ray experiments.
***

