Title       : Chromatin-based Control of Gene Expression in Maize and Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9975930

Award Number: 9975930
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12700000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Jorgensen raj@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Henikoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the generation of mutations in genes that control gene
              expression at the level of chromatin. The overall goal of the project is to
              identify and functionally analyze most, if not all, of the several hundred
              genes in maize (corn) and Arabidopsis that contribute to chromatin-level
              control of gene expression. Maize is the most important agricultural crop in
              the US, as well as the premier model system for addressing fundamental
              questions in monocots, particularly cereals. Chromatin is the proteinaceous
              material that together with DNA comprises chromosomes. A key requirement for
              the expression of genes in chromosomes is that chromatin be remodeled (i.e.,
              "opened") in such a way that transcriptional activator proteins and RNA
              polymerases can have access to the DNA, permitting the assembly of a
              transcription complex which then transcribes the gene into messenger
              RNA.

The approach exploits conserved chromatin genes identified in the
              human, yeast, worm, and fly genome projects to: (1) identify similar genes in
              the complete Arabidopsis genome sequence and (2) isolate related genes from
              maize. Identification of genes in Arabidopsis greatly facilitates the isolation
              of genes from maize. Certain tests of chromatin gene function require dominant
              mutations, so dominant negative mutations will be made for each target
              chromatin gene. Most importantly, all mutations will be characterized to
              determine their effects on genetic transmission, plant growth and development,
              and a comprehensive battery of biochemical and epigenetic tests. These tests
              include histone acetylation, DNA methylation, the processes of epimutation and
              paramutation, reactivation of silenced transgenes and transposons, the
              efficiency of Agrobacterium T-DNA integration, and nucleolar dominance. Also,
              fusions of chromatin gene products to the GAL4 DNA binding domain will be
              tested for effects on a reporter transgene possessing a GAL4 DNA binding site
              to determine the ability of candidate genes to reverse or promote the formation
              of repressive chromatin. These lines will be valuable for isolation of
              additional mutations that suppress activity of chromatin genes. This "forward"
              genetic approach will be important to identify the many interesting regulatory
              components in chromatin that are not highly conserved or are plant specific.
              

This award will result in the generation and classification of a large set
              of useful mutations that will facilitate investigations of gene regulation in
              plants, leading to deeper understanding of the complex mechanisms by which
              plants control the expression of their genes. Equally important, a chromatin
              database and web site will be created that will facilitate communication among
              scientists and dissemination of information on chromatin level control in
              plants and other organisms.

Understanding how plants control gene expression
              is essential for understanding how plants grow and develop and how they respond
              and adapt to the environment. Quality and yield improvements in crops continue
              to depend on applying new genetic insights and tools like those to be gained
              from this program. The research here will have a direct impact on genetic
              improvement of maize, and will also be applicable to many other important crop
              plants. 

