Title       : Role of Familiarity in Mediating the Impact of Positive Affect on Persuasive
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9975204

Award Number: 9975204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Mackie mackie@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People who are in positive moods deal with information less critically and in
              less depth than do those who are not in a positive mood. For this reason, 
              happy people can sometimes be more easily persuaded by weak and specious
              arguments. Although the finding itself is well established, the explanation for
              it is not. Another well-established finding is that the recognition of an
              object, event, or situation as familiar triggers both a positive mood and
              non-analytic thinking. Feeling positive is a cue to familiarity. Putting these
              two sets of findings together, it is suggested that positive mood triggers
              non-analytic thinking because being happy usually signals familiarity, and when
              something is familiar, it can be dealt with superficially.

The primary
              objective of this research is to empirically establish that positive mood
              triggers non-analytic thinking because positive mood usually signals
              familiarity, which in turn triggers non-analytic thinking. In this view, people
              often mistake a mild positive mood induced by all kinds of small environmental
              events (such as receiving a compliment, being given a small unexpected gift,
              watching a funny movie) for the positive mood that accompanies the recognition
              of familiarity. These experiments are designed to show a) that this confusion
              can take place, b) the conditions under which it does and does not take place,
              and c) that this confusion is responsible for the typically found association
              between feeling good and non-analytic processing. Given that positive moods can
              be triggered quite easily either incidentally (as when people watch a
              television comedy before listening to a Presidential address) or quite
              deliberately (as when an advertising agency invokes a humorous context in which
              to present a product with few valuable attributes), this research has both
              theoretical and practical implications for understanding when and how people
              can be more vulnerable, or more resistant to, persuasion.

