Title       : Genomics of Wood Formation in Loblolly Pine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9975806

Award Number: 9975806
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7176000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Sederoff volvo@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pines are one of the world's most important crops and one of the most important
              genera of trees in the world's forests. Pines, as gymnosperms, represent one of
              the oldest and most successful groups of higher plants. Pines can be difficult
              to study, due to their long generation times and large DNA content; however,
              new technology and a genomic strategy promise great returns in knowledge and
              practical application from understanding the fundamental biology of trees.
              Forest trees are in the earliest stages of domestication and the major genetic
              changes usually associated with domestication have not yet been made.
              Therefore, a genomic approach to understanding the formation of wood and the
              identification of the genes that determine the major features of wood
              properties could lead to genetic modifications of great economic significance.
              Virtually every problem of scientific or commercial importance that depends
              upon the biology of pine trees would be advanced by knowledge of the identity
              and function of all of the expressed genes. Wood formation is also of general
              biological interest as a specialized system for both biochemical and genetic
              analysis of cell wall biosynthesis. 

This award will allow us to identify
              and characterize large numbers of genes that are important in wood formation
              (xylogenesis) and determine how many of these genes affect the properties of
              wood and its derived products, pulp and paper.  First, we propose to identify
              large numbers of expressed genes from differentiating xylem. Second, we will
              use DNA microarrays to identify genes implicated in the formation of the wood
              cell wall, through studies of their specific regulation, abundance, or
              interactions. Third, new methods will be developed to map these genes onto the
              pine genome using microarrays. The fourth objective is an intensive effort to
              obtain phenotypic information on the physical and chemical properties of wood
              from mapping populations. This phenotypic information will be used to map loci
              having quantitative effects on wood properties and to identify concordance
              between genes identified from expression data/map location and the wood
              property phenotypes. Similarly, association in populations of alleles and
              phenotypes will be examined for genes affecting wood properties and to identify
              alleles that may be useful for tree breeding.

This award will lead to the
              discovery of a large number of functional plant genes, many of which may have
              novel functions. The large sequence database of gymnosperm gene sequences will
              be a rich source of comparative sequence information for studies of evolution
              and functional genomics of all plant genomes.  There is currently very little
              information available on the sequences of genes from gymnosperms, one of the
              two major groups of higher plants.  A genomic approach to understanding the
              biology of pines represents the first major public genome initiative on an
              undomesticated forest species with a dominant role in the world's temperate
              ecosystems.  Such studies will lead to understanding of the molecular basis of
              response to climate change and adaptation in both the recent past and since the
              conquest of the land by higher plants.  

