Title       : Oxometal Complexes and Redox Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9975453

Award Number: 9975453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Hill chill@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work of Dr. Craig Hill, Department of Chemistry, Emory University is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Division of Chemistry. The project involves new inorganic complexes and
              systems that catalyze transformations using the most environment friendly and
              economically desirable oxidants (oxygen/air and hydrogen peroxide) and solvent
              (water). Specifically, the work consists of a three-component program: (a) the
              first deals with developing "inorganic picket fence porphyrin" equivalents to
              uncover new oxygen binding and catalytic oxygenation chemistry; (b) the second
              concerns new multi-iron containing polyoxometallates with long-chain organic
              groups that exhibit surfactant-like properties permitting greater
              solubilization of organic substrates in oxidative catalysis; whereas (c) the
              third deals with catalytic oxidations by oxygen in water in which
              thermodynamically stable catalysts self-buffer under turnover
              conditions.

Several new polyoxometallate systems will be fabricated which,
              if proven robust, represent an important class of low-cost oxidation catalysts
              for fine chemicals production. The project emphasizes utilization of
              environmentally benign oxidants such as air and oxygenated water to oxidize
              organic pollutants. The research will lead to great benefits to society as more
              environment friendly and selective catalytic processes are developed. The
              research activity will provide excellent training and educational experiences
              to graduate students and post-doctoral associates.
