Title       : Collaborative Research on the History of Cartography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9975699

Award Number: 9975699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Monmonier mon2ier@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will produce a series of exploratory papers on the history of
              twentieth-century cartography that will form the foundation of Volume Six of
              The History of Cartography, a multi-volume reference work of the history of
              mapping in its technological, cultural, and social contexts.  Since very little
              secondary literature has been written on the twentieth century, the principal
              investigators will direct the research of eleven scholars chosen from a "Call
              for Research Proposals" for a conference in Summer 2000, at which the types of
              available sources and the kinds of issues germane to Volume Six will be
              evaluated. These authors will attend a formal professional meeting at which
              finished papers based on their findings will be presented in summer 2002. The
              published proceedings resulting from this meeting-to appear in 2003 in a
              special double issue of a leading journal-will form the basis of much larger
              and more fully developed chapters in Volume Six.

The research will focus on
              key technological developments in cartography during the twentieth century.
              These themes provide a touchstone for many aspects of information science: in
              information gathering (surveying, global positioning systems, aerial
              photography, remote sensing), in computer infrastructure and graphic design,
              and in the access to geospatial information (in map and geographic information
              science libraries). Alongside these technological changes are many social
              issues that have shaped cartographic technology and have been shaped by it.
              Maps are used more widely now than in any other time in history. They are
              indispensable in our attempts to understand the world views of individuals and
              societies in both academic and practical senses. They are an important chapter
              in the history of human cognition and communication, and they are essential in
              organizing geographical knowledge and in visualizing patterns in geographical
              data.  Maps are one of science's basic sources for spatial insight.

