Title       : Acquisition of a Single Crystal Charge Coupled Device Area Detector X-ray
               Diffraction System for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9975623

Award Number: 9975623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Conrad zur Loye zurloye@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe H. Bunz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Reger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975623
zur Loye

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition
              of a single crystal Charge Coupled Device (CCD) area detector diffraction
              system, complete with computer, software and the low temperature attachment. 
              The X-ray system will support several research programs, in the Department of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry of the University of South Carolina.

These
              include:  1) the crystal growth, structural and magnetic investigation of
              modulated, 4-D, composite oxides with hexagonal perovskite related structures;
              2) the synthesis and characterization of sensitive peralkynylated
              organometallic complexes and larger segments of all-carbon networks; 3) the
              synthesis and characterization of semiconductor clusters, quantum dots, and
              quantum dot composite materials whose photophysical properties are being
              investigated for luminescence and possible lasing phenomena; 4) the structural
              characterization of self-assembling polymers that form highly coherent
              zeolite-like arrays for applications in absorption, separations, and catalysis;
              5) the synthesis and structural characterization of coordination compounds
              containing tris(pyrazolyl)methane ligands of main group metals in order to
              develop new uniform bonding theories for this family of metals; the structural
              characterization of organic/inorganic composite structures for applications in
              adsorption and separation; and 7) the synthesis and characterization of high
              nuclearity mixed metal cluster complexes for use in the study and development
              of novel reaction catalysts.

The equipment will be used as an integrated
              research and graduate-level teaching instrument.  Students will use it to
              collect data sets on crystals, solve structures, and for thesis
              research.
%%%
The instrumentation will significantly enhance current research
              and educational capabilities of faculty and students.
***

