Title       : Acquisition of Tunable Femtosecond Near-IR Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy
               System for Nondestructive Materials Imaging & Three- Dimensional
               Microfabrication & Educ of Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975773

Award Number: 9975773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Belfield kbelfiel@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Van Stryland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Belfield
The unique properties associated with simultaneous absorption of
              two-photons,
the investigation of two-photon fluorescence imaging as a
              nondestructive technique for
the imaging of a variety of materials and
              interfaces, including polymeric materials,
coatings, and composites will be
              investigated.  The characteristic three-dimensional spatial resolution of the
              two-photon absorption process will be harnessed for three-dimensional
              photoinitiated polymerization and lithography.  The scanning microscopy system
              will be modified to accommodate use of the near-IR laser.

The research to be
              done with this system is expected to have broad impact on materials fields,
              from facilitating fundamental studies of multiphase systems and polymer
              processing techniques to direct application in addressing current and emerging
              issues related to nondestructive evaluation, failure analysis, failure
              prediction, and microfabrication. In addition to advancing the fields of
              materials analysis and processing, these efforts will make great strides in
              cross-disciplinary education and training of future scientists and engineers.
              These professionals will possess a unique set of skills in polymer and
              materials science, materials processing, and optical systems.  The two-photon
              techniques will be incorporated into existing courses in polymer chemistry,
              polymer science and engineering, chemistry of materials, and nonlinear
              optics.

&&&
This system will significantly enhance the institutional
              infrastructure and commitment to the integration of research and education in a
              critical area of technology.
 

