Title       : Searching on Remotely Sensed Imagery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9975400

Award Number: 9975400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hodgson hodgsonm@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geographers are interested in how spatial displays like maps and aerial
              photographs can be efficiently processed to obtain critical information. This
              research will determine the critical components of visual search and will
              construct a simulation model for the process.   In addition, cognitive
              experiments related to the processes humans use to search for targets on
              complex remotely sensed imagery will be undertaken.  The method uses a multiple
              target design and considers contextual objects in the display as well as the
              usual target and distractor objects.  An analysis of variance will be used to
              determine the imagery and human subject variables that significantly affects
              the variation of search times.  It is expected that some objects in the
              display, that are known to be associated with the target objects, play a
              significant role in visual searches of complex imagery.    

The purpose of
              the research is to investigate the processes used by humans to visually search
              complex remotely sensed imagery.  A complete understanding of these processes
              is important to advancing cognitive science because efficient processes can be
              documented and taught to students.  This knowledge is also important for the
              creation of intelligent computer programs that can automatically search for
              targets on remotely sensed imagery.  

