Title       : Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975578

Award Number: 9975578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Shield   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil V. Virkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravi Chandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Materials Science and Engineering at the University of Utah
              operates a multi-user electron microscopy facility.  This facility is the
              primary user facility for the main University of Utah campus.  Approximately
              fifteen faculty from ten departments and four colleges rely on the facility for
              their research.  All classes of materials are examined, including polymers,
              ceramics, metals, and semiconductors.

In addition to serving research needs,
              the facility also serves educational needs.  Numerous formal courses utilize
              the SEM in their laboratory projects.  Additionally, graduate student training
              is a major objective of the laboratory.

This award will provide partial
              support for the acquisition of a new, state-of-the-art variable pressure
              scanning electron microscope (SEM) to meet the current and future research
              needs of faculty at the University of Utah.  this equipment will provide
              improved and expanded capabilities over what is now available.  For example,
              the proposed equipment has light element x-ray detection capabilities, and will
              obtain x-ray maps.  The variable pressure (or low vacuum) feature is especially
              useful in this laboratory, as non-conducting samples such as polymers and
              ceramics can be examined without application of a conducting coating.  This
              ensures that no features of the material will be masked.  Furthermore,
              compositional analysis will be more reliable without a coating, as the coating
              can crate peak overlap and/or absorb low energy x-rays.

The educational
              benefits of this equipment include student use of state-of-the-art
              instrumentation.  Numerous formal courses will utilize the SE in their
              laboratory projects.  G
Graduates will enter the work force better prepared to
              analyze materials and to solve problems.  An additional aspect of this project
              is the development of a web-accessible laboratory, providing remote students
              with access to high priced technological equipment.  This work will be
              conducted in collaboration with an NSF-funded project at the Iowa State
              University.
***
This equipment provides a unique opportunity for students and
              faculty to enhance collaborative research and educational activities in a
              significant manner.

