Title       : Aquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9975887

Award Number: 9975887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Pekarek tpekarek@gw.unf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Florida
	      4567 St Johns Bluff Rd S
	      Jacksonville, FL  322242646    904/646-2666

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975887
Pekarek

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition
              of  a SQUID (Superconducting QUantum Interference Device) magnetometer that
              will be located at the University of North Florida in Jacksonville, Florida
              where no similar system currently exists.  The SQUID magnetometer uses an
              extremely sensitive technique for magnetic measurements of samples with low
              total magnetization over a temperature range from 1.9-400 K in fields up to 7
              Tesla.  The proposed instrument is automated and can acquire a large amount of
              data at a relatively low cost.  The combination of extreme sensitivity,
              automation, and low cost result in a very powerful research tool capable of
              providing high-quality data for several research groups.

Research groups at
              the University of North Florida, University of Northern Iowa, and Fordham
              University will all utilize the SQUID magnetometer.  In each case, the
              instrument will provide significant new capabilities to the research areas
              including III-VI and II-VI Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors, magnetic clusters
              in III-V semi-conductors, and magnetic rare earth and rare earth-transition
              metal alloys.  In many cases, the data gathered from the SQUID magnetometer
              will allow the current research projects to address new significant issues
              directly related to the current studies.  The final impacts of the proposed
              instrument will not only allow new issues to be addressed but it will also lead
              to a more comprehensive analysis of the systems under study.

The data
              obtained by this instrument complements the state-of-the-art facilities at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), which is located in
              Tallahassee, Florida (only a few hours drive from the University of North
              Florida).  The SQUID magnetometer is significantly more cost effective than the
              NHMFL for fields below 7 Tesla and would free up magnet time at the NHMFL that
              would otherwise be requested for lower field measurements.

This instrument
              will be incorporated into the Advanced Physics Laboratory as a prominent focus
              of this senior-level undergraduate course for physics majors.  This will allow
              undergraduate physics majors the opportunity to investigate fundamental physics
              phenomena in classic systems as well as in current research areas using a very
              powerful research tool.
%%%
The acquisition of this instrument will
              significantly enhance the research capabilities of investigators at this
              institution, as well as at several others, and enrich the educational
              experience of students.
***

