Title       : Algorithms for enhanced sampling and global optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9975494

Award Number: 9975494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371900             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Straub straub@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              John Straub of Boston University is supported by a grant from the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research in algorithms for
              enhanced sampling and global optimization.  Such algorithms have extensive
              applications in simulations involving biomolecules, low temperature clusters,
              and supercooled liquids.  The goal of this research is to develop search
              algorithms that can sample complex multidimensional potential energy surfaces
              efficiently.  Ideally such a technique would 1) isolate the thermodynamically
              important low lying energy basins, and 2) effectively sample those basins and
              move between them in a way that produces exact thermodynamic averages.  Two new
              algorithms are proposed.  The first involves a novel Monte Carlo method that
              allows long range moves between neighborhoods of low energy minima in a way
              that satisfies detailed balance.   The second algorithm involves the continued
              development of quantum mechanical annealing methods for global optimization. 
              This involves a reformulation of the Feynman path integral representation that
              uses an effective potential to allow enhanced sampling beyond that of the
              standard quantum delocalization.  A number of applications are proposed
              including: 1) the simulation of solvated peptides; 2) the computation of
              thermodynamic averages for low temperature molecular clusters; and 3) the
              evaluation of the mechanism for ligand rebinding in myoglobin.

The
              simulation of condensed matter systems has been moved forward by dramatic
              increases in the availability and speed of computers and the development of
              effective algorithms for the simulation of dynamical and thermodynamic
              phenomena.  Of particular fundamental and practical interest are the properties
              of biomolecular, supercooled and glass forming systems.  For such systems, the
              task of isolating conformations of lowest free energy or computing
              thermodynamic averages is frustrated by the rugged energy landscape.  The new
              techniques being developed by Straub should find widespread applications in the
              simulation of biological systems.
