Title       : Development of an Optical Microscope to Investigate the Nonlinear Optical
               Properties of Single Quantum Dots and to Train Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975739

Award Number: 9975739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Salamo salamo@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Min Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Salamo
This award provides partial support for the development of an instrument
              to measure linear and nonlinear optical properties of small confined structures
              with a spatial resolution better than one nanometer.

The linear and
              nonlinear optical behavior of a single quantum dot is based on measuring the
              real and imaginary parts of the susceptibility using an interferometric
              apertureless scanning microscope, SIAM. The basic concept is significantly
              different from the more conventional near-field scanning optical microscope
              NSOM. Rather than transmitting light through a small fiber aperture, SIAM makes
              use of light scattered from the tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM) or a
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and the surface to be probed.

This
              activity brings together three experimentalists and one theorist with
              complementary skills in quantum and nonlinear optics and in molecular beam
              epitaxy and scanning tunneling microscopy.  These scientists presently work
              with six graduate students, three undergraduates, and three post doctorals on
              projects that would be measurably enhanced by the instrument proposed here.  
              This activity involves four faculty and twelve individuals in research and
              research training.

&&&
The development of this instrument is expected to
              significantly impact the research and educational experience of students and
              advance capability to explore the behavior of nanostructures.

