Title       : Using Constraints to Enable Flexible Access and Interaction on the Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9975990

Award Number: 9975990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Borning borning@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Constructing and maintaining web sites is more difficult than one would like,
              and the tools for browsing are often not flexible enough. The PI will
              investigate the use of constraints to enable authors to capture the essential
              properties of the layout, in a way that allows flexible display for a variety
              of browser types and output media.  The viewer will be able to impose
              constraints as well, for example on desired browser width or minimum font size.
               Some of these constraints may be requirements, and others preferences.  The
              appearance of the final document will in effect be the result of a negotiation
              between author and viewer that is carried out by solving the combined sets of
              constraints from each.  A second area of investigation will be the use of
              constraints to describe dynamic information, for example animations for process
              visualization; again, the final animation will be the result of solving the
              combined constraints from author and viewer. This research will be driven by a
              set of real-world examples arising from an ongoing interdisciplinary research
              project on land use, transportation, and environmental modeling.  In addition
              to being of intrinsic interest, this application is intended to be an
              archetypal example of using the internet to further civic participation by
              diverse stakeholders using complex information sources.  This project will
              yield a qualitative leap in the power and flexibility of the world wide web for
              complex and varied authoring and viewing tasks.  Web authors should be able to
              focus on the semantic content of their documents rather than on visual
              formatting; viewers will be able to choose from a wider range of devices and
              viewing preferences, while still seeing well-formatted information
