Title       : Regulation of the Capacity for Isoprene Synthesis in Kudzu
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9975482

Award Number: 9975482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Sharkey tsharkey@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sharkey Award Abstract

The overall goal of this research is to understand how
              the capacity for isoprene emission is regulated in Kudzu, an invasive weed
              which emits huge amounts of isoprene.  Isoprene has a great impact on the
              environment because it contributes to the "near-ground" ozone formation and
              photochemical smog.  Isoprene synthesis is a major biochemical pathway both in
              terms of the proportion of photosynthate converted to isoprene and in terms of
              the proportion of hydrocarbon entering the atmosphere.  Studying isoprene
              emission is timely and important because isoprene biosynthesis is second only
              to photosynthetic carbon fixation in terms of carbon flux.  Recent data
              indicate that in addition to short-term changes in rate, there is a longer-term
              (6-48 hours) change in the capacity for isoprene emission.  In this research
              the molecular and biochemical basis of this longer-term regulation of the
              capacity for isoprene synthesis will be studied.  Isoprene is made by the
              recently described deoxyxylulose phosphate (DXP) pathway.  Two of the enzymes
              of this pathway have now been cloned in Arabidopsis even though Arabidopsis is
              not an isoprene emitting plant.  These gene sequences will be used to make
              probes to measure message level for those enzymes in inductive and noninductive
              conditions.  These proteins will also be expressed in E. coli so that
              antibodies can be made for use with western blots.  Attempts will be made to
              clone isoprene synthase so that the regulation of this enzyme can also be
              studied.  This information will be used to determine what regulation of the DXP
              pathway occurs when isoprene emission capacity changes and which changes likely
              regulate the capacity for isoprene emission.  

