Title       : The Temporal Microstructure of Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9975220

Award Number: 9975220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249113             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Anderson ja+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ACT-R is a theory that tries to model the microstructure of human cognition in
              time increments of less than a second.  According to the ACT-R theory, during
              each step of cognition some information is retrieved from the environment or
              memory in response to a goal and this information is used to transform the
              goal.   The research will apply the theory to three domains.  Part of the
              methodology in this research will be to monitor and interpret eye movements to
              get information about the temporal dynamics of problem solving.   The first
              domain of study will be equation solving, a task of immediate educational
              significance.  The research addresses the question of how fluency in retrieval
              of arithmetic facts and basic algebraic transformations determines fluency in
              an advanced mathematical skill.  It will measure the duration of eye fixations
              in reading equations and study how these reflect retrieval processes.  These
              studies will lay the foundation for using eye movements to inform
              computer-based instruction.  The second domain, planning in the Tower of Hanoi
              laboratory task, is concerned with how planning is guided in complex problem
              solving.  The research tests basic assumptions in the theory about how goals
              are remembered to organize moment-by-moment problem solving.  The timing of
              individual steps in the solution will be measured and we will look at those
              that are associated with retrieval of goals.  The third domain, research on the
              psychological refractory period, is concerned with how perception, cognition,
              and action are intertwined to determine the flow of behavior.  The experiments
              look at when and how doing one task interferes with doing a second task.  The
              ACT-R theory claims that central cognition can only do one thing at a time but
              that central cognition can run in parallel with perceptual and motor processes.
               Understanding the timing dependencies in such tasks is important for
              identifying the critical factors in use of artifacts like computer
              applications.    The research and theory will be extended to studies of how
              people coordinate eye movements and mouse movements while using a computer. 
