Title       : Tools for Potato Structural and Functional Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a9975866

Award Number: 9975866
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Baker bbaker@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Potato is a crop of worldwide importance and one of the most important
              dicotyledonous sources of food for humans.  In light of threats to worldwide
              potato production by late blight, research on the plant's response to infection
              by microbial pathogens will be critical to environmentally sound agricultural
              production.  A century of breeding efforts in potato have resulted in the
              introduction of resistance traits from abundant wild Solanum germplasm
              collections to pathogen susceptible cultivated species.  However, breeding of
              cultivated potato for a single disease resistance trait can take years and
              pathogens rapidly evolve to overcome single resistance traits. Potato breeders
              are in need of additional information and genetic resources to compete with the
              challenges of ever changing pathogen populations. Genetic studies have
              identified untapped pathogen resistance traits in wild Solanum species. 
              Accumulating evidence suggests that regions of wild potato genomes may contain
              large clustered arrays of resistance loci to several different pathogens. 
              

Recent developments in biotechnology have greatly facilitated genetic
              research in potato, including recent advances in genomic sequencing which allow
              for the rapid collection and analysis of vast amounts of DNA sequence data. The
              genomes of two wild potato species containing many resistance traits are
              available as deep bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) libraries. The genomic
              sequences of these important regions will be determined, allowing interspecific
              comparisons as well as the development of allele-specific molecular markers
              that can be used by researchers for introgression of desirable traits using
              marker-aided selection.  Another widely used approach is the generation of
              Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs).  These short, randomly selected sequences are a
              very cost effective way of identifying a large number of genes expressed in a
              tissue. 

This award supports: (1) Identification, isolation and sequencing
              of regions of wild potato genomes bearing disease resistance (R) genes and
              quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for P. infestans resistance.  The genome
              sequences of these important regions will be determined, annotated, compared to
              each other and made publicly available.  These sequences will facilitate the
              cloning of the significant resistance genes and other traits to combat late
              blight disease, provide tools to readily isolate and characterize functionally
              similar regions from other wild Solanum genomes to combat late blight, and
              provide substrates for evolutionary studies; (2) Generation of 55,000 ESTs from
              a variety of potato tissues and from disease-challenged tissues, to construct
              an annotated, publicly available Potato Gene Index and establishment of a
              potato Expressed Sequence Tag (EST) database including sequences expressed
              during response to late blight pathogen infection; (3) Specific ESTs will be
              selected and arrayed to fabricate potato cDNA microarrays, and used for
              genome-wide analyses during responses to pathogen infection and other plant
              processes; (4) Refinement of the syntenic relationship between potato and
              tomato and to base the linkage between these two genomes on orthologous
              sequences, which are also being anchored in the Arabidopsis genome.  Tools and
              information will be made available to the scientific community for studies on
              late blight disease and will provide materials and information pertinent to the
              investigation of other pathogen diseases and critical plant processes. 


