Title       : (EGB) Influence of Natural Colloids on Speciation and Chemical Mobility of Trace
               Metals Transported from Contrasting Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9975444

Award Number: 9975444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467882             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Armstrong armstrong@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Hurley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin M. Shafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9975444
Armstrong

Watersheds play a major role in regulating the trace metal
              status of lakes and streams.  Metal export has been related to watershed
              characteristics, hydrology, and biogeochemical processes through linkages to
              trace metal carriers, especially suspended particulate matter and natural
              organic matter.  However, understanding metal transport from watersheds
              requires information on the chemical forms (speciation) of the metals in
              addition to their yields and concentrations.  Of special concern is the nature
              of aqueous and colloidal metal forms and whether metal bound to aqueous and
              colloidal ligands (carriers) are labile (bioavailable) or stable.  Our premise
              is that the liability of metals associated with aqueous and colloidal ligands
              in streams can be characterized and linked to watershed characteristics.

Our
              goal is to quantify and model key chemical forms of trace metals exported from
              contrasting watersheds and their linkages to watershed processes and
              characteristics.  Specific objective are to (1) determine the partitioning of
              metals in aqueous and colloidal phases between labile and stable forms and the
              dynamic behavior of labile forms, (2) quantify prominent characteristics of
              ligands controlling metal binding and the linkages of these properties to
              watershed characteristics, (3) rank and quantify the influence of key state
              variables on trace metal association with aqueous and colloidal phases, and (4)
              incorporate natural aqueous and colloidal ligands into a framework for medeling
              the speciation and dynamics of labile metals and the coupling to watershed
              characteristics and processes.

Our approach characterizes the interaction of
              a suite of trace metals with representative natural aqueous and colloidal
              ligands from contrasting watersheds.  Comparisons among metals will be used to
              probe ligand properties.  Watersheds will be selected to provide specific
              combinations of key aqueous and colloidal vector (dissolved organic carbon; Fe
              and Al oxides).  A geographic information systems approach will be used to link
              metal speciation to watershed characteristics and processes.

The work is
              being supported by the Division of Earth Sciences (Hydrology) in the
              Directorate for Geosciences, the Division of Chemistry and the Office of
              Multidisplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences, and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems in the Directorate
              for Engineeing.
 
 

 
