Title       : Construction of a Nanotube Tip Mounting Workbench for Generation of Nanoscale
               Probes for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9975833

Award Number: 9975833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87893              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Rinzler rinzler@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur F. Hebard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975833
Rinzler

This award will partially support the construction of a
              carbon nanotube tip-mounting workbench to be used for the routine attachment of
              carbon nanotubes to commercially available atomic force microscopy cantilevers
              and other electrodes.  The workbench will consist of a dark-field-capable,
              inverted optical microscope on a vibration isolation table.  The microscope
              platform will be retooled to accept three high precision XYZ translation stages
              equipped with electrostrictive drives for fine motion control.  A laser light
              source will permit enhanced viewing of the nanotubes as well as the capability
              to heat these for certain proposed applications.  A CCD camera and image
              capture system will permit remote observation of the microscope field of view
              both for training purposes and for documentation.  A specially constructed,
              windowed, evacuable chamber, designed to fit on the platform to permit
              microscopic observation will allow the mounted nanotubes to be further
              processed in an inert atmosphere.

As part of their training in physics, a
              graduate student and two undergraduate students (provided for in University
              matching support for two years) will be involved in all phases of the design
              and assembly of the Workbench and its associated hardware.  These students will
              learn the present techniques for mounting nanotube tips and be responsible,
              under the direction of Professors Rinzler and Hebard, for the further tip
              developments outlined above.  Once trained these students will also share the
              responsibility for training other users.  The advantages afforded by the
              nanotube tips generated with the Workbench are anticipated to be sufficiently
              useful in probe microscopy and other applications that we expect it to be used
              by a host of other graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs, to produce
              tips, for use in their own research over years to come.
%%%
This is an
              unusual opportunity for students to gain invaluable experience in the design
              and use of a unique system.
***

