Title       : Continuous and Discrete Nonlocal Evolution Equations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9975451

Award Number: 9975451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Chmaj chmaj@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9975451
Chmaj

This project concerns the dynamics of both spatially discrete
              and 
continuous but non-local evolutionary systems.  In particular, we are
              
concerned with the existence, stability, and variety of spatial patterns in
              
interacting and reacting systems which exhibit threshold behavior.  Not
              
just stationary patterns but also those which evolve in a predictable way. 
              
The systems of equations arise in the field of computational neural
              
networks designed to perform specialized tasks such as automatic image
              
recognition.  They also arise in population dynamics, in models of phase
              
transitions, in models of the primary visual cortex of the brain, and in
              
computer simulation of a wide variety of continuum processes where
              
discretization is the standard approach.  Results from the project will have
              
a direct impact on the understanding of computational experiments and on
              
the assumptions on which the mathematical models of many physical 
phenomena
              rest.

From one perspective, the project explores some of the basic
              challenges of 
present day material science: The modeling of processes which
              cause and 
accompany change of phases or crystalline variants of a substance.
              New 
mathematical models are being continually proposed, with the hope of
              
shedding insight into the basic physics of these processes. Successful
              
modeling can offer help in the development of new high performance
              
materials, which is vital to economic and other national interests. From
              
another perspective, the theoretical study of neural networks will lead to
              
the development of automatic pattern recognition, useful in such widely
              
diverse areas as text analysis, target identification, and image
              
enhancement.

