Title       : Chemical Vapor Deposition of Diffusion Barriers for Microelectronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9975504

Award Number: 9975504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy G. Gordon gordon@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9975504
Gordon

In microelectronic devices, barrier layers must be placed
              between the semiconductor silicon and the metal wiring connecting different
              parts of its surface.  The barrier keeps the metal from diffusing into the
              silicon and ruining its transistor characteristics.  Aluminum and tungsten are
              the metals commonly used for these circuits.  In the near future, copper will
              also be used because of its lower electrical resistance and better durability
              against electro-migration.  In the absence of a barrier layer, aluminum would
              alloy with the silicon, producing etch pits that can short out the electrical
              circuits; tungsten would peel off of the silicon dioxide insulating layers; or
              copper would diffuse into the silicon and provide deleterious recombination
              centers for the electrons and holes.  The barrier layers must cover the
              sidewalls and bottom of the etched features with a film thickness about the
              same as on the outer surface.  In other words, the barrier layer should have
              step coverage close to one.

Titanium nitride is the material that is usually
              used as the barrier layer.  The titanium nitride is ordinarily formed by the
              process of reactive sputtering of a titanium target in a low pressure of
              nitrogen gas.  The sputtered material has been satisfactory for the production
              of computer chips with feature sizes down to about one-quarter of a micron.  As
              the industry tries to make the circuits operate faster and store more
              information, the feature sizes are being reduced.  For feature sizes less than
              about one-quarter of a micron, sputtering does not cover adequately the sides
              and bottoms of the narrow holes and trenches that are etched a micron deep into
              the substrates.  Thus a critical need is perceived for barrier layers deposited
              by a process that has better step coverage than sputtering can provide. 
              Another problem for the use of titanium nitride in future generations of
              computer chips is that it may not be an effective diffusion barrier for
              thicknesses below about 30 nm.  For features below 0.25 micron, thinner
              diffusion barriers will be needed, so that the barrier material does not take
              up too much of the hole.  Titanium nitride films have a microcrystalline
              structure that allows diffusion of copper through thin titanium nitride
              barriers along boundaries between the microcrystalline grains.

Amorphous
              diffusion barriers are expected to perform better than microcrystalline ones,
              because amorphous materials lack intergranular pathways for diffusion. 
              Amorphous tantalum nitride or niobium nitride form the most conductive known
              thin barriers to diffusion of copper.  Unfortunately, the sputtering processes
              commonly used to make amorphous tantalum nitride or niobium nitride do not
              provide adequate step coverage.

Under a previous NSF grant, the PI
              discovered a process for CVD of amorphous niobium nitride with excellent step
              coverage at temperatures below 400 oC.  In order to gain commercial acceptance
              for this new CVD process, a pure precursor with completely reproducible
              properties is needed, not the currently available mixture with unpredictable
              proportions.  Analytical methods need to be established to verify the
              composition and purity of the precursor.  The chemical properties of the
              precursor must be studied, including its reactivity to materials of
              construction, air and water, and its stability in storage.  Various physical
              properties, such as vapor pressure, density and viscosity, must also be
              measured.  The composition and quantities of the CVD reaction byproducts must
              be determined, so that they can be neutralized and disposed of properly. 
              Finally, the kinetics and reaction mechanism must be understood so that proper
              chemical engineering of the reactor can be accomplished and rational control of
              the reaction conditions can be practiced.  The proposed research will establish
              this fundamental knowledge base needed for commercialization of CVD niobium
              nitride barriers in the microelectronics industry.
***





