Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Valuing Biodiversity - Insights from the Pharmaceutical
               Drug Discovery Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9975929

Award Number: 9975929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Norgaard norgaard@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will provide one year of support for one doctoral student for
              fieldwork and research on the relation between biotechnological research and
              the emergent socio-economic perceptions of the value of biological diversity.
              Since the conservation of biological diversity has become one of the most
              pressing environmental issues, drug design and its potential contribution to
              novel conservation incentives draws attention to the issue of valuing nature
              for and regardless of human uses. Because pharmaceutical drug design is located
              at the intersection between utilitarian business imperatives, public policy,
              new technologies and the frontier of scientific knowledge, the study of the
              processes for negotiating the attendant uncertainties about the value of
              biological diversity used in this applied science arena can yield important
              insights both for policies for the conservation of biodiversity and the value
              of nature more generally. The research aims to elucidate the decision-making
              processes that lead to the discovery of a drug "lead" (i.e. a viable candidate
              for full development into a drug), from extracts and other compounds found in
              the diversity of biological organisms. Since pharmaceutical research is
              centrally concerned with making biodiversity useable and continuously develops
              technologies to this end, and since this very endeavor is located at the
              frontiers of biological knowledge, it presents a rich study site for
              understanding how existing perceptions of nature are reshaped in the process of
              giving meaning and value to a "piece" of biodiversity, be it part of a plant, a
              synthetically imitated compound or a gene. Research methods from a range of
              science studies disciplines will be employed, with tools including ethnographic
              observation, interviewing and participant observation, to understand how actors
              within and affiliated with the drug design process value biodiversity in this
              area of co-emergent knowledge and values. This research differs from other
              social constructivist and ethnographic studies of science and technology in
              that it investigates the case of pharmaceutical discovery simultaneously as the
              locus of changing perceptions of the value of nature, an arena of policy
              intervention for environmental conservation and as the driving force behind new
              technologies that enable future changes in this perception. Preliminary work on
              strategies employed by the pharmaceutical industry to screen for potential drug
              candidates has shown there to exist competing narratives, a biological and an
              economic one. These put different emphases on the merit of biological organisms
              per se or as part of nature at large versus a conception of biodiversity as the
              sum of discrete identifiable, information-laden bits than can be made useful
              through technology, respectively. Since these different notions at play in
              different stages of the drug design process are reflective of public,
              scientific and policy stances towards the protection of biodiversity, drug
              design serves as a study ground for how competing economic and biological
              narratives shape our relation to nature. At the center of the fieldwork is the
              study of the different design stages any one compound undergoes in the process
              of becoming a "lead", and along which its value is established in complex
              interactions between lab technicians, scientists and managers. The purpose of
              this work is to gain a better understanding of different forces at play in the
              valuation of biodiversity in a utilitarian context, in order to better inform
              biodiversity conservation policy. This is made possible by the industry's
              characteristic as a novel form of scientific activity, that has embedded in it
              not only science and business, but also politics, e.g. in the form of property
              rights or the industry's role in implementing biodiversity conservation.


