Title       : Root Plasticity and the Capture of Variable Rainfall by Desert Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9975163

Award Number: 9975163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Park S. Nobel psnobel@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
     In this project, the location and behavior of roots of desert plants will
              be examined with respect to variation in the availability of soil water, the
              limiting factor in such arid regions.  Because rainfall occurs during only
              brief periods in the desert, existing roots must be able to take up water
              quickly or the plants must be able to produce new highly absorptive roots in
              response to such rainfall.  Also, the soil does not dry out uniformly during
              drought, as wetter regions can occur deeper in the soil, under rocks, or in
              rock crevices.  Thus, the ability to take up water can vary along the length of
              a root.  Roots of plants growing in the Sonoran Desert of the southwestern
              United States will be examined with respect to where along their length water
              uptake occurs, whether special root properties develop in wetter parts of the
              soil, and whether roots branch more in wetter regions.  Such examination will
              involve root excavations after various watering treatments in the field, plus
              laboratory investigation into the structural characteristics of roots that
              receive varied amounts of water.
     The water uptake characteristics of
              plant species with different root architectures will be compared.  In
              particular, the investigators will examine roots of an agave with thick
              water-storing leaves and unbranched roots (Agave deserti), a grass with thin
              leaves and unbranched roots (Pleuraphis rigida), a cactus with thick stems and
              highly branched roots (Opuntia basilaris), and a small shrub with thin leaves
              and highly branched roots (Encelia farinosa).  The species with thick leaves or
              stems can store much water and so may have different root responses in the
              early phases of drought than do those with thin leaves.  Also, species with
              roots that can readily branch and thus proliferate in wetter regions of the
              soil will be compared with those with relatively unbranched roots.  Water
              uptake ability per amount of root will be evaluated with respect to the
              variations in water due to depth in the soil and to seasonal differences such
              as time after rainfall and time during drought.  This will help explain the
              present distribution of plants in deserts and whether changes in occurrence are
              expected in the future as climate changes.  Changes in root properties of
              desert plants due to variations in soil moisture can also be used to predict
              plant responses in moister habitats where more extreme fluctuations in rainfall
              may occur in the future.


