Title       : Collaborative Research on the Geography of English Dialect Features by
               Self-Organizing Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a9975657

Award Number: 9975657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36095              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Kretzschmar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project between a geographer and a linguist will provide a
              thorough spatio-linguistic analysis of the variations of word usage and
              pronunciation in the Middle and South Atlantic States. It is intended as a
              contribution to linguistic geography, empirical dialectology, and computational
              geography. Conventional methods of quantitative spatial analysis have been
              found to be ill-suited to analyze the Linguistic Atlas of Middle and South
              Atlantic States (LAMSAS) databases accumulated over several decades of
              extensive field work. Thus, the project will employ a neural network model,
              called Self-Organizing Maps (SOM), which has never been used to analyze
              linguistic data, and the study will be a test of the robustness of SOM on
              geographic problems. The following specific linguistic and dialectologic
              questions will be addressed:
1.	How are linguistic features (whether words,
              grammatical constructions, pronunciations, or combinations of the latter)
              distributed over geographic areas, if not in relatively uniform patterns of
              complementary distribution?
2.	Are the configuration and density of the road
              network critical elements of the creation and shaping of dialectal
              regions?
3.	Since individual linguistic features can be shown to have specific
              distributions in geographic space, are there some relatively small group of
              linguistic features that can be perceived as most "salient" in the
              identification of regional differences?  
4.	What is the congruence between
              isoglosses posited by traditional, subjective methods for simple linguistic
              features (lexical, pronunciation, or grammatical) and the "fuzzy"
              multidimensional clusters derived from SOMs?
5.	What is the interaction of
              personal/social variables such as sex, age, ethnicity, occupation, and
              education, with geographic variables such as location and community type
              (urban/rural)?

The project is an empirical study of language variation
              across geographic areas and socio-demographic groups conducted on the largest
              digital database of language features in North America. Traditional
              dialectologists have assumed that there were such things as regional dialects
              and that they only needed to find diagnostic linguistic features to demonstrate
              the presence and boundaries of the dialect areas.  The primary tool of
              traditional dialectologists was the isogloss, which was supposed to represent
              the geographical limit of occurrence of some linguistic feature; bundles of
              isoglosses that ran in about the same place were taken to be dialect
              boundaries. Recently, quantitative approaches have indicated that linguistic
              variations are considerably more complex. This project will rely on novel
              computational techniques of data compression to further our understanding of
              the mathematical underpinnings of language in the distribution of features
              across territory and social dimensions. By not starting with the assumption of
              the systematicity of language and dialect that generativists and traditional
              dialectologists and sociolinguists share (i.e. that all speakers of a language
              or dialect share essentially the same rules and inventories of linguistic
              features), this research has the potential to build a multidimensional cultural
              model in which language is not removed from society as an independent system
              but instead is well-integrated with other regional and social
              characteristics.

