Title       : RUI: Personality and Cognitive Factors in Autobiographical and
               Laboratory-Generated Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9975181

Award Number: 9975181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33562              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Platt rdplatt@osprey.smcm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's Col of Maryland
	      18952 E. Fisher Road
	      St. Marys City, MD  206863001    301/863-7100

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project will examine college students' memories for meeting their
              college roommates and investigate whether accuracy and distortion of these
              memories are related to accuracy and distortion in a variety of laboratory
              memory tasks. Within 24 hours of arriving on campus, the participants will
              complete a questionnaire that asks them to describe the details of meeting
              their roommate.  Six months later their memory for the event will be tested
              again and accuracy will be determined by comparing the results to the original
              account.  Over the course of the academic year, the participants will return
              for additional testing sessions where they will complete different laboratory
              experiments including tasks that look at eyewitness memory, the impact of
              imagining on memory for both autobiographical and laboratory events,
              misinformation effects, and memory intrusions in recall of word-lists.
              Comparing autobiographical memory for life events to performance on laboratory
              memory tasks provides an opportunity to investigate the ecological validity of
              the laboratory tasks.  This research design makes it possible to determine
              whether performance on laboratory memory tasks predicts memory performance in
              real life. 

The participants will also complete eleven different
              questionnaires that assess both personality and cognitive factors that previous
              research has suggested might be related to memory performance.  This will
              provide a more comprehensive picture of individual differences in memory
              accuracy and distortion.  In most past research investigating individual
              differences in memory performance, a handful of personality and cognitive
              measures have been investigated as possible predictors of memory performance on
              a single task.  In the present study, it should be possible to look at
              similarities and differences among a number of very different memory tasks and
              their relationships with the personality and cognitive dimensions being tested.
               This will allow for a more detailed understanding of the mechanisms involved
              in memory accuracy and distortion.  A better understanding of these mechanisms
              may make it possible to better differentiate between real life memories that
              are likely to be accurate and those that may have been distorted.  

