Title       : Development of an Integrated Facility for Surface Phase Investigation of Complex
               Materials and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9975731

Award Number: 9975731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jian Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiandi Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Dowben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Mandrus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975731
Plummer

This award will provide partial support for the development
              of a facility for the study of surfaces of complex materials, specifically
              layered transition metal oxides.  The challenges and opportunities for
              discoveries associated with the effects of broken
symmetry in layered
              transition-metal oxides (TMOs), specifically at surfaces and interfaces, are
              immense.  Interest in this general class of materials stems from the richness
              of their physical properties, the complexity of the underlying physics, and the
              promise of technological applications.  TMOs are complex because the
              structural, electronic, and magnetic properties are strongly coupled, but not
              always linearly.  A small change in one property (e.g., structure) can produce
              a large change in another property (e.g., the magnetic state).  Many of these
              materials are layered or quasi two-dimensional (2D), and many of the most
              interesting physical phenomena such as phase transitions are associated with
              and controlled by symmetry-breaking perturbations.  A surface (or an interface)
              breaks the inherent symmetry in a solid and can thus change the order
              parameters associated with various types of transitions.  Our objective is to
              construct a facility capable of characterizing the electronic, magnetic, and
              structural properties at the surface.  The goal is to study surface phase
              transitions in these complex TMOs and to understand how these transitions can
              be tuned to produce a desired response.

This facility will be used to train
              a "new breed" of surface materials scientists.  The experimental students will
              be introduced to a variety of state-of-the-art characterization techniques and
              will be involved in both the synthesis and characterization efforts.  They will
              develop the ability to think chemically as well as physically.  In this age of
              complex materials, such ability is absolutely essential.
%%%
This award
              enables a unique partnership between scientists and engineers at Oak Ridge
              National Laboratory and the University of Tennessee for research and training
              of students.
***

