Title       : Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer and Cryostat System for
               Undergraduate Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975708

Award Number: 9975708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110500             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Randy Dillingham Randy.Dillingham@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Cornelison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975708
Dillingham

This grant will provide partial support for the
              acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectrometer and an
              associated closed cycle helium cryostat.  The FTIR spectrometer will be
              integrated with our existing x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy system, providing
              multi-technique materials analysis capability.  This instrumentation will be
              used in a multi-disciplinary research program involving faculty and
              undergraduate student researchers in condensed matter/surface physics,
              astrophysics, planetary astronomy, and chemistry.  The main focus of the
              current research program is investigation of the chemical and material
              properties of ices (the term "ice" as used in this context refers to the solid
              phase of materials typically thought of as either liquids or gases).  The
              addition of the helium cryostat will greatly expand our capability for growing
              these low temperature materials.  The FTIR spectrometer will also be utilized
              in an educational capacity.  In addition to training our undergraduate research
              students in its operation, the instrument will be used by students in several
              advanced undergraduate laboratories.

Northern Arizona University has a
              strong commitment to undergraduate education and has a primary focus on faculty
              teaching.  The Department of Physics and Astronomy offers undergraduate degree
              programs in physics, astronomy, and physical science, and in teacher
              preparation in physics and physical science.  The Department is committed to
              the development of its research program that will benefit both faculty scholars
              and the undergraduate students that they serve.  Furthermore, the University
              mission statement places a particular emphasis on the education of Native
              Americans.  NAU has one of the largest Native American student populations of
              all U. S. Colleges.  The Department of Physics and Astronomy has established a
              long history of providing opportunities for these students to fully participate
              in research projects and work closely with individual professors.  Thus, the
              instrumentation requested in this proposal will advance this mission through
              its support of the research-based programs already in place.
%%%
This is an
              ideal, integrative research education acquisition, that is expected to
              significantly impact Native American students.
***

