Title       : Breathing Space: A History of Asthma and the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9975526

Award Number: 9975526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg A. Mitman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-75526;  Gregg A. Mitman (Univ. of Oklahoma) 
"Breathing Space:  A
              History of Asthma and the Environment"

Between 1982 and 1994, the prevalence
              of asthma -- the leading chronic illness among children in the United States --
              increased over 60 percent. Asthma's prevalence is disproportionately higher
              among inner-city, African-American children than among suburban white children,
              although studies suggest that this disparity is linked more to socioeconomic
              status and place than to ethnicity or race. While inadequate access to
              preventive health care has been suggested as a contributive factor in this
              incidence pattern, in the last fifteen years investigators have pointed to
              increased exposure to indoor air pollutants such as tobacco smoke and to indoor
              allergens associated with dust mites and cockroaches in addition to outdoor air
              pollutants as important environmental factors in the development and worsening
              of asthma symptoms among the urban poor. In the l990s, asthma has become
              identified as a disease of the built environment, a chronic symptom of living
              in an industrial society, where the risks to environmental pollutants are
              distributed unequally across ethnic and socioeconomic lines.

The built
              environment has become a subject of increasing interest to environmental
              historians as attention has shifted away from a historical focus on the
              "natural" environment to urban and industrial spaces. Historical scholarship on
              the environmental consequences of industrial and urban development has greatly
              enhanced our understanding of the ways in which changing environmental
              conditions of the workplace and the city have shaped the economic, political,
              social, and cultural dimensions of human lives. In addition, scholars have
              recently begun to historically examine the struggles of scientists and citizens
              to combat pollution and environmental hazards in the built environment and the
              integral role that environmental issues have played in political activism for
              social justice and equality throughout the twentieth century. Despite this
              recent work, however, and despite the fact that we speak of the environment as
              though it captures a single entity and diversity of interests, we still have
              little appreciation for how conceptions and management of the environment of
              the home, workplace, and recreational area have historically intersected with
              and diverged from one another.

By looking at asthma through a history of
              place -- from a therapeutic perspective emphasizing environmental control and
              management, from an etiological perspective implicating environmental factors
              ranging from allergens to air pollution, and from the perspective of the
              patient seeking a better quality of life in the rarefied air of mountain
              resorts or more recently through environmental remediation of the home and
              workplace -- this project investigates how environmental attitudes toward
              places of home, work, and play have interacted in medical, scientific, and
              popular beliefs about asthma over the last 120 years. Unlike infectious
              diseases such as cholera, typhoid, and tuberculosis, no magic bullet has
              appeared for the treatment or cure of asthma. Although pharmacological
              developments have played an important part in therapeutic management, living
              with asthma has throughout the late-nineteenth and twentieth century always
              entailed the control and management of the environment, where asthmatics live,
              work, and play. By attending to the environmental management that physicians
              and other caretakers prescribed and that chronic sufferers employed in the
              alleviation of asthma, this project seeks to elucidate historically changing
              perceptions of the relationship between the environment and health in
              twentieth-century American culture.


