Title       : Marriage Markets and Intergenerational Transfers in a Premodern Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9975086

Award Number: 9975086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maristella Botticini maristel@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9975086	ABSTRACT
This project aims to investigate interactions between
              nonmarket institutions and markets, placing them in a historical context.
              Specifically, it intends to thoroughly examine economic transactions inside the
              household and the economic role of the state, two of the most important
              nonmarket institutions. The state can promote or hinder market efficiency and
              economic growth by protecting property rights or expropriating its subjects. On
              the other hand, although intergenerational transfers cannot be characterized as
              market transactions, they do greatly affect, and are affected by, the market
              economy.
Economists have proposed several models of intergenerational
              transfers, transfers within and between families, and interactions between
              public finance and private transfers of wealth from parents to children. In
              addition, empirical evidence on contemporary economies has allowed economists
              to test some of these models. However, one fundamental issue not fully explored
              in the empirical literature concerns the variables that affect
              intergenerational transfers in the absence of social security systems, which
              play a critical role in contemporary economies. Considering that social
              security systems have a potentially great impact on transfers of wealth across
              generations, and that many developing countries still lack social security and
              pension systems, the study of intergenerational transfers in the absence of
              these essential institutions is very important.
An ideal laboratory in which
              to address this issue is offered by past economies, in which social security
              systems did not exist. By using unpublished archival sources, this research
              project aims to analyze the relationships between intergenerational transfers,
              savings behavior, demographic shocks, taxation, and the rise and growth of
              government borrowing in medieval and Renaissance Florence. The most vibrant
              European economy together with Venice, and endowed with sophisticated economic
              and political institutions, Florence in the 1300s and 1400s is the perfect case
              study for several reasons.
Within this premodern context, this project will
              investigate two central issues in empirical economics. The first issue is
              determining the demographic, social, and economic variables that affect inter
              vivos transfers and bequests. Specifically, (a) did demographic shocks, such as
              the Black Death of 1348, have an impact on intergenerational transfers? In the
              absence of a social security system and with parents relying on their children
              for old age support, demographic shocks that heavily hit children and young
              people might have had a dramatic impact on inter vivos transfers and parents'
              bequest behavior. (b) Did changes in political institutions, such as those in
              1343, 1378, and 1436, and the growth of the Florentine public debt during the
              14~ and 15~ centuries influence intergenerational transfers? The policy of
              financing the public debt through taxes or by increasing government borrowing
              might have differentially affected the shares of wealth left to daughters and
              sons because of the different timing of the transfers. Unlike bequests, dowries
              were inter vivos transfers made when daughters married. In enhancing or
              curtailing the ability of households to provide dowries, the Florentine
              governments might have affected the marriage market and, in turn, the fertility
              rate.
The second issue is determining whether and how social norms influence
              intergenerational transfers and parents' bequest behavior, which in turn can
              affect economic growth. To address this issue, this project will test the
              Cole-Mailath-Postlewaite model by verifying whether the social norms that
              governed the Florentine marriage market in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
              made parents save more and increase the size of their intergenerational
              transfers, which, as a result, could have had an impact on the growth of the
              Florentine economy. As Cole, Mailath, and Postlewaite (1992) have shown,
              identical economies characterized by different social organizations, for
              example, in the allocation of mates, can yield different market allocations and
              different growth rates due to the different savings behavior of parents. In
              economies in which status is determined by wealth, greater saving rates are
              predicted since parents wish to transfer more wealth to their children to make
              them more attractive as mates in the matching process.
As a valuable
              by-product, this project will also create a micro data set on intergenerational
              transfers in a premodern economy. Economists can compare them with modern and
              contemporary data and test the impact of the creation of social security
              systems on intergenerational transfers and parents' bequest behavior.

