Title       : Electronic Properties of Impurities, Surfaces, and Quantum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9975470

Award Number: 9975470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai C. Chiang chiang@mrl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975470
Chiang

This project is a fundamental study of the electronic
              properties of selected metal systems using high-resolution angle-resolved
              photoemission spectroscopy. The goal is to understand the response to
              electromagnetic stimulation and the behavior of quasiparticles and collective
              excitations. Photoemission cross sections, lineshapes, and linewidths will be
              measured as a function of binding energy at precisely specified points in k
              space. Effects of impurity scattering, magnetic interaction, spatial coherence,
              phonon scattering, and quantum confinement will be examined. Systems of
              interest will include surfaces and bulk materials doped with magnetic and
              nonmagnetic impurities as well as films and multilayers designed for probing
              specific properties including the Fermi-liquid or non-Fermi-liquid behavior. We
              have demonstrated that atomically uniform films of silver can be prepared on
              iron single crystals. These films form an electron interferometer allowing
              highly accurate spectroscopic measurements. The underlying growth mechanism
              leading to the formation of such films will be investigated, and experiments
              will be carried out to explore the possibility of making uniform films of other
              materials. 
%%%
Artificial structures involving thin layers and dopants can
              exhibit interesting and potentially useful electronic properties. Modern
              techniques allow layer configurations made with atomic precision. Electrons in
              such systems can become trapped, reflected, or scattered by the layer
              boundaries and dopants, resulting in new properties that offer opportunities
              for applications. This research project will focus on basic physics and
              chemistry issues of atomic layer formation and the relationship between atomic
              structure and electronic properties.  Part of the work will be carried out at
              the Synchrotron Radiation Center, a national user facility funded by the
              National Science Foundation. This project will offer excellent opportunities
              for graduate student research and training.
***


