Title       : High-throughput Mapping Tools for Maize Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a9975868

Award Number: 9975868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2947701            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Schnable schnable@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xun Gu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Ashlock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Churchill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 A greater understanding of the organization and function of the maize genome
              is essential if US agriculture is to be successful in meeting the growing needs
              for maize as food, feed and a source of industrial raw materials as the US
              moves towards a "plant-based" economy.  A team of molecular, quantitative and
              evolutionary geneticists and bioinformaticists has been assembled to build upon
              existing NSF investments in plant genomics to develop the novel high-throughput
              genetic mapping technologies and resources needed to meet this challenge.  


                IDPs (InDel Polymorphisms) are a new class of co-dominant, allele-specific,
              genetic markers suitable for high-throughput analyses.  The project team will
              identify, develop and genetically map 500 IDP markers specific to two widely
              used inbred lines (B73 and Mo17).  To identify efficient IDP isolation
              strategies, the rates of IDP identification will be compared from four sources:
               1) GenBank genic sequences; 2) Mu transposon flanking sequences; 3) 3' UTRs
              from ESTs; and 4) previously mapped RFLP markers.  In addition, computational
              and wet lab approaches for the high-throughput acquisition and mapping of IDPs
              will be developed and optimized.

   The Mapping Array is a novel chip-based
              technology designed to genetically map a large number of non-redundant,
              sequence-defined cDNAs.  During Phase I, an existing nylon-based protocol will
              be adapted to DNA "chips"; hybridization conditions optimized; various sources
              of "target" sequences (e.g., 3' UTRs, exons, full-length cDNAs and RFLP
              markers) tested; experimental design parameters determined; and mapping
              software developed.  Upon successful completion of Phase I, 10,000 ESTs will be
              genetically mapped (Phase II).  

   The sequences of EST 3' UTRs are of
              great value in distinguishing members of gene families, as potential sources of
              IDPs and for producing the gene-specific probes needed for the Mapping Array. 
              The project team will sequence the 3' ends of 20,000 of the ESTs being isolated
              by the NSF-supported maize genome project headquartered at Stanford University.
               In addition, the insert size associated with each of these 20,000 clones will
              be ascertained.  
Because the proposed research will occur at the interface
              between molecular and computational genetics, it will provide important
              cross-disciplinary training opportunities for graduate students and
              post-doctoral scientists.



