Title       : Functional Genomics of Plant Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9975808

Award Number: 9975808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2983734            (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Walker WalkerJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frans E. Tax  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice C. Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Gribskov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reversible protein phosphorylation is a key component of virtually every
              regulated biological process.  Approximately 5% of the genes in higher plants
              are directly involved in signaling by protein phosphorylation.  The goal of
              this project is to integrate bioinformatics and genetics to investigate
              phosphorylation-dependent signal transduction in plants.  Bioinformatics will
              be used to mine plant sequence databases to gain new insights into the
              structural and functional relationships of the genes and proteins involved in
              post-translation modification by phosphorylation.  Annotation of every protein
              kinase and phosphatase in Arabidopsis thaliana will be complemented with
              enhanced annotation for genes with published information.  A community
              interface for data submission (published and unpublished) will be created and
              bioinformatics training will be provided to plant scientists who can then
              directly access and modify the data base from their home institution.  A
              network of laboratories will both identify knockouts in genes encoding protein
              kinases and phosphatases and characterize the phenotypes of knockouts.  Each of
              the network laboratories will focus on a group of proteins in which they are
              knowledgeable or expert.  The network laboratories will also contribute to the
              database annotation for the groups of proteins for which they are experts. 
              This project will yield significant advances in understanding the molecular
              mechanisms controlling cellular function in plants and will ultimately
              facilitate the development of improved crops.  


