Title       : Collaborative Research on Multi-dimensional Models of Bargaining and Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9975173

Award Number: 9975173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56481              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Duggan dugg@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	A theory of collective choice is developed to facilitate our understanding of
              group decisionmaking, particularly when the decision of a group affects all
              members, perhaps not equally.  Such situations are rife with opportunities for
              negotiation, coalition formation, and other forms of complex strategic
              interaction.  The theory abstracts for the procedural details of decisionmaking
              and is, therefore, quite general.  Unfortunately, Arrow (1963), Plott (1967),
              Schofield (1983) and others have shown that "core" points -- points from which
              no coalition can force a profitable change  -- often fail to exist.  Moreover,
              McKelvey (1977, 1979) has shown that, when the core is empty, the social
              alternatives that can be reached by successive coalitional moves comprise the
              entire space of alternatives.  This has prompted some (e.g., Riker (1980)) to
              draw the conclusion that collective decisionmaking is inherently unstable and
              unpredictable.
	In this proposal, we outline a research program on bargaining
              and elections with the goal of advancing our understanding of collective
              choice.  Although our work has connections to the theory of collective choice,
              our approach is distinct:  we explicitly model the institutional setting in
              which collective choices are made, such as the procedural rules of legislatures
              or elections.  Once the institutional context of choice is clarified, the tools
              of non-cooperative game theory can be applied, and choices can be analyzed as
              the product of equilibrium behavior in non-cooperative games.  Our models have
              several elements in common that permit a unified theoretical treatment:  they
              are dynamic and multi-dimensional, and the primary mechamisn by which
              individual preferences are aggregated is voting.
	We attempt to develop a
              general theory that will lay the groundwork for future theoretical and applied
              work and, accordingly, our focus is primarily on the existence of stationary
              equilibria (equilibria of a particularly simple form) and on connections to the
              theory of collective choice.  We believe that addressing these foundational
              issues will facilitate future analysis of more highly specified models,
              allowing sharper equilibrium characterizations, comparative statics analysis,
              computational analysis, and empirical testing.  The proposal consists of two
              parts, presented in Sections 2 and 3.  In Section 2, we propose five projects
              on the study of bargaining, as outlined below.  The results of the first
              project are contained in Banks and Duggan (1998), and are near their final
              form.
A Bargaining Model of Collective Choice:  We establish existence and
              robustness of staionary equilibria in the basic model, and generalize past work
              on bargaining.  We establish conditions under which our non-cooperative theory
              predicts precisely the core, thereby corroborating the theory of collective
              choice.
A Multi-dimensional Model of Gridlock:  We investigate the issue of
              the stability of the status quo in the basic model .  Our model generalizes
              Kreshbiel's (1996, 1998) model of legislative gridlock and provides the
              following insight:  in multi-dimensional settings, complete gridlock of the
              sort in Krehbiel's model is rare, although a partial type of gridlock is
              possible.
Contemporaneous Bargaining:  We extend our equilibrium existence
              result to a model of simultaneous bargaining with multiple groups. 
              Applications include the study of federal systems of government, bicameral
              legislatures, decisions within separate firms, and decisions within separate
              national assemblies.
	Bargaining in Economic Environments:  We capture
              bargaining in economic contexts, give decisionmakers endowments and property
              rights over them, and allow endowments to vary stochastically over time.  We
              focus on equilibrium existence and core equivalence.
	Dynamic Collective
              Choice:  We allow bargaining to continue after an agreement has been reached -
              the outcome of bargaining in one period becomes the status quo point for
              bargaining in the next.  We attempt to overcome difficult technical problems in
              the analysis of equilibrium existence in models of "ongoing" collective
              choice.
	In Section 3, we propose to study repeated elections, and generalize
              Duggan (1997) by allowing for a multi-dimensional policy space and more general
              preferences.  The model of elections is mathematically quite similar to our
              basic model of bargaining, and the techniques we have developed in our analysis
              of bargaining enable us to establish the existence of stationary electoral
              equilibria, to characterize them, and to clarify their connection to the core. 
                      

