Title       : Collaborative Research on the Expected Utility Theory of War
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9975291

Award Number: 9975291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan C. Stam allan.stam@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The researchers significantly revise the data-generating and management software
              program EUGene (Expected Utility and Data Generation), originally developed
              under an NSF award, in order to 1) add functions that will improve its
              usefulness as a data management tool, and 2) address new theoretical research
              questions concerning the expected utility theory of war and comparative testing
              of international conflict theories.

EUGene is a software package that
              generates data for variables used to test a version of an expected utility
              theory of war and dispute initiation.  Specifically, EUGene is the first
              publicly-available program that generates tau-b alliance similarity scores,
              risk attitude scores, expected utility data, and international interaction game
              equilibria for all states (or dyads) and years from 1816 to 1984.  In addition,
              EUGene serves as a data management tool for creating data sets to be used in
              the quantitative analysis international relations, and is particularly useful
              for creating data sets with the directed-dyad-year as the unit of analysis. 
              Until now, creating such data sets has been cumbersome and difficult.  The
              researchers have used EUGene in conducting the largest analyses of the expected
              utility theory of war to date (analyzing nearly 700,000 directed dyad-years of
              data.  They also have used it to build a data set to analyze 11 competing
              theories of international conflict on the population of all directed interstate
              dyads.

EUGene is expanded in a number of ways that benefits the
              international relations community.  First, the researchers implement a new
              measure of alliance similarity, the "S" score which has been argued to be a
              better measure for analyzing alliance similarity than tau-b, on which current
              expected utility data are based.  Next, the software are updated to allow users
              to add any data set (of a suitable format) to those provide with the program,
              making EUGene useful for a wide variety of data set development projects. 
              Finally, the researchers implement a number of options that have been requested
              by users, including the ability to generate non-directed dyad data sets, to
              update expected utility data as new alliance data is made available, and to
              track versions of data for replication.

With the updated data software, the
              researchers build new data sets that facilitate significant new research
              projects.  Three main substantive projects result from this research.  First,
              using newly generated data the researchers expand on comparative tests of
              theories of international conflict conducted previously.  In particular, with
              added data the researchers test a three-stage econometric model of conflict
              that integrates trade, political institution, and non-governmental
              organization.  Second, the researchers explore the nature of preference
              stability across the international system, developing an evolutionary model of
              preferences that helps to explain earlier findings of an inconsistent fit of
              the expected utility theory of war across regions and over time.  Third, by
              fully implementing the "S" score measure of alliance similarity and using it to
              develop new risk scores and expected utility data, the researchers fully
              evaluate the effect of this new measure for prior and future empirical
              research. 
This research enhances substantially our understanding of this
              important topic.

