Title       : Isotopic and Geochemical Analysis of Microbial Processes in Uncontaminated and
               Contaminated Ground Water and Sediment: Innovative Application of Radiocarbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9975223

Award Number: 9975223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226184             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Marjorie Aelion aelionm@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1440,1573,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Aelion, Marjorie
Stone, Peter
MCB-9975223
Abstract

Quantifying
              biodegradation of chlorinated hydrocarbons (CHCs) in the 
subsurface is
              problematic because of the recalcitrant nature of the  compounds and the
              complexity of the degradation processes.  The overall  objective of this
              innovative field study is to investigate in situ microbial  mineralization of
              CHCs and naturally-occurring organic carbon in the  subsurface using
              radiocarbon (14C), and carbon and hydrogen stable isotopes  (13C and deuterium
              (2H)) of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4).  This research will quantify,
              compare and evaluate tetrachloroethylene (PCE) and 
trichloroethylene (TCE)
              biodegradation in the vadose zone and groundwater from a contaminated field
              site and uncontaminated adjacent area, under varying redox conditions.  PCE,
              TCE, concentrations of their metabolites, and geochemical parameters will be
              measured using standard techniques (gas chromatography, spectrophotometry).  In
              addition, sediment vadose zone CO2 and CH4, and groundwater dissolved inorganic
              carbon and CH4 will be collected and purified cryogenically for 14C and 13C
              analysis by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) and mass spectrometry (MS). 
              Combining isotopic 
monitoring of 14C, 13C and 2H of CO2 and CH4 with limited
              contaminant monitoring can better differentiate between biochemical processes
              occurring in uncontaminated and contaminted groundwater.  This technique
              distinguishes between CO2 and CH4 produced from natural substrate
              biodegradation versus CHC biodegradation, and can be used under varying and low
              contaminant and CO2 and CH4 concentrations.

 	Although the use of
              radiocarbon in environmental biodegradation studies is relatively new, it is
              used commonly in geological and archeological dating. Currently, indirect
              evidence and measurements of microbial degradation are used to estimate the
              contribution of naturally-occurring bacteria to contaminant removal. 
              Radiocarbon measurements will be used in conjunction with stable carbon
              measurement and metabolite monitoring to improve the detection of microbial
              degradation of organic pollutants in groundwater.  Although this research will
              examine microbial degradation of chlorinated solvents used in dry cleaning and
              industrial applications, this technique should apply to any petroleum-derived
              contaminant such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), diesel and jet
              fuel, heating oil and trinitrotoluene (TNT), because 14C is depleted in these
              compounds.  The proposed research will expand the use radiocarbon as an
              environmental tracer and lay the groundwork for the application of this
              technique to other biochemical contaminant studies.

This proposal was
              submitted in response to the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry
              solicitation NSF 99-9 and is being funded jointly by the Divisions of BIO and
              EAR.



