Title       : Collaborative Research on Creating Conditions for Virtual Team Effectiveness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a9975612

Award Number: 9975612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan G. Cohen scohen@ceo.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alec R. Levenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cristina B. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this project investigates the factors that lead
              to virtual team effectiveness.

There are three major challenges in virtual
              teams that are barriers to effective team performance: 
-- virtual team
              members' distinct thought worlds;
-- the differentiation of the organizational
              units members represent and the corresponding differences in their approaches
              to the team task; 
-- potential mistrust among members. 

The researchers
              are investigating: (1) the development of shared understandings about the
              desired outcomes and the means to achieve those outcomes; (2) the integration
              of knowledge, skills, and abilities across systems (particularly information
              technology), boundaries, and people; and (3) the development of trust.

The
              researchers examine the capabilities of the people that comprise virtual teams
              and explore whether attributes such as the ability to work laterally or
              tolerance for ambiguity are critical for virtual team success. They will work
              with DaimlerChrysler AG, Hewlett Packard, Medtronic, Motorola, Meru Research
              and Lockheed Martin.

The project will highlight the factors, processes and
              experiences that enable virtual teams to be effective. The findings will be
              applied to "school families" (virtual teams bridging elementary, middle, and
              high schools), as well as to virtual teams of providers of specialized
              educational offerings.

