Title       : High-Density DNA Microarrays for Global Gene Expression Studies in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9975920

Award Number: 9975920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2179049            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Quackenbush johnq@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. Ketchum  (Principal Investigator former)
              Catherine M. Ronning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	As plant biologists approach the 21st century there are tremendous
              opportunities for understanding the molecular basis of cellular physiology and
              differentiation, organ development, disease resistance, and stress tolerance,
              because of advancements in automated DNA sequencing.  These fundamental areas
              of plant research have been inundated with new sequence data that provide clues
              to the genetic elements central to plant life. The United States along with the
              international research community has promoted the complete genome sequencing of
              the model system Arabidopsis thaliana  to seed efforts in plant genomic
              research.  The value of this resource can not be overstated because of the
              significant conservation of gene sequence and protein function throughout
              evolutionary history.  The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) has played a
              major role in the Arabidopsis genome initiative and will publish the complete
              sequence of Chromosome II, more than 10% of the genome (16-17 megabase pairs
              out of an estimated 120 megabase pairs), in mid 1999.  TIGR has also been
              funded to annotate the entire Arabidopsis sequence so that data generated by
              the AGI (Arabidopsis Genome Initiative) international consortium will be
              curated and maintained in a unified and informative fashion.  

	This award
              supports the construction of a complete Chromosome II microarray for functional
              genomic studies of Arabidopsis.  The Chromosome II microarray will be used to
              catalog gene expression at the whole chromosome level and to evaluate and
              extend the gene prediction algorithms that are now being employed for
              annotation of the complete genomic sequence.  At this stage of the genome
              program, approximately 30% of the predicted gene products are annotated as
              "hypothetical proteins."  Identification of a corresponding mRNA species for
              these hypotheticals, using microarray technologies, will immediately add weight
              to the genome annotation.  Moreover, information about chromosomal gene
              expression patterns will lead to a more refined understanding of genome
              organization and the activation of gene networks.  Validation of our current
              gene predictions and correction of those hypothesis that are not
              physiologically relevant will enhance the value of this universal plant
              resource.  

	The fundamentals of plant biology will be revealed by the
              Arabidopsis thaliana sequence: a reference genome for plant genomic research in
              the 21st century.  This microarray program will provide a means to map
              additional physiological data to the Arabdiopsis  sequence data and enhance its
              used for basic and applied plant research beneficial to our agricultural and
              economic national interests.  These observations of the Arabidopsis genome will
              be directly transferable to genome programs in other plant species, helping all
              research groups to realize the full potential of a National Plant Genome
              Research Program.

