Title       : Acquisition of a Differential Scanning Calorimeter for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9975603

Award Number: 9975603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo C. Bazan bazan@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Heeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Deming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant will provide partial support for the acquisition of a modern
              differential scanning calorimetry package (DSC), including a theromogravimetric
              analyzer (TGA) and accessories for studying phase transitions at elevated
              pressure and at low temperature.  This system will have a major impact on
              several materials oriented projects at the University of California, Santa
              Barbara (UCSB).  Of major importance is the use of DSC data for understanding
              the formation or presence of microheterogeneous phases in multicomponent
              materials.  The instrument will enhance projects concerned with the design of
              amorphous organic glasses suitable for use in emerging optoelectronic
              technologies, the synthesis of multi-component organic crystals, the
              characterization of biopolymers with liquid crystalline properties, the study
              of tough block copolymers and the solid state characterization of
              multicomponent networks for device applications.  These studies require DSC
              analysis to understand long range order in sold samples and the spatial
              relationship of different components in complex mixtures.

The success of the
              research and teaching missions of UCSB's Materials program depends on the
              availability of modern instrumentation.  A new Ph.D. program in Chemistry,
              which emphasizes research in Materials Chemistry, was established this year. 
              In this program a broad education is encouraged and courses in fields such as
              Physics, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science are part of the curriculum.
               Modern instrumentation, such as the DSC system that is shared between groups
              of different departments will enhance collaborative interactions between
              students and faculty engaged in Materials research.
***
This equipment will
              significantly enhance the research capabilities, and the educational
              experiences of students.

