Title       : A Molecular Genetic Analysis of Transcription Termination in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a9975758

Award Number: 9975758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim D. Karam   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda E. Hyman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Hyman 

The long term objective of the project is to understand the
              mechanism of transcription teruiination in eukaryotes. It is well documented
              that cleavage of pre-mRNA is coupled to transcription termination. However,
              many aspects of the termination reaction remain ill-defined, in particular, the
              mechanism of nascent transcript release and the identification of novel factors
              that participate in 3' end formation. Thus, the objective of this research is
              to examine mechanism(s) by which RNA processing and transcription termination
              coordinate formation of a functional mRNA 3' end. The yeast model system was
              employed to take advantage of combined molecular genetic and biochemical
              approaches. GRS1, a putative glycyl tRNA synthetase, was identified in a screen
              for genes involved in 3' end formation. Strains carrying a grsi1-1 mutation
              cleave and polyadenylate pre-mRNAs in vitro at wild type levels but exhibit
              increased readthrough transcription of a polyadenylation signal. Thus, the
              hypothesis is that Grslp promotes efficient transcription termination. To test
              this, experiments are underway to: a. examine the role of Grs1p in the
              termination reaction; b. carry out structure/function studies of Grs1p to
              determine if the same domains responsible for 3' end formation are important
              for tRNA acylation. 

The mechanism by which genes are regulated and
              expressed is complex. This area is under intense investigation as gene
              transcription is critical for human biology and disease mechanisms. A component
              of the transcription reaction that is not well understood deals with how the
              enzyme that synthesizes the RNA from the DNA template ends the reaction. This
              research describes the novel finding that a component of the termination
              reaction is also involved in other cellular functions. This is important as it
              provides a connection between two fundamental processes in cells, the synthesis
              of RNA and the synthesis of proteins. Thus, the significance of the research is
              to provide insight into how cells express individual genes and how this process
              is related to other cellular functions

