Title       : On-Demand Delivery of Large Popular (Multimedia) Data Files
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9975044

Award Number: 9975044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary K. Vernon vernon@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will develop next generation data delivery techniques for the Web
              and other on-demand data delivery systems that contain large, popular, widely
              shared data files.  The project includes several research efforts.  One key
              goal is to design improved (or optimized) delivery architectures that provide
              immediate service at reduced (or minimal) server bandwidth.  Another key goal
              is to develop tractable models to compute the regional cache contents that
              minimize delivery cost for systems with diverse object lengths and delivery
              rates, and with heterogeneous regional server capabilities and client loads.  A
              third goal is to derive basic system design principles by using the optimized
              cache content calculations to determine how delivery cost and the optimal
              caching strategy are influenced by key system and workload parameters.  A
              fourth goal is to develop extensions to the dynamically scheduled delivery
              architecture to optimize support of (encoded) variable bit rate data streams. 
              Finally the project will address several implementation issues, including
              server disk layout for the dynamically scheduled data segments, methods for
              informing clients of scheduled and reassigned multicast segment deliveries, and
              methods for coordinating shared data delivery between the (remote) information
              source server and the regional/proxy server.  The results of this research are
              being incorporated in a prototype on-demand data delivery system to demonstrate
              implementation feasibility and to validate the projected performance
              improvements.
