Title       : Continued Development of Methods for Characterizing and Ranking Health, Safety
               and Environmental Risks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9975200

Award Number: 9975200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190741             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Granger Morgan granger.morgan@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. DeKay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Fischbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1094,1369,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Risk ranking has become a popular way for citizens to provide advice to
              environmental decision makers.  If such advice is to reflect citizens' informed
              judgment, methods must be found to provide participants with both an adequate
              understanding of the underlying science, and with procedural assistance that
              helps them to address systematically the complexities of the problem.  Under
              this grant, an interdisciplinary team is developing and demonstrating such
              methods.

Risk ranking requires both risk analysis and value-based judgments.
               In the Carnegie Mellon method, experts create "risk summary sheets," which
              describe each hazard in clear simple language, and in multi-attribute terms. 
              Then, representative groups of lay people, akin to citizen juries, rank the
              risks using two converging methods.  The first is a "holistic" ranking
              procedure -- after examining the risk summary sheets, participants are guided
              through a structured procedure for making overall judgments of relative risk. 
              The second method is a simplified "multi-attribute utility" (MAU) ranking
              procedure, in which participants assign relative weights to each of the risk
              attributes described in the summary sheets, allowing implicit ranks to be
              inferred.  Groups then use their initial holistic ranking, and the results of
              the MAU procedure, in order deliberate and construct a final ranking.  The
              procedure uses a combination of group and individual methods.  The former
              attempt to exploit the multiple perspectives and mutual clarification possible
              with group interaction.  The latter are designed to ensure that individuals
              continue to express (and reflect on) their personal views.  Although the basic
              approach has been built upon theoretical and empirical results from behavioral
              social science, making it work in a realistic setting has required a
              substantial amount of experimentation.  To that end, the CMU group has created
              an elaborate experimental testbed involving 22 health and safety risks in the
              fictional Centerville Middle School.

The current grant is supporting
              refinement and evaluation of the method using the school test bed.  It is also
              supporting the extension of the method beyond risks to human health and safety
              to include ecological and other environmental risks with the ultimate goal of
              developing ways to combine health, safety and environmental risks in a single
              ranking process.


