Title       : Adaptive Mutations: A Consequence of Prokaryotic Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9975140

Award Number: 9975140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Yasbin yasbin@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In 1988, John Cairns and his collaborators discovered so-called "adaptive
              mutations"  These observations, later enhanced by a series of investigators,
              suggested that some mutants arose in response to specific environmental
              challenges or situations. The nature of the mechanism that generates these
              "adaptive mutants" has been hotly debated. It now appears that these mutations
              are the result of a sub-population of cells that differentiate into a
              hypermutable state. The genetic control for this differentiation has not yet
              been elucidated.  Preliminary investigations with the bacterial Bacillus
              subtilis model system indicate that in this organism the genetic mechanism(s)
              that regulate the development of the hypermutable state overlap with the
              mechanisms that regulate the processes of sporulation and competence (uptake of
              extracellular DNA). This project will utilize the knowledge of the genetic
              control of the processes of sporulation and competence development to delineate
              the molecular mechanisms responsible for the generation of "adaptive
              mutations."  Using the information that is currently available, a working
              hypothesis for the generation of "adaptive" mutations would be that under
              stress, a small subset of cells differentiate into a hypermutable state, and
              these cells lack a functional DNA mismatch repair system.  The research in this
              project is aimed at testing this hypothesis by utilizing the genetic and
              molecular biological techniques that have been developed for analyzing
              differentiation in the Gram-positive, spore forming bacterium Bacillus
              subtilis.  Delineating this system is critical to our understanding of the role
              played by stress-induced genetic diversity mechanisms in species 
