Title       : The Role of Chaotic Dynamics in Motor Pattern Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9975490

Award Number: 9975490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Rowat prowat@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Elson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9975490
The role of chaotic dynamics in motor pattern generation

PI:
              Peter F. Rowat, 
Co-PI: R.C.Elson

How do animals produce and control
              repetitive behaviors such as walking, swimming, or chewing? In a variable or
              hostile environment, the ability to produce fast, appropriate, and flexible
              responses to new sensory information is of vital importance. The physical
              system of bones and muscles that produces movements is driven by neural signals
              - parallel trains of action potentials -- passing from underlying biological
              circuits known as central pattern generators (CPGs) to the muscles. The
              research problem is to understand the basic principles of production of these
              signals, or motor patterns, by a CPG. Many neural "building blocks" with which
              a CPG produces repetitive movements are now known.  What is not well understood
              is how flexibility and responsiveness is built into a CPG. Biological
              substances known as neuromodulators can directly alter the properties of neural
              circuits, on a relatively slow time-scale. Could dynamical properties of CPG
              circuits directly contribute to flexibility and environmental
              responsiveness?

From theoretical studies, it is known that a chaotic system
              has intrinsic properties, which could be very useful for the production of
              variable and environmentally responsive output. Its output is highly variable
              but in a structured way and techniques for the control of a chaotic system are
              now well known. At the same time, experimental studies of biological CPGs show
              that a significant amount of variability or jitter is always present.  

This
              project experimentally investigates the biological variability, on the one
              hand, and on the other, develops theoretical models of how a chaotic system can
              be used to impart flexibility of response into a motor system.  There is a
              continual interaction between experimental data collection and model building.
              The variability in the data will be analyzed to determine the relative
              contributions of noise and deterministic -- chaotic - dynamics. 

Two
              well-known CPGs from the lobster stomatogastric system are used and recordings
              are made from small sub-circuits of these CPGs. Recently developed nonlinear
              analysis algorithms are used for this analysis. The control of intrinsic
              neuronal dynamics by synaptic connections within a CPG are studied using the
              same analysis algorithms. Simulated synaptic connections will be constructed
              between real biological neurons and computer-based model neurons. The dynamical
              control of a stomatogastric CPG will be studied by using simulated sensory
              feedback from an identified sensory neuron. Here the feedback loop from CPG to
              periphery and back via re-afferent circuits is closed by a computer-based
              model. In parallel with these experiments and data analysis, a chaos-based
              model system for the control of a robotic motor system, will be developed in
              simulations. It is designed around a robust, chaotic core and a dynamic,
              sensorimotor controller that utilizes recent chaos-control algorithms.
              

There are many parallels between this design and properties of biological
              sensorimotor systems. The project will extend our knowledge about the role of
              biological variability and also the design of flexible robotic controllers.

