Title       : A Self-Organizing Neural Network Model of Lexical and Morphological Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9975249

Award Number: 9975249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Li pli@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A crucial aspect of human language learning is the learner's ability to
              generalize existing patterns to novel instances. The issue of generalization is
              a focal point of current debates on mechanisms of language acquisition. In the
              last ten years, many researchers have used the acquisition of the English past
              tense as an example to debate whether language acquisition should be viewed as
              a symbolic, rule-based learning process or as a connectionist, statistical
              learning process. However, most of this debate has revolved around a specific
              cluster of connectionist models, the back-propagation network as a model of
              language acquisition. The back-propagation algorithm, especially in the context
              of language acquisition, has several limitations now. In this study, we explore
              self-organizing neural networks, in particular, the self-organizing feature
              maps as models of language acquisition. In contrast to back-propagation, the
              self-organizing network uses unsupervised learning that requires no presence of
              a supervisor or an explicit teacher; learning is achieved entirely by the
              system's self-organization in response to the input environment. Moreover,
              multiple self-organizing networks can be connected via Hebbian learning, a
              biologically motivated co-occurrence learning mechanism. 

Our project
              involves first the development of a connectionist model of language acquisition
              based on principles of self-organization and Hebbian learning. It further
              involves the modeling of the acquisition of the lexicon and morphology, with
              respect to the emergence of structured lexical representations and the
              relationship between generalization and representation. These studies should
              allow us to determine (1) whether and how structured lexical representations
              can emerge from self-organizing processes of learning, rather than being
              available innately; (2) the extent to which generalization is a function of the
              new representation; and (3) whether and how self-organizing processes lead to
              the recovery from generalization errors. We propose that self-organization and
              Hebbian learning provide the necessary computational and psycholinguistic
              mechanisms for lexical representation, morphological generalization, and
              recovery in language acquisition. Our project will integrate previous empirical
              and modeling results in a new light, and offer a new theoretical perspective as
              well as a methodological tool for the study of the acquisition of the lexicon
              and the morphology.
