Title       : Collisions of Hyperthermal Polyatomic Ions with Organic Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9975355

Award Number: 9975355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki H. Wysocki vwysocki@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project, carried out by Professor Vicki H. Wysocki and her students at the
              University of Arizona and supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              program,  develops a novel surface characterization tool to provide qualitative
              identification and quantification of the functional groups present in the
              outermost atomic layers of organic thin films.  The core of the method is use
              of  hyperthermal collisions of atomic and polyatomic ions with these surfaces,
              and subsequent study of  ion/surface reactions, neutralization yields,
              projectile dissociation efficiency, and chemical sputtering to determine the
              surface composition.  Hyperthermal collisions are used to study single
              composition and mixed composition model surfaces, many of which are composed of
              thiolate self-assembled monolayers and Langmuir-Blodgett films.  Contact angle,
              FTIR, atomic force microscopy, ellipsometry, and XPS measurements are also used
              as independent analytical probes of the surface composition.

Professor
              Wysocki and her students at the University of Arizona use the carefully
              controlled collisions of slow moving ions with surfaces to reveal the
              composition of the organic overlayers on those surface.  Subtle features of the
              surface are revealed by using more complex structures for the incoming ions. 
              Chemical reactions between the surface and the incoming ions are also used to
              reveal structure and composition.  The slowness of the incoming ion means that
              only the top few atomic layers of the surface are examined.  Reactivity and
              structure of such thin films is of major interest area in areas such as
              sensors, catalysis, and new electronic devices.




