Title       : Applying Consensus & Cultural Models to Improve Environmental Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9975825

Award Number: 9975825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Paolisso mpaolisso@anth.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erve Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A large number of national environmental initiatives being launched at the end
              of the millennium call for increased integration of socio-cultural information
              into policy and program decision-making. This research seeks to strengthen the
              capacity of national and state agencies and local communities to better
              incorporate stakeholder interests, beliefs and values into environmental
              decision-making. Specifically, the research uses consensus and cognitive theory
              and methods from environmental and cognitive anthropology to identify and model
              environmental stakeholder views related to ecology and pollution. The resulting
              cultural models are formal representations of shared explicit and implicit
              knowledge, interests, beliefs and values that members draw upon when responding
              to the environmental challenges facing their communities, industries and
              ecosystems.  The research requires ethnographic fieldwork in the communities of
              environmental stakeholders of the Chesapeake Bay in general, and the Pocomoke
              watershed more specifically. Situated on the lower eastern shore of the
              Chesapeake Bay, the Pocomoke watershed is receiving intensive state and
              national environmental attention due to the recent toxic bloom in the lower
              Pocomoke River of the dinoflagellate Pfiesteria piscicida. In
              recently-completed exploratory research of the cultural consequences of
              Pfiesteria, the researchers identified a number of key stakeholder groups for
              the Pocomoke River watershed, including farmers, watermen, environmental
              professionals, poultry industry representatives, bioecological scientists and
              community leaders. The proposed research continues to work with these
              stakeholder groups, and adds additional stakeholders based on fieldwork
              results.  The research will combine consensus and cultural models to produce
              complementary analyses of the breadth and distribution of beliefs about
              environmental issues, and an understanding of how these issues are interpreted
              by key stakeholders.  Methodology and findings will be relevant to research on
              environmental controversies, as well as to agencies and groups interested in
              developing dialogues and programs to improve the environment.  In addition, the
              project will provide valuable experience on how to improve graduate student
              training in anthropology. 
