Title       : Computational Analysis of Visual Processing in the Mammalian Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9975646

Award Number: 9975646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Dan ydan@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Computational Analysis of Visual Processing in the Mammalian Brain

A major
              challenge in studying mammalian brain functions is to understand how
              information is encoded in the electrical activity of neurons.  The current
              project aims to understand processing of visual information with a combination
              of experimental and computational approaches.  Novel features of this project
              include the use of multielectrode recording of neural activity and natural
              scenes as visual inputs.  Several computational analyses will be carried out
              concurrently with the physiological experiments to address information coding
              in the early visual pathway.  
In the first part of the project, the
              investigators will use several decoding techniques to reconstruct natural
              scenes from recorded ensemble neural responses.  These decoding studies will
              provide a critical test of various computational models of visual coding. 
              Because of the relatively simple response properties of their visual neurons,
              the decoding study will first be carried out in the visual thalamus.  To
              understand the mechanisms of visual coding, it is also crucial to understand
              what features of visual inputs are encoded at different stages of the visual
              pathway.  Therefore in the second part of the project, the investigators will
              systematically characterize the features of visual inputs that are represented
              by the responses of primary visual cortical neurons.  Such studies may reveal
              nonlinear coding properties of cortical neurons that have eluded earlier
              analyses.  Taken together, the results from the proposed studies are likely to
              provide new insights into the general principles of sensory coding.  Successful
              implementation of these research plans will also create an exciting environment
              for encouraging early involvement of undergraduate students into basic
              research, for in depth training of graduate students in neuroscience, and for
              preparing postdoctoral fellows for an independent research career.  

