Title       : Electromagnetic Orientation in Sharks and Rays, a Sensory Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9975645

Award Number: 9975645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrianus J. Kalmijn adjkalmijn@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1160,9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Some animals are believed to use information about the earth's magnetic field
              to navigate from place to place, but a sensory mechanism has yet to be
              established for how animals detect magnetic compass information.  In the ocean,
              sharks and rays have a sensory system of electroreceptors, related to the
              lateral line system of several other fishes.  This electrosensory system has
              been extensively studied physiologically and behaviorally, and has extremely
              high sensitivity to very tiny electrical currents that are used for locating
              prey.  Ocean water and living organisms are salty and electrically conductive,
              and the physics of electromagnetism means that motion of a conductor through a
              magnetic field induces an electrical current.  A shark has organs sufficiently
              sensitive to detect the electrical field induced by its own motion through the
              earth's magnetic field, and so theoretically is able to orient to a magnetic
              compass heading.  This project utlilizes a unique electromagnetic research
              facility, specially constructed for behavioral tests while allowing the
              creation of artificial uniform electric and magnetic fields in a large seawater
              tank.  These fields can be made to simulate or to exactly cancel fields of the
              sort that the fish encounter naturally, corresponding to their swimming speed
              and direction.  Behavioral tests will show whether the electrosensory system is
              necessary and sufficient for an animal to swim toward a correct target based a
              magnetic compass reference system.  Instead of searching for a new sense organ
              for magnetic sensitivity, this project is a direct test of whether sharks and
              rays actually utilize the information already available to their electrosensory
              system.
   Results will be a clear validation or refutation for the first time
              in any animal of a sensory mechanism for magnetic compass orientation, and so
              will have an impact on a long-standing controversy in animal behavior as well
              as neuroscience.  Additional impact will come from making the facility itself
              available as a resource for others in the field.



