Title       : Development of a Technique for Quantitative Hydrogen Analyses of Geological
               Materials Using SIMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9975549

Award Number: 9975549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hervig hervig@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9975549
Hervig

This award supports the development of a technique for the
              quantitative microanalysis of hydrogen in geological materials using secondary
              ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and ion implantation. Hydrogen influences many
              geological processes, including melting temperatures of rocks, bubble
              nucleation leading to volcanic eruptions, and the strength of minerals.
              Hydrogen is an essential structural constituent of hydrous minerals, and their
              hydroxyl contents may provide an indicator of volatile activities. The presence
              of hydrogen in nominally anhydrous minerals represents an important part of the
              hydrogen budget in the earth's mantle.  The proposed research is needed because
              quantitative microanalyses for H in geological materials cannot now be made
              without obtaining a standard very close in chemical composition to the unknown.
              It is not feasible to synthesize standards for every composition of interest
              and there is no straightforward alternative because no theory exists to predict
              the calibration based on other standards. Combining this work with the high
              sensitivity and spatial resolution provided by SIMS will allow us to analyze a
              wide range of geological phases in standard polished thin sections which we can
              use to attack many areas of research, including volcanology, metamorphic
              petrology, low-temperature geochemistry, and high pressure geochemistry.
              Because the result of this technique development will easily cross from one
              SIMS to another (of the same manufacturer), the results of our work will also
              allow researchers at other laboratories to obtain quantitative hydrogen
              analyses on phases of interest. Ion implantation is a reliable, quantitative
              method that has been applied to problems in semiconductor analysis for nearly
              two decades; this technology is readily transferred to geologic
              materials.
***

