Title       : Geometry and Topology of Symplectic Four Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9975469

Award Number: 9975469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tian-Jun Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9975469

PI: Tian-Jun Li

Abstract: The focus of this project
              is to apply methods from differential topology,
geometric analysis and
              algebraic geometry to study symplectic four manifolds.
For symplectic four
              manifolds, the equivalence between Seiberg-Witten invariants  and the
              
symplectic Gromov-Taubes invariants  has led to many striking results in
              symplectic topology.  In collaboration with Liu, Li has set up the parametrized
              Seiberg-Witten theory and derived a wall-crossing formula.
The parametrized
              Seiberg-Witten theory is particularly interesting for
families of symplectic
              manifolds.  Li proposes to develop further the parametrized Seiberg-Witten and
              the parametrized Gromov-Taubes theories and  show
 that these two theories are
              equivalent for symplectic families.
The parametrized theories should be useful
              for studying the isotopies of diffeomorphisms
as well as symplectomorphisms.
              And the equivalence between the two theories is expected to play an important
              role in the classification  of symplectic four manifolds, especially those with
              torsion canonical classes.  
Recently, it has been shown that smooth Lefschetz
              fibrations
provide a link between the topology of symplectic four
              manifolds,
the geometry of the moduli space of curves and the algebra of
the
              mapping class groups. The investigator plans to explore the
beautiful and rich
              interplay to advance  understanding
of all these objects.

An n manifold is
              a space that locally looks like Euclidean space
of dimension n. For example,
              the space-time universe we live in
is a four manifold.  A symplectic structure
              
 is a very basic structure that underlies
almost all the equations of
              classical and quantum physics.  
A symplectic four manifold is  a four
              manifold with
a symplectic structure. Thus symplectic four manifolds
play a
              central role in mathematics and physics.
The fundamental problem is to
              classify all symplectic
four manifolds. The investigator aims to gain some
              understanding of the general shape
of symplectic four manifolds.    

