Title       : The Role of Development in Reaction Norm Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9975168

Award Number: 9975168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Frederik Nijhout hfn@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Goggy Davidowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A "reaction norm" is a description of how a trait changes when the environment
              changes, for instance, how adult body size varies due to variation early
              nutrition in insects, mammals, and other organisms. Such variation is often
              profound and in many cases the variants exhibit additional traits that are
              adaptations to a particular environment. Reaction norms have a genetic basis,
              and organisms with different genomes differ in their ability to adapt to their
              environment via a reaction norm. Because of such genetic differences among
              individuals, it should be possible to change the reaction norm by selection and
              therefore change and perhaps improve the adaptation of organisms to a variable
              environment. The proposed work will test this hypothesis by studying the
              genetics of the reaction norm of body size in relation to nutrition in two
              species of Lepidoptera with different growth characteristics. This work will,
              for the first time, study the genetics of the underlying developmental
              physiology that determines body size. This physiology consists of patterns of
              hormone secretion that control when the animal begins metamorphosis to the
              adult. Because of the PI's earlier work on the developmental physiology of this
              system, the developmental control of growth and maturation are better
              understood in this system than in almost any other organism. This enables us to
              initiate the proposed investigation of how genetic variation affects variation
              of the developmental processes that control the final adult body size. This
              work will enhance our understanding of how the reaction norms that lead to
              variation in body size are regulated by genetics and development.
