Title       : Collinearity of Maize and Sorghum at the DNA Sequence Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a9975618

Award Number: 9975618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim W. Messing messing@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Llaca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Bennetzen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. SanMiguel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig G. Nevill-Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Comparative analysis of aligned plant chromosomal regions have exceptional,
              but largely
untested, potential for the discovery of genes, new classes of
              mobile DNAs, and the
nature, rates and mechanisms of evolutionary change.
              Moreover, comparative analysis of
closely related genomes that differ greatly
              in size can indicate both the origin(s) of that
genome size difference and,
              equally important, determine whether the small genome
could be used for
              map-based cloning of significant genes in the large genome species. In
this
              project, maize and sorghum have been chosen for such an analysis because of
              their
importance as crop plants and as model genetic systems. In particular,
              we plan (1) to
uncover basic genomic composition of several gene-rich regions,
              (2) to use this two
genome approach to improve and test annotation (including
              gene prediction) programs,
(3) to determine whether the compactness of the
              sorghum genome can be used to
physically link maize genes that have been
              genetically mapped to be as close as one map
unit, and (4) to characterize the
              chromosomal composition of maize and its relationship to
the origin of the
              sorghum genome for gene clusters and intergenic regions. The content
of
              contiguous DNA sequence from different chromosomal locations in maize
              and
sorghum totaling five megabases will be characterized. The size of the
              regions
characterized will differ between the two genomes because of their
              differential gene
density. In maize, a minimum of two BAC clones whose overlap
              hybridizes to a
designated nucleation probe will be used. In sorghum, the
              probe will be centered within
a single BAC. By selecting gene sequences as
              probes to genic regions of the respective
genomes, a number of clusters, each
              with a predicted 10-20 genes, and their intergenic
regions will be obtained.
              By comparing gene clusters in a bi-genomic fashion, better
computational
              programs for predicting gene boundaries and repeat elements will emerge.
In a
              number of cases, gene sequences will be discovered with known phenotypes
              because
of the integration of genetic and DNA sequence data. Current projects
              to increase the
density of DNA markers and phenotypes on both maize and
              sorghum maps will also
benefit from this analysis because it will provide
              extensive evidence on the
feasibility/difficulty of positional cloning in
              maize or its relatives. Evolutionary studies
of cereal genomes based on gene
              islands will now be enhanced by the analysis of gene
clusters and intergenic
              regions.

