Title       : Mid-term Voltage Stability Assessment and Measures for Mitigating Voltage
               Collapse in Interconnected Power Grids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9975713

Award Number: 9975713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Badrul H. Chowdhury bchow@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Levent Acar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariesa L. Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Voltage stability assessment and enhancement in power systems will depend, to a
              large extent, on successfully addressing a number of fundamental issues.  These
              are the use of long-term dynamic simulations to ensure proper margins, the
              existence of reliable models, and the formulation of intelligent reactive power
              management and control strategies that are robust, accurate, and fast.  Just
              providing the operator with information on the security margins is not always
              adequate.  This information has to be provided well in advance of impending
              voltage insecurity, such that appropriate preventive control actions can be
              taken.  Many experts fear that reactive power management will become a crucial
              reliability issue in the present deregulated environment - a scenario stemming
              from the unbundling of services. With many system operators opting against
              maintaining acceptable voltage profiles in the face of competition, systems are
              now facing renewed threats of voltage collapse.  There have been several
              reports of widespread cascading outages due to inadequate reactive
              reserves.

This proposal is aimed at accomplishing three tasks, those of (i)
              developing accurate models for mid-term voltage stability assessment; (ii)
              developing a new aggregation method for dynamic simulations based on the
              estimated interpolation errors of static states, and (iii) introducing fast and
              effective remedial measures for mitigating mid-term voltage instability in
              power grids.  Stability enhancement measures will entail a number of automatic
              schemes encompassing over-excitation limiters, generator automatic voltage
              regulators (AVRs), shunt capacitor banks, area reactive power coordination,
              under-voltage load shedding, etc.  The use of fuzzy sets and/or neuro-fuzzy
              control algorithms will be investigated for tighter control.  The project will
              be led by investigators with a combined thirty years of experience in power
              systems modeling, simulations, and in intelligent control algorithms. 
              Interactions with industry experts will provide guidance in developing
              practical designs.  New course modules in power system stability and in
              intelligent controls will be put in place in order to fulfill the educational
              objectives of the project.



