Title       : Acquisition of a Tunable Femtosecond Laser System for Two-Photon 3D Lithography
               and Optical Recording and for Training Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9975961

Award Number: 9975961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Perry jwperry@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth R. Marder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide partial support for the acquisition of a laser system
              for the study of two-photon photoactive materials and their 3D patterning by
              nonlinear excitation.  The system produces high-energy femtosecond laser pulses
              tunable from the ultraviolet to the near-IR spectral region.  Two-photon
              materials and processes form the basis of a new technology for rapid
              prototyping of 3D microstructures and for high density 3D optical data storage.
               This laser will enable important studies of the processes involved in the
              nonlinear photochemistry in these materials and studies of the mode of
              nonlinear optical exposure, for example, single shot vs. repetitive excitation
              and femtosecond vs. picosecond pulse durations, which are important for
              optimizing the exposure processes.  These investigations will provide knowledge
              and know-how allowing the design of materials that are more efficient and
              permit higher recording resolution, and definition of the requirements for new
              rapid-prototyping instrumentation.

The proposed laser system will foster
              collaborative materials research activities on two-photon photoactive materials
              with researchers from several academic institutions, as well as private sector
              and government laboratories. It will also provide unique opportunities to
              advance the frontiers of materials research education through integration of
              concepts, knowledge and practical experience involving design of photosensitive
              materials, ultrafast lasers, nonlinear optical processes, and
              microfabrication.
&&&
This is an ideal award, designed to significantly
              impact research and education in a very important field.


