Title       : Acquisition of a High Resolution X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9975600

Award Number: 9975600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix E. Fernandez f_fernandez@feynman.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weiyi Jia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Huimin Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975600
Fernandez

This grant will support in part the acquisition of a
              high-resolution triple axis x-ray diffractometer system.  The instrument will
              be equipped to satisfy the needs, current and foreseen, of Materials Science
              researchers fabricating thin films and multilayer structures at the University
              of Puerto Rico, and those studying samples through external collaborations.  It
              will allow high precision measurements on crystalline or highly textured films
              and epitaxial multilayered structures.  The particular instrument requested is
              of a very adaptable nature, making it suitable for many specific applications,
              including precision measurements in nearly the full diffraction space, as well
              as grazing-incidence reflectometry.  This instrument will not duplicate
              existing XRD instrumentation in Puerto Rico.  Instead, it will complement and
              complete current resources, enabling fundamental structural characterization of
              materials now being produced, as well as advanced materials which will be
              developed in the future.  In order to provide access to the greatest number of
              researchers, a self-serve facility for qualified users will be established.  A
              significant number of researchers at the Mayaguez and Rio Piedras campuses of
              UPR, along with their graduate students, will benefit immediately or in the
              near future from access to this facility.  It is expected that this substantial
              improvement of the infrastructure for Materials Science research will be
              conducive to improved quality of the crystalline materials and structures
              produced and will stimulate additional work in this area for years to come, and
              enrich the education and training of students
%%%.
This equipment will enable
              the faculty to expand their research activities in several areas, and
              significantly improve the infrastructure and capability to integrate research
              and education.
***

