Title       : UMEB: Wright State University partners with Wilberforce University to yield
               RESULTS (Research in Environmental Stress for the Underrepresented: Long Term
               Studies)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9975314

Award Number: 9975314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly michele.wheatly@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1135,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Wheatly and her colleagues will conduct a program of Undergraduate Mentoring
              in Environmental Biology (UMEB), with three objectives:  (1) to provide
              long-term research experience under the guidance of a faculty mentor for
              students with physical disabilities and from ethnic/racial minority groups, (2)
              to increase the entry of these students into graduate programs in environmental
              biology, and (3) to foster interdisciplinary approaches to environmental
              biology upon which to build curricular and research initiatives.

Students
              with physical disabilities are the most underrepresented group in science,
              while ethnic minorities also remain significantly underrepresented. 
              Undergraduate participants will be recruited from these two groups both at
              Wright State University (WSU, a leader in disability services) and at
              Wilberforce University (a historically Black university), whose students can
              get credit for WSU coursework through an articulation agreement.  Researchers
              at WSU have built a highly visible, extramurally funded program in
              environmental stress that involves undergraduate students.  With appropriate
              infrastructure and attitude, WSU faculty members will mentor students through
              didactic coursework and long-term research experience.  An extended research
              opportunity will enable students to experience research success and should
              result in increasing the representation of both groups in environmental
              biology.

Application materials from the two targeted groups of students will
              be reviewed by a selection committee, which will accept 10 students based on
              demonstrated competence in biology and interest in environmental research.  Ten
              faculty mentors were selected from three departments (Biological Sciences,
              Psychology, Pharmacology & Toxicology) based on funded research in the broad
              area of environmental stress that will expose students to diverse conceptual,
              methodological, and organismal approaches.  The selected faculty members have
              all demonstrated effective mentoring of undergraduates from underrepresented
              groups, and three of them are members of underrepresented groups.  They are all
              volunteering their time as mentors.

During the summer before students enter
              the research lab, they will take a required course that will be a survival
              guide to scientific research.  They will then enter a selected lab for a
              minimum of one year, where they will perform research under the supervision of
              a faculty member.  Expectations and responsibilities for mentors and students
              are clearly defined and contracted.  Enrichment activities (project lab
              meetings, social events, yearly symposium, electronic publishing) that create a
              community of scientific peers, as well as continuous monitoring and active
              counseling in professional development, should help to retain students in the
              program.  Students will demonstrate their success in research through
              oral/poster presentations and written reports/manuscript submissions.  An
              advisory board will monitor overall success of the project through assessment
              exercises.
