Title       : Acquisition of Hardware for a Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscope Dedicated
               to Synthetic and Natural Polymer Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9975694

Award Number: 9975694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harald W. Ade harald_ade@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Zimba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George D. Cody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan C. Sokolov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miriam Rafailovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975694
Ade

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition of
              components to build a scanning transmission X-Ray microscope (STXM) facility
              dedicated to polymer science and engineering projects at the Advanced Light
              Source (ALS).  This facility will be the sole endstation at an optimized
              bending magnet beamline.  It will increase instrument time for polymer
              applications at least 4 fold.  At least 25% of instrument time will be provided
              to qualified independent investigators through a peer reviewed competition
              administrated by the ALS.  The ALS has agreed to spend considerable resources
              ($550,000) to provide the synchrotron beamline/monochromator.  The beamline
              optics design has been completed.  A novel design in which the zone plate
              rather than the sample is scanned to form the image has been developed.  A
              stationary sample, with minimal constraints imposed by fine scan requirements,
              will more easily facilitate the heating, cooling, rotating and stretching of
              the samples.  Interferometric encoding which will improve the stability and
              spatial resolution achievable in spectroscopic mode, and will improve the
              registration of images acquired at different energies will be implemented. 
              More efficient detectors will be added, as well as an indexing sample stage,
              and on-line data analysis, and a novel higher-order-suppressor as new features.
               Together, these aspects will make the polymer-STXM significantly more capable
              and user-friendly than existing instruments.

The "revolutionary" approach of
              coupling to a bending magnet will significantly lower the necessary investment
              from about $4,000,000 for the undulator and its beamline to about $550,000 for
              a bending magnet beamline.  Since there are still plenty of unused bending
              magnet sources at various third generation synchrotron facilities, the
              potential for developing or constructing additional STXMs without the need for
              new synchrotron radiation sources improves dramatically.

All participating
              academic institutions have substantial research and education programs
              supported from many sources.  As a unique and complex piece of instrumentation,
              the new Polymer STXM facility will substantially enrich the education of
              students.
%%%
This facility will significantly advance the fields of polymer
              science and engineering, and train a new generation of scientists and engineers
              in x-ray microscopy techniques.  There is a world-wide shortage of personnel
              with expertise in this field.
***

