Title       : Citizen-Science Alliances in Contested Environmental Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9975518

Award Number: 9975518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84091              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phil Brown Phil_Brown@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project examines citizen-science alliances that deal with "contested
              illnesses" that involve major scientific disputes and extensive public debates
              over environmental causes. Focusing on three major disputes -- Gulf War
              Syndrome, small air particles and asthma, and environmental factors in breast
              cancer - this project examines research collaborations between laypeople and
              scientists, either as individual scientists or as part of research groups or
              institutes, that identify, determine causes of, and plan remediation of,
              contested environmental illnesses.  For each area, this project will examine
              the following questions: 1) How do laypeople decide they need science allies
              and seek them out? 2) Where are allies found? 3) How do scientists who serve as
              allies think about their role? 4) How successful are the processes and outcomes
              of citizen-science alliances? 5) Do science allies face discouragement,
              condemnation, or bias as a result of their activities? 6) Should policymakers
              and regulatory agencies create new organizational contexts, based on
              laypeople's experiences, that will provide science allies?  Data include state
              and federal government documents involved in setting up the Long Island Breast
              Cancer study, the Silent Spring Institute, the Massachusetts Toxic Use
              Reduction Institute, and the VA-sponsored Gulf War research centers, as well as
              EPA documents on its small air particles conference.  Interviews will be
              conducted with citizen activists, scientists, and government officials involved
              in the three contested illnesses, as well as with researchers at organizations
              that provide various forms of research aid to citizens.  Site-based observation
              will be carried out at Silent Spring Institute (breast cancer), Boston
              Environmental Hazard Center (Gulf War illnesses), Action for Community and
              Environment (asthma), and Toxic Use Reduction Institute. Results will expand
              existing knowledge of public participation in science and of transformations in
              scientific methods. By understanding public reactions, policy makers can be
              prepared for similar issues in the future.  This project includes substantial
              support for graduate students to assist with this component of the research,
              which is part of a related larger project funded by the Robert Wood Johnson
              Foundation.  Results will be reported at meetings and in journals; a book is
              also planned. 
