Title       : Transposition of IS492 and Regulation of Expression of Extracellular
               Polysaccharide in Pseudoalteromonas atlantica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9975332

Award Number: 9975332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna G. Karls   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas atlantica switches between an
              extracellular polysaccharide (eps)-producing and an eps non-producing state. 
              The switch is mediated by a precise insertion and excision of the transposon I
              S492.  The proposed research will characterize transposition of the insertion
              element and determine how reversible insertion of IS492 at the eps locus
              regulates extracellular polysaccharide (EPS) synthesis.  The precise insertion
              of IS492 at its target site within the eps gene eliminates extracellular
              polysaccharide production and excision of the transposon from eps restores eps
              expression.  The transposition process is novel in that it is responsive to
              growth conditions, such as cell density.  Because of this, the regulation of
              transposition is likely to be novel.  The research will first define the
              essential steps in transposition using PCR-based assays and genetic
              selections/screens for IS492 insertion/excision at the eps locus in P.
              atlantica and on a plasmid in E. coli (Balding-Perkins et al., J. Bacteriol.
              181(16), 1999). As these steps are determined, the regulation of transposition
              and the impact on eps expression will be assayed by measuring the frequency of
              transposition of IS492 in response to various environmental signals.   Primer
              extension assays for eps mRNA and genetic fusions for eps expression will be
              used to identify the regulatory link between IS492 transposition and EPS
              production.  

Studying the regulation of EPS production by marine bacteria
              is extremely important to our understanding of the establishment of many types
              of marine ecosystems.  It has been shown that the EPS produced by marine
              bacteria, including P. atlantica, facilitates the development of microbial
              biofilms.  P. atlantica is an excellent organism for both basic research and
              research on marine microbial communities because it is culturable and amenable
              to genetic and biochemical characterization, whereas many of the other marine
              bacteria are not.  The proposed research aimed at understanding the regulation
              of transposition and the role of this transposition in extracellular
              polysaccharide synthesis, therefore, is essential to our understanding of the
              broader picture of marine microbial communities.



							 

