Title       : Identification of Plant Genes Involved in Agrobacterium-Mediated Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9975715

Award Number: 9975715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4440751            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanton B. Gelvin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vitaly Citovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The objectives of this project are to identify plant genes involved in
              Agrobacterium-mediated genetic transformation, and subsequently to utilize this
              information to improve the genetic transformation of maize and to prevent crown
              gall disease on grape.  

	Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is the most
              popular method currently in use for generating transgenic plants.  However,
              there are many aspects of the transformation process that are poorly
              understood.  Specifically, little is known about the roles that host genes and
              proteins play in Agrobacterium-plant cell interactions. Understanding of the
              plant contribution to the transformation process will certainly result in new
              technologies for genetic manipulation of agronomically important species that
              are presently recalcitrant to Agrobacterium-mediated transformation.  For
              example, many plants can be relatively efficiently transformed transiently by
              Agrobacterium, yet their stable transformation remains elusive.  It is likely
              that these crops are deficient in T-DNA integration into the plant genome.  An
              understanding of the plant genes involved in the integration process may allow
              scientists to devise strategies to over-express homologues of these genes in
              the recalcitrant species and alter them to transformation-competence.  On the
              other hand, inactivation of the same genes in susceptible plants will make them
              crown gall-resistant.  Crown gall disease affects numerous target crop species,
              and its prevention would be important for many sectors of the agricultural
              community.  

	This project involves an international collaboration of three
              laboratories (two in the US and one in Switzerland) and will use four
              approaches to identify and characterize plant genes involved in
              Agrobacterium-mediated transformation:  1)  Screening of existing collections
              of T-DNA-tagged Arabidopsis mutants for rat (resistant to Agrobacterium
              transformation) phenotypes.  These mutants will be investigated genetically and
              biochemically to identify the specific stage at which the transformation
              process is arrested; 2)  Utilization of the yeast one- and two-hybrid systems
              to identify plant proteins that interact with Vir (virulence) proteins
              transferred to the plant by Agrobacterium.  These Vir proteins include VirF,
              VirB2, VirD2, and VirE2; 3) Utilization of differential display, microarray,
              and subtraction approaches to identify plant genes whose expression is up- or
              down-regulated during early stages of Agrobacterium-mediated transformation; 4)
               Characterization of Arabidopsis genes involved in Agrobacterium-mediated
              transformation using reverse genetics, and examination of the functions of
              proteins encoded by these genes using specific biological assays developed in
              each of the collaborating laboratories.

	The information gained from our
              analysis of Arabidopsis genes will be used to genetically modify maize such
              that it will become more susceptible to Agrobacterium-mediated transformation,
              and to genetically modify grape such that it will become resistant to crown
              gall disease.  

