Title       : The Structure and Function of the Expressed Portion of the Wheat Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9975989

Award Number: 9975989
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin O. Qualset coqualset@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Camille M. Steber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Div Agr & Nat Res
	      1111 Franklin Street
	      Oakland, CA  946075200    510/987-0042

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to generate and map a large number (target is
              10,000) of unique DNA sequences from the genetic code (genome) of bread wheat.
              The assumption is that these unique DNA sequences will correspond to individual
              genes of wheat and their identification is a first step in determining the
              function of these genes. The ultimate goal is to use this information to
              improve the quality and yield of wheat and enable successful adaptations to new
              and marginal environments, thus increasing production. Wheat belongs to a group
              of closely related species (termed a tribe, named Triticeae) in the grass
              family which includes more than 300 species, including several very important
              crops (bread and durum wheats, barley, rye, triticale) and several forage-grass
              species. World-wide, wheat is the most widely grown crop and the third in
              economic significance for the United States. The US is the largest wheat
              exporter in the world and, to maintain this market continuous genetic
              improvement of the crop is required. 

Recent advances in plant genetics and
              genomics offer unprecedented opportunities for discovering the function of
              genes and potential for their manipulation for crop improvement. Because of the
              large size of the wheat genome (the total DNA or genetic information of the
              species), it is unlikely that the actual base pair sequences of the DNA
              molecules will be learned completely in the near future. This project takes an
              alternative strategy to realize the benefits of new techniques for discovering
              genes and learning their function (functional genomics). Following the
              identification of 10,000 unique wheat DNA sequences (termed ESTs, Expressed
              Sequence Tags), they will be mapped to their physical location on the
              chromosomes of wheat. This process utilizes a unique feature of the wheat
              chromosomes, their ability to tolerate deletions of portions of the chromosomes
              and still produce a viable plant. The mapping logic is direct: if an EST is
              present in a plant with complete chromosomes, but absent in a plant missing a
              known part of a single chromosome, then it can be inferred that the DNA
              sequence that corresponds to that EST is located in that segment of the
              chromosome. By the end of the mapping component of this project, a most
              valuable tool will have been produced: 10,000 unique DNA sequences, likely
              corresponding to genes, whose physical location in the chromosomes of wheat are
              known. This sets the stage for the next phase of the project, the analysis of
              this array of mapped ESTs to determine function. The project will focus on
              characteristics of the wheat reproductive stages, from flowering signals
              through seed development and dormancy. The information gathered on the
              sequence, function, and position of these genes in the wheat chromosomes will
              be collected and distributed by means of a USDA public database of genomics
              information (known as GrainGenes). Because of the close relationship of wheat
              to other species in the Triticeae tribe and other grass species, especially
              corn and rice, the results from this project will be immediately applicable to
              other crops in the Triticeae. Most of the collaborating investigators are
              already collaborating members of the International Triticeae Mapping Initiative
              which has produced molecular genetic maps of the chromosomes of wheat and
              related species. The diversity of experimental techniques and traits pursued in
              the individual laboratories collaborating on this project will be an ideal
              training ground for graduate students and postdoctoral scientists. The large
              pool of well-characterized and mapped unique DNA sequences, available in the
              public domain will be an exceedingly important resource for future Triticeae
              research and basic functional genomics research.

