Title       : Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Mechanical and Magnetic Property
               Measurements in Small Dimensions and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9975924

Award Number: 9975924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shefford P. Baker shefford.baker@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri Suzuki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975924
Baker
This grant will provide partial support for the acquisition of
              an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) which will be modified to be used to make
              measurements of mechanical and magnetic properties in the submicrometer regime.
               The standard AFM displacement sensor will be replaced with load-displacement
              transducers which can be used both for scanning force topography imaging and
              for instrumented identation ("nanoindentation") and scratch (nanoscratch")
              testing. The AFM's scanner will be modified to incorporate a sample stage that
              contains an electromagnet.  This stage will be used to apply fields
              perpendicular and parallel to thin film samples during magnetic force
              microscopy measurements in novel magnetoresistive and magnetostrictive
              materials.  

This is to be a shared instrument.  It will be set up to
              conduct either mechanical property or magnetic property measurements and will
              remain in this configuration for some time.  The addition of this equipment
              machine will enable the investigators to obtain valuable information rapidly in
              a number of ongoing projects and will facilitate new efforts to investigate the
              properties of materials in small dimensions.  In addition, both investigators
              are very active sponsors of undergraduate research and outreach programs. 
              Their undergraduate and graduate students will have ready access to this
              machine with attendant educational benefits.  Approximately 20% of the machine
              time will be made available to other researchers and to new projects in the
              hope of stimulating new results in the area of materials properties in small
              dimensions.
%%%
This equipment will significantly enhance the research and
              educational training of students, and enable mechanical and magnetic properties
              as well as new phenomena, in thin film materials.   


