Title       : Mathematical Explanation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9975628

Award Number: 9975628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paolo Mancosu mancosu@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Explanations are central to science and ordinary life. It is thus not surprising
              that the topic of scientific explanation is central to philosophy of science.
              By contrast, the topic of explanation in mathematics has received very little
              attention. However, mathematicians recognize that some proofs or theories are
              more valuable than others on account of their explanatory power. Mancosu
              proposes to investigate the topic of mathematical explanation from three
              different points of view. The historical part of the project shows that
              concerns about the explanatory power of proofs and theories have shaped the
              history and the philosophy of mathematics since the Greeks. The second part of
              the project is related to mathematical practice. Here, he will analyze, by
              means of a suitable choice of mathematical episodes from twentieth-century
              mathematics, the major patterns of mathematical explanation found in
              mathematical practice. In the third part of the project, Mancosu will provide
              an analytical discussion of the available theories of mathematical explanation
              (Steiner, Resnik, Kitcher) and propose his own account of mathematical
              explanation.
