Title       : The Mathematical Works of Thomas Hobbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9975800

Award Number: 9975800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Jesseph doug_jesseph@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support for the preparation of three volumes of mathematical
              works to be published by Oxford University Press as part of the Clarendon
              Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes. The principal investigator has signed a
              contract to edit these volumes, and the award is being used to carry out the
              three tasks necessary for preparation of a new edition: assembling the text
              from the originals (both printed and manuscript), translating the non-English
              materials, and redaction (including notation of variants, writing of
              introductions, and preparation of explanatory notes).

Hobbes is a figure of
              central importance in the development of early modern science, and his
              prominence as a political theorist has placed him at the center of numerous
              studies of the social, cultural, and intellectual context of
              seventeenth-century science. Hobbes's significance for the development of
              mathematics is also profound, although scholars have tended to overlook his
              mathematical work. This relative neglect stems, in part, from the mistaken
              impression that his mathematical writings are nothing more than misguided
              attempts to solve such unsolvable problems as the squaring of the circle.
              Although Hobbes was convinced that his first principles would enable the
              solution of such problems, the majority of his mathematical writings concern
              methodological and philosophical issues that are independent of his failed
              circle quadratures, and many other of his writings are part of his long and
              bitter controversy with John Wallis and other members of the Royal Society. A
              proper edition of his mathematical works is thus of great interest to STS
              scholarship generally, and particularly to studies of science and mathematics
              in the seventeenth century.

A major obstacle impeding scholarly attention to
              Hobbes's mathematics is the fact that the current standard edition of his
              collected works has a completely inadequate presentation of the mathematical
              material. This fact makes this older edition almost useless for scholarly
              investigation of Hobbes's mathematics. By including complete texts, adequate
              diagrams, introductions, translations, notes, and a critical apparatus, the
              mathematical volumes of the Clarendon Works will make accessible a wealth of
              material relevant to studies of the philosophical, social, and cultural
              background of seventeenth-century mathematics.




