Title       : Monetary Policy with Market Frictions: Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9975506

Award Number: 9975506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. King rgk4m@fermi.clas.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Monetary policy analysis requires the construction of models of macroeconomic
              activity.  Such models need to be realistic, capturing the main features of
              business cycles.  They need to highlight the main channels by which monetary
              policy affects the economy.  Finally, the models need to be used to uncover the
              main trade-offs facing moentary policy-makers.  This project develops detailed
              macroeconomic models that feature various frictions including imperfect
              competition, sticky prices and costs of adjusting portfolios.  This research
              consists of theoretical and empirical analysis in the following three areas:  
              Price dynamics and macroeconomic activity; Design of monetary policy rules, and
              Construction and evaluation of small-scale macroeconomic models.

Price
              dynamics and macroeconomic activity:  One part of the proposed research
              explores empirical implications of state dependent pricing, drawing on recently
              completed theoretical work by the principal investigator. The theory makes
              predictions about the form of coefficient instability in standard time
              dependent pricing models-these predictions can be tested on aggregate data.
              Another part of this research concerns the dynamics of disinflation
              experiences. The new research investigates the role of credibility in
              disinflation using measures of long-term expected inflation extracted from
              interest rates.

Design of monetary policy rules: In fully articulated
              macroeconomic models, monetary policy rules can be designed to maximize
              welfare. Previous work by the principal investigator explored optimal policy
              with imperfect competition and sticky prices; the new research further develops
              the methodology and applies it to more realistic macroeconomic models. However,
              there can be multiple equilibria in macroeconomic models if monetary policy is
              implemented with an interest rate rule. Previous work has found restrictions on
              interest rate rules which lead to unique equilibria in models without
              investment and capital. For example, uniqueness requires that rate responses to
              inflation (either expected or actual) must be very aggressive. The new research
              investigates the limits on interest rate rules in more realistic economies. The
              goal is to determine whether unique equilibria obtain for a wider range of
              parameters within this new class of models.  

Construction and evaluation of
              small-scale macroeconomic models:  Recent work has also stressed that financial
              market frictions can lead to liquidity effects of monetary policy on interest
              rates, but only in models that display very rapid adjustments of the price
              level.  The new research therefore combines financial market frictions with
              monopolistic competition and sticky prices, a synthesis which promises to
              overcome key difficulties with each approach. Empirical implications of this
              model are studied under money stock and interest rate rules, using an
              econometric approach previously developed by the principal investigator.

