Title       : Random Solids and Other Topics in Condensed Matter Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a9975187

Award Number: 9975187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Goldbart goldbart@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975187
Goldbart

This award supports research into the fundamental
              properties of disordered solid materials, such as rubber, glasses, and gels,
              that are formed by the permanent or temporary random bonding of atoms,
              molecules, or macromolecules.  The proposed research focuses on the questions:
              Given their randomness, what can one say at all about random solids? Can one
              characterize their structure and and their response to perturbations? Do they
              exhibit universal aspects that transcend any particular material?  Are there
              any senses in which random solids are simpler or more universal than their
              crystalline counterparts?  Can one develop an accurate theory of the highly
              unusual transition to the random solid state?  What light, if any, do
              vulcanized solids shed on glassy matter?  These questions will be attacked
              using statistical mechanics, statistical field theory, and large-scale computer
              simulations.   The PI plans to work on other topics of condensed matter theory
              including aspects of superfluidity in Bose-Einstein condensed alkali-metal
              gases and liquid helium-three, electrical properties of magnetic compounds, and
              biology inspired questions concerning the spatial structure of macromolecules. 
              The proposed research provides important educational opportunities for the next
              generation of condensed matter theorists.  
%%%
This award supports
              fundamental theoretical research into the nature of disordered solids, many of
              which are ubiquitous in our everyday experience.  These include rubber, glass,
              and many foodstuffs.  The PI will use state-of-the-art techniques in
              theoretical condensed matter theory to investigate the nature and properties of
              these materials.  The research environment will provide quality educational
              opportunities for the next generation of condensed matter theorists.


