Title       : UMEB: Preparing Students for Careers in Environmental Biology--A Massachusetts
               Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a9975177

Award Number: 9975177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Brainerd brainerd@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Prattis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Juanes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Jakob  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1135      UNGRAD MENTORING IN ENVIR BIOL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1135,9169,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology program at the
              University of Massachusetts at Amherst is to recruit and prepare UMEB Scholars
              to be professionals in the broadly-defined area of Environmental Biology.  The
              program includes (1) a recruitment plan with a focus on underrepresented
              groups, (2) opportunities for long-term independent research experiences with
              faculty mentors, (3) workshops in skills needed to succeed as environmental
              biologists, (4) extensive interactions with professional environmental
              biologists from a variety of fields, (5) peer mentoring, (6) mentor training
              and logistical support from the UMass community, and (7) a plan to disseminate
              the results of the program.

Long-term mentoring is known to be effective, so
              UMEB Scholars will be recruited early in their education and will participate
              in the program for multiple years.  UMEB Scholars will be recruited from two
              pools:  one group will be from three Massachusetts community colleges, and
              others will be UMass freshmen and sophomores.  Community college students will
              transfer to a Five-College institution to complete their four-year
              degree.

UMEB Scholars will participate in a residential summer program. 
              Each student will have a laboratory "home" and will conduct independent
              research with a faculty mentor from the Five-College Consortium (UMass,
              Hampshire, Smith, Mount Holyoke, and Amherst).  Students will meet with
              environmental biologists to become familiar with a range of career
              opportunities.  Workshops and field trips will help students prepare for
              graduate school or the job market.  A peer mentor will live with the students
              to provide additional support.  Each year, the summer program will end in a
              capstone day, when students will present their research in a poster session to
              which their families will be invited.

During the academic year, students in
              the Amherst area will continue to conduct research and will attend seminars and
              monthly meetings.

The potential for success of this program is enhanced by a
              supportive network at UMass that will provide extensive mentor training,
              assessment, and logistical help.  The program will be managed by three faculty
              directors and aided by a recruitment coordinator.  This program is well
              positioned to meet its goals of training a small but well-prepared group of
              environmental biologists.
