Title       : RUI: Databases and Database Tools for Canopy Science - What Trees Can Teach Us
               about Integrating Database Use into the Research Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a9975510

Award Number: 9975510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $721181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini M. Nadkarni nadkarnn@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith B. Cushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lois M. Delcambre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Project will develop database tools that will enhance the ability of
              researchers in one emerging and interdisciplinary field -- forest canopy
              studies -- to collect, analyze, link, and archive their data.

The field of
              forest canopies is currently in its adolescence, and is growing rapidly in
              terms of interest from the scientific community, the general public, and policy
              makers. Coordinated study of the canopy is beginning at shared research sites,
              but canopy researchers view their major obstacle to answer emerging questions
              as the lack of database tools that would allow them to gather their data in
              harmonized ways and to link their data to enable comparative
              studies.

Previous NSF-sponsored collaborative research developed preliminary
              database tools and datasets, based on pilot studies of forest canopy
              structure/function relationships at the Wind River Canopy Crane Research
              Facility. These tools included data models, a metadata database, and a
              web-based project inventory for a multi-PI global climate change study.

This
              project develops these tools further by gathering archived and current data to
              test hypotheses on canopy structure/function relationships in a gradient of
              coniferous forests of differing structural diversity, ranging from very
              structurally complex (the late-successional primary forests) to very
              structurally simple (young monospecific plantation forests). These tools will
              be extended to incorporate forests of different structural constituents from
              two other forest types in Panama and Australia, both of which have a canopy
              crane facility and support collaborative canopy research. Researchers at the
              H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest, the Forest Science Database Center at Oregon
              State University, the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, and the Centre
              for Tropical Forest Studies will participate as part of a collaboration.

The
              project will disseminate findings through workshops and through the development
              of a "virtual center" of canopy research, building upon the existing
              International Canopy Network which is housed at Evergreen State. Research
              activities will be incorporated into opportunities for undergraduate and
              graduate students.

