Title       : Formation and Morphological Evolution of Nanoporous Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a9975190

Award Number: 9975190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean G. Corcoran sgc@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975190
Corcoran

A novel method for the production of nanoporous metals is
              using alloy corrosion for selective dissolution.  This process involves
              electrochemically parting one element from a binary alloy to produce a highly
              nanoporous metal of the remaining element.  Although this process is well known
              within the corrosion community, the potential benefit of using the selective
              dissolution process to produce high surface-area electrodes has not been
              explored.  This grant provides a detailed characterization of the nanoporosity
              created in metal alloys during selective dissolution under well-controlled
              environmental conditions.   The conditions are designed to change the relative
              rates of the roughening and smoothing processes.  Small angle neutron
              scattering (SANS) characterizes the full three-dimensional morphology of the
              porosity.  The SANS experiments are carried out at the Cold Neutron Research
              Facility of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.   Scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM) characterizes the surface morphological changes that
              occur during dealloying.  The STM can also quantify the surface diffusivity of
              the more noble element in the various dealloying environments.  The research
              plan includes:  (1) quantifying the in-situ time evolution of the full
              three-dimensional pore size distribution that is formed during selective
              dissolution as a function of electrochemical environment, applied voltage and
              alloy composition; (2) quantifying the coarsening kinetics of porous metals as
              a function of temperature, electrochemical environment, and melting point of
              the alloying elements; and (3) using STM to measure the evolution of island
              sizes developed during selective removal of surface atoms as a function of the
              electrochemical environment.
%%%
This research gives the first detailed
              morphological characterization of the effect of electrochemical environment on
              formation of porosity during dealloying.  The research data provide a
              foundation for using selective dissolution to create high surface-area
              electrodes for amperometric sensors (with a specific interest in biomedical
              sensing).  Nanoporous metals have tremendous potential in such diverse areas as
              high surface-area electrodes for electrochemical energy storage and conversion,
              biomedical sensor applications for disease diagnosis and treatment, and unique
              filtration applications in highly corrosive environments.  
***

