Title       : Acquisition of a State of the Art Micro Raman Spectrometer for Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9975691

Award Number: 9975691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Schadler schadl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna Rajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Siegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pulickel M. Ajayan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thierry A. Blanchet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9975691
Schadler

This award will provide partial support for the acquisition
              of a micro Raman spectrometer (MRS) for use of applications including: 
              micro-mechanical behavior of materials, tribology, nanotube technology,
              biomaterials, and microelectronics.  Students from materials engineering,
              mechanical engineering, and biomediacal engineering will be the primary users
              of the proposed equipment, but it will be available to other users as well. 
              This instrument will provide research capability currently not available at
              Rensselaer. It will strengthen many current research programs and provide
              numerous opportunities for developing new programs.  The MRS is a
              state-of-the-art central facility with an order of magnitude faster count times
              and better spatial resolution than the technology currently available at
              Rensselaer.

The MRS will do more than impact individual projects. It:  (1)
              will contribute to the infrastructure in Rensselaer's developing center of
              excellence in nano-structured materials; (2) will help advance the field of
              micromechanical behavior (i.e., MRS is the only technique capable of directly
              probing the strain in fibers embedded in a polymer composite), and ; (3) will
              be used for innovation in studying materials for microelectronic applications
              and tribology, and bone implant materials.

MRS is becoming a standard
              analytical technique, and RPI students in many areas of study need experience
              in Raman spectroscopy.  The facility will be available to our microscopy for
              undergraduate research projects.  The Department also teaches a course in
              nanostructured materials in a seminar format.  Thus, as new developments are
              uncovered using micro Raman spectroscopy, they will be included in this course
              through the guest lectures and/or student projects.
%%%
This is a unique
              investment which is expected to advance fundamental knowledge, and provide
              excellent training for students at all levels.
***

