Title       : Self-Organized Nanostructure Formation in Chain Molecule Systems: Computer
               Simulation Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9975625

Award Number: 9975625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanat K. Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9975625
Santa, K. Kumar
PA State U.

One of the important
              challenges in current synthetic strategies is to design chain
molecules,
              oligomeric or polymeric, which can reversibly self-organize into supramolecules
              structures with desired shape, size and functionality.  These include short
              copolymers and small hydrogen bonding molecules of molecular weights less than
              1kD, which can spontaneously assemble into well-defined nanostructures with
              molecular weights in the 102kD range.  At the other extreme, associating
              polymers in solution reversibly assemble into infinite gels.  These self
              assembled systems, which thus span the size range from nanoscopic to
              macroscopic, have applications in varied context, e.g., as viscosity modifiers
              for oils, in food (starches, gelatin), and in optoelectronic applications.  The
              current understanding of the connection between the microscopic architecture of
              the building blocks and the resulting supramolecular structure is a nascent
              stage.  As we shall show, the factor governing self assembly and the phase
              behavior of these materials are closely related.  Therefore, we propose to
              utilize a suite of novel computer simulation methods, developed to simulate
              phase equilibria in complex fluids, to understand these interrelated issues. 
              Specifically, we shall address the following problems as part of the proposed
              research:  (a) The microphase separation and resulting self assembly of short
              copolymers into nanostructures, (b) The supramolecular assembly of
              macromolecules with associating moieties into thermoreversible gels and (c) The
              role of self assembly of polyampholyte solutions in determing their phase
              behavior.  Through this approach we shall provide much deeper insights into
              this relatively new strategy of creating materials with highly defined
              structure and properties.  

