Title       : Assessment of Gene Content, Colinearity and Evolution in Barley, Maize, Rice,
               Sorghum and Wheat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2000    
File        : a9975793

Award Number: 9975793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2008066            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Bennetzen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge Dubcovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andris Kleinhofs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. SanMiguel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruno W. S. Sobral  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the project is to determine the structure, composition and
              evolution of several important plant genomes: barley, maize, rice, sorghum and
              wheat. The chromosomes of plants are very large and complex in structure,
              although different plant species vary by over 500 fold in the amount of DNA
              contained within the chromosomes.  Despite this tremendous variation in DNA
              amount, gene content appears to vary relatively little.  Hence, it would be
              valuable to determine the nature of the DNA content in the chromosomes of
              plants, and how these DNAs (especially genes) are arranged.  The family of
              plants called grasses, including barley, maize, rice, sorghum and wheat,
              provide most of the world's food and are also fairly closely related.  Yet they
              differ over 11 fold in genome size and have very different optimal growth
              environments and yield potential.  This study will investigate the composition
              of sequences in four to five evolutionarily-related regions of these five
              genomes.  The approach will be to generate the DNA sequence of approximately
              100 kilobase pair segments for each genome, isolated as clones in bacterial
              artificial chromosome vectors.   These sequences will then be analyzed for gene
              content and organization, and for the presence and nature of other types of
              DNAs.  These results will indicate how grass chromosomes are composed and how
              they evolve.  This knowledge will permit more efficient techniques in all
              laboratories for gene isolation, for gene study, and for genetic
              engineering.



