Title       : Technological and Organizational Change in the U.S. Trucking Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9975143

Award Number: 9975143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Hubbard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This set of projects investigates several fundamental questions in the economics
              of formation, technology, and organizations by examining patterns in
              information technology (IT) adoption and organizational change in the United
              States trucking industry since the mid-1980s. The focus is on the diffusion of
              on-board computers and changes in the governance structure used to mediate
              trade between carriers and shippers. As of 1987 almost no tractor-trailers had
              on-board computers installed; by 1992, about 20% of the U.S. fleet did. During
              the same period, carriers and shippers began to use longer-term contractual
              arrangements. Between 1987 and 1992, about $25 billion in shipping transactions
              -- roughly the revenues of the entire rail industry -- moved from spot markets
              to long-term contracts or internal procurement. On-board computers provide
              information that can be used to improve incentives and coordination within
              carriers and between carriers and shippers. Economic theory suggests that
              adoption may be accompanied by organizational change. The concurrent
              technological and organizational changes in this industry offer an opportunity
              to explore a series of long-standing issues, including: Does the diffusion of
              new information and communication technologies favor transacting through
              markets or within firms? How, where, and why do information costs impede
              transacting through spot markets? How, where and why do they impede transacting
              within firms? How do local market conditions affect governance? How wide is the
              scope of hold-up based theories of governance? How does IT affect productivity,
              how large are the productivity gains associated with IT use, and where are the
              productivity gains the highest?

The empirical work will use data from the
              Bureau of the Census' Truck Inventory and Use Survey. The projects in this
              proposal use truck-level data from the 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997 surveys. Each
              survey contains observations of 25,000-40,000 heavy-duty truck-tractors.
              Variables describe trucks' attributes and use. Attributes include trucks' make,
              model year, engine size, and whether different classes of on-board computers
              are installed. "Use" variables describe trucks' base state, how far from home
              they were operated, the type of trailer to which they were commonly attached,
              the classes of products they typically hauled, the governance form under which
              they typically operated, and various measures of capacity utilization. These
              data are ideal for studies which apply analytic frameworks that take trucks or,
              because individual trucks are used in consistent ways from day to day, shipping
              transactions as the unit of analysis. Decisions regarding on-board computer use
              and governance are made both at the transaction---as well as the firm--level.
              The level of disaggregation in the data provides for a good fit between
              theoretical and empirical frameworks.  It also permits direct application of
              standard theories of contracting and governance, which commonly take the
              transaction as the unit of analysis.

This proposal describes three projects.
              The first project develops a model in which new information can affect
              governance in several ways suggested by theories of organizations. It then
              tests propositions from this model with estimates of relationships between
              on-board computer adoption and changes in governance. The empirical work
              exploits the availability of multiple cross-sections of data. The second
              project investigates the scope of hold-up-based theories and examines the
              extent to which changes in governance between 1987 and 1992 were due to factors
              other than on-board computer diffusion. The third project explores the
              productivity improvements associated with on-board computer use: the degree to
              which it has increased capacity utilization and fuel economy. This study
              exploits differences in on-board computer use across hauls and time. These
              projects are both of interest by themselves and as inputs to complementary
              future research which investigates relationships between technological change,
              market formation, and industry structure.

