Title       : Preparation of Iridium(I) Complexes and Investigation of Their Electronic
               Excited States: A University/Community College Research Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9975385

Award Number: 9975385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Crosby gac@wsunix.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Glenn Crosby of Washington State University is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program, and by the Office of
              Interdisciplinary Programs, of the Mathematics and Physical Sciences Division
              for a program of research dealing with the preparation of iridium(I) complexes,
              and investigation of their electronic excited states. This research will
              involve students and faculty members of community colleges located in (mainly
              rural) eastern Washington as coworkers. 

This research program will carry
              out the synthesis of a carefully designed series of  complexes of iridium, and 
              study the luminescence and related  properties of these materials. One
              objective of the research will be to understand, on a fundamental level, how
              the internal electronic structure, and the photophysical behavior, of these
              complexes resembles and differs from the corresponding characteristics of
              related platinum complexes. A second main objective of the project will be to
              increase the number of students at community colleges in eastern Washington who
              continue their education in science beyond the community college level. Many
              such students are Hispanics or Native Americans. Community college students and
              faculty members will carry out parts of this research during summers.
              Recruitment of outstanding community college students and faculty to
              participate in this program will be aided by a network of teachers in eastern
              Washington who have previous connections with the Principal Investigator and
              are familiar with his research. 
