Title       : Undergraduate Research in Mechanical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EID 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9000739

Award Number: 9000739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EID  DIVISION 0F ENGIN INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOP
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42109              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanford G. Meek meek@mech.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Hoeppner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              An REU Site Program is proposed that will offer a wide variety of              
              opportunities of approximately 10 students to perform research on a            
              broad range of mechanical engineering topics during a 9-week summer            
              period.  National advertising of the program and selection procedures          
              to be used as an integral part of the program will maximize the                
              possibility of attracting top students nationally, including students          
              who are women, handicapped, members of minority groups.  Students              
              selected for the program will have the opportunity of choosing a               
              summer project from a wide range of topics that encompass virtually            
              the complete realm of mechanical engineering.  Specific topics are             
              scheduled to be directed by faculty members with a specialty in that           
              specific areas and who are active in research in those topics.  The            
              students will be encouraged to enroll in an optional credit course for         
              their work.  Supplemental programs, such as fundamentals of shop               
              practice, instrumentation, and computer and computer graphics use,             
              will be available to participants who do not have that background.  An         
              integral thrust of the program is a seminar series that includes the           
              students presentation of their research plans (after approximately one         
              week on the program) and their results (at the end of the program).  A         
              formal written report will be required of each student summarizing             
              their efforts.  In all cases, attempts will be made to have the                
              students work publishable in the technical press.  Based on past               
              experience with similar programs, it is anticipated some of the                
              student work will, in fact, be publishable and that a large number of          
              these students will go on to graduate school.  Research areas involve          
              engineering design, control theory, fluid mechanics, heat transfer             
              applied mechanics of composite and manufacturing.
