Title       : The Role of Gene Regulation in Starvation-Induced Arrest in the Yeast S.
               Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9000556

Award Number: 9000556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1989  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Werner-Washburne maggieww@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,1114,1228,9135,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to gain insight into the process of               
              starvation-induced growth arrest in the yeast Saccharomyces                    
              cerevisiae.  Although growth arrest is a universal response to                 
              starvation, the process by which it occurs and the relationship                
              between growth arrest and the characteristic physiological                     
              changes associated with the arrest are not well understood.                    
              Recently several genes have been identified whose transcripts                  
              exhibit distinct patterns of accumulation as cells undergo                     
              starvation-induced arrest.  The accumulation of these transcripts              
              in arrest-defective mutants will be studied to determine the time              
              at which the mutants stop development and, thus, to map control                
              points during arrest.  The promoter of one gene whose arrest-                  
              specific transcript accumulation is cAMP-mediated will be fused                
              to a selectable marker gene to isolate regulatory mutants.                     
              Mutants obtained by this selection will be analyzed to determine               
              whether similarly-regulated genes are essential, whether their                 
              expression is sufficient to induce arrest, and whether cAMP is                 
              directly involved in this regulation.                                          
                                                                                             
              Nutrient limitation is one of the most common stresses affecting               
              cell viability and growth.  Because of this, there is great                    
              selective pressure for cells to sense, respond to, and survive                 
              prolonged periods of starvation.  When faced with nutrient                     
              limitations, yeast, like many other organisms, ceases dividing                 
              and undergoes a series of characteristic morphological,                        
              biochemical, and physiological changes.  The proposed research                 
              will provide insight into the mechanism of starvation induced                  
              growth arrest by characterizing some of the genes whose                        
              expression is altered during nutrient limitation.  Because                     
              starvation is a universal stress, understanding the general                    
              mechanisms by which simple eucaryotic organisms, like yeast,                   
              respond to and survive starvation may well provide insight into                
              these mechanisms in higher organisms.
