Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1990        
File        : a9000647

Award Number: 9000647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwayne D. Simmons   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Tallman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Bromer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              The award provides funds to the Natural Science Division at                    
              Pepperdine University to enhance an already active program of                  
              undergraduate research in biology by teaching students the common              
              elements of the research process and increasing their appreciation             
              for the diversity of biological subdisciplines.  In addition, the              
              program provides a mechanism whereby students from traditionally               
              underrepresented groups in science will have the opportunity to                
              experience biological research.  The program will begin in the                 
              summer with a 6-day research orientation workshop at the Murchison             
              Science Center during which students will be introduced to the uses            
              and limitations of specific research tools and techniques and                  
              immersed in the research process (literature review, hypothesis                
              formulation, and hypothesis testing).  After the orientation                   
              workshop, students will pursue individual research projects under              
              the direction of faculty in either ecology, cellular biochemistry,             
              or neurobiology.  All research projects will be designed to provide            
              students with insight into how scientists formulate research                   
              questions, design experiments, collect and analyze data, and                   
              communicate their results to the scientific community.  Over the               
              course of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special                    
              research seminars in each research area, giving students an                    
              opportunity to discuss their own data with other scientists.  Each             
              research group will hold weekly literature seminars to discuss                 
              current journal articles pertaining to their research interests.               
              The program will conclude with a student research symposium in                 
              early August.
