Title       : Collaborative Research: Geochemistry of the Source Regions of Southwest Pacific
               Volcanic Islands: An Approach Using Ultramafic Xenoliths & Host Basalts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1990   
File        : a9000197

Award Number: 9000197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1990   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Frey fafrey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1557      VOLCANOLOGY & MANTLE GEOCHEMIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a collaborative project between James Natland of Scripps               
              Institution, and Fred Frey of MIT.  It is an integrated textural,              
              mineralogical, and geochemical study of ultramafic xenoliths and               
              their host lavas from the Samoan, Society, and Marquesas Islands               
              in the southwest Pacific.  The xenoliths are in existing                       
              collections, and preliminary mineralogical and isotopic work                   
              demonstrates that they are related to processed of partial                     
              melting and magmatic differentiation beneath these volcanoes.                  
              The island chains contain some of the most enriched basaltic                   
              lavas in the ocean basins, which are hypothesized to be related                
              to a regionally widespread, perhaps hemispheric, geochemical                   
              anomaly in the mantle.  Xenoliths should provide complementary                 
              information on the compositions of mantle sources, the action of               
              metasomatic processes in influencing or modifying source                       
              compositions, and the processes of melt extraction and magmatic                
              differentiation in and near the source regions of ocean-island                 
              basalts.  Studies so far indicate that both residual (Type 1) and              
              "cumulate" (Type 2) xenoliths are present in all three island                  
              chains, and that substantial degrees of partial melting produced               
              possible tholeiitic magmas which crystallized olivine-spinel-                  
              pyroxene assemblages en route from the mantle.  Such lavas may                 
              comprise much  of the voluminous, submerged, but still unsampled               
              portions of these volcanoes.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Principal techniques to be applied to the xenoliths will be 1)                 
              petrography; 2) electron-probe microanalysis of mineral phases;                
              3) ion-probe analysis of trace-element abundances in minerals,                 
              and 4) a combination of mass spectrometry (conventional solid-                 
              source and ICP-MS), XRF, and instrumental neutron-activation                   
              analysis for whole-rocks and mineral separates.  Steps 1 and 2                 
              will be used to select the appropriate range of samples for                    
              detailed ion-probe, isotope, and trace-element studies.  Bulk                  
              chemical, trace-element, and isotopic measurements will be made                
              on host lavas and these related to temporal successions on the                 
              islands, which are already known.  Comparisons will also be made               
              to published information on continental and Hawaiian xenolith                  
              suites.
