Title       : Support for U.S. Participation in International GeographicalUnion Activities -
               including the 27th IGU Congress to be held in Washington, DC: August 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1990 
File        : a9000186

Award Number: 9000186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin G. Marcus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Geographic research has been extremely dynamic in recent decades,         
              making the quadrennial congresses sponsored by the International               
              Geographical Union (IGU) especially important settings at which                
              scholars from throughout the world meet to exchange the most current           
              results of their research and to plan future collaborative activities.         
              The 27th Congress of the ISPRS will be held in Washington, D.C., in            
              early August 1992, providing an excellent opportunity for American             
              scientists to meet directly with experts from throughout the rest of           
              the world.  This award provides support for the 1992 IGU Congress in           
              two ways.  First it provides financial assistance to offset costs of           
              the planning and operation of the congress.  Second, it provides a             
              means by which other federal government agencies may provide financial         
              support through interagency agreements that will fund supplements to           
              the initial award.                                                             
                   This award will provide valuable financial assistance for the             
              planning and operation of the largest and most significant gathering of        
              geographers from throughout the world since the 1984 IGU Congress in           
              Paris.  As has been true of past IGU activities, enhanced scholarship          
              and increased involvement in international collaborative activities by         
              American geographers will result.  Further positive consequences of            
              this grant will be realized if NSF can assist in channelling                   
              contributions from other federal agencies to this important activity.
