Title       : Landscape Archaeology at Olduvai Gorge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1995   
File        : a9000099

Award Number: 9000099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fidelis T. Masao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9000099  Blumenschine    With National science Foundation support, Dr. Robert
              Blumenschine  and his colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological 
              research at Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanzania. They will focus  on two
              stratigraphic horizons which date to just under 2 million  years ago and which
              preserve traces of human activity. Dr.  Blumenschine and colleagues will sample
              these horizons through  carefully controlled excavation and will collect both
              stone  artifacts and faunal remains. Because each horizon extends over a 
              considerable horizontal distance, through comparison of samples,  the team will
              be able to reconstruct a broad range of hominid  (and likely non-hominid)
              activities, gain insight into  geographically varied behavior, and place this
              in an  environmental framework.    This research is significant for two primary
              reasons. First it  will shed new light on the emergence of human cultural 
              capabilities. Olduvai Gorge has yielded not only important  hominid fossil
              remains, but also numerous assemblages of stone  tools and apparently
              associated fauna. These materials have  provided a focus for examination of the
              cultural capacities of  early hominids. Using data from the Olduvai sites 
              paleoanthropologists have speculated on issues such as the role  of meat in
              early hominid diet and questioned whether such peoples  had the ability to
              hunt. Most of the available data comes from  "sites" or dense, spacially
              clustered groups of stone and bone  remains. Archaeologists however have come
              to realize that such  clusters represent only one aspect of hominid behavior
              and that  smaller less dense scatters and areas which have no material at  all
              can also provide important relevant information. Dr.  Blumenschine and
              colleagues will focus their attention in a  systematic fashion on both the
              "clusters" and the scatter between  the sites. Secondly, this work will help to
              pioneer the field of  "landscape archaeology." The team will develop techniques
              for the  collection and analysis of non-s ite data and these methods will  be
              applicable in a wide variety of archaeological situations.    This work will
              provide insight into early hominid behavior. It  will yield data of interest to
              many archaeologists and assist in  the training of Tanzanian researchers. It
              will serve to  strengthen the scientific ties between African and United States
               scientists.  ***
