Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Cohomological Topics in Finite Transformation Groups and
               Applications"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1991  
File        : a9000582

Award Number: 9000582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Assadi assadi@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Symmetry plays an important role in mathematics, physics,                 
              and other sciences.  In mathematics, symmetry has many different               
              but related manifestations.  A finite group G of symmetries of a               
              space X induces symmetries on algebraic invariants of X.  In this              
              way, transformation groups and representation theory become                    
              intimately related.  In this project, the investigator will look               
              systematically at the interaction between the geometry of the                  
              symmetry (e.g., fixed points, stability subgroups, etc.) and the               
              algebraic invariants of such representations.  In particular,                  
              symmetries of Moore spaces (the Steenrod Problem posed in early                
              1960's) and algebraic curves and surfaces arising in algebraic                 
              geometry and number theory (besides topology) provide concrete                 
              problems to which the following general theory will apply.  A                  
              significant feature of this project is its interdisciplinary                   
              nature, which requires tools and ideas from several branches of                
              mathematics.  This provides a natural setting for interaction of               
              these areas, including new applications of algebraic geometry to               
              transformation groups and modular representation theory.  Other                
              applications include (algorithmic and inductive) construction of               
              important classes of modular representations, number theoretic                 
              properties of algebraic function fields, and a deeper                          
              understanding of symmetries of algebraic surfaces versus 4-                    
              dimensional manifolds.  A long term objective is solution of the               
              long-standing Steenrod Problem and its application to the problem              
              of existence of symmetry for manifolds.
