Title       : Summer Student Program (Undergraduate)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9000833

Award Number: 9000833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Harrison deh@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides ongoing support to The Jackson Laboratory, a               
              private, non-profit research institution, to continue their                    
              Research Experience for Undergraduates Site. In 1990 12                        
              undergraduates, selected from a nationwide group of applicants,                
              will conduct independent hands-on research for 9 weeks in the                  
              summer under the direct supervision of staff scientists.  Working              
              in their sponsors' laboratories, the students conduct original                 
              basic research on problems in mammalian genetics and development               
              that are components of their sponsors' on-going research programs.             
              Students gain experience in all aspects of doing a research                    
              project, from project design to reporting the results.  Inbred and             
              mutant laboratory mice are utilized in many projects.  All students            
              are from outside the host institution; about half are from                     
              baccalaureate colleges.  Students with a wide range of science                 
              preparation are accepted, with each participant's research project             
              tailored to his or her individual background and interests.  The               
              students' work at the bench is supplemented by organized group                 
              educational activities, including a formal symposium.  Follow-up               
              activities are in place to help foster the students' continuing                
              interest in science and research.  Informal studies of program                 
              alumni indicate that a very high percentage receive doctoral                   
              degrees in the biological sciences or medicine.
