Title       : The Impact of Energy Technologies on Natural Environmental Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1990       
File        : a9000860

Award Number: 9000860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30925              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. McCort   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl L. Strojan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin K. Moorhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia
	      Boyd Graduate Studies Res
	      Athens, GA  30602    404/542-3030

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to The Savannah River Ecology                      
              Laboratory (SREL) to continue their Research Experience For                    
              Undergraduates Site for another year.  The program will provide                
              research experience, training and career perspective for                       
              undergraduate students through the use of SREL's unique field                  
              sites, laboratory facilities and the association and active                    
              involvement in research with full-time research ecologists.                    
              Project participants will examine the influence of by-products of              
              nuclear and fossil fuel energy production on selected biological               
              and chemical properties in southeastern ecosystems.  SREL faculty              
              members, all actively engaged in research and publication, will be             
              paired with students having compatible research interests.  Student            
              projects, while distinct and independent, are portions of ongoing              
              research programs of SREL.  The student experience is enhanced by              
              interaction with a programmatic team comprising individuals with               
              a diversity of ecological backgrounds, interests and ideas.                    
              Applicants from minority schools and regional institutions with                
              limited research programs will continue to be actively encouraged,             
              as in previous years.  Participant selection is based upon the                 
              quality of an application, letters of recommendation and academic              
              record.  Through the research training of more than 400                        
              undergraduate participants over the past 22 years, SREL has created            
              a highly successful program of student/advisor interaction.                    
              Scientific publications and career development of former                       
              participants attest to the success of the program.
