Title       : Photosynthetic Performance of Laminaria Solidungula and L. Saccharina in the
               High Arctic: Adaptation to Very Low Light Levels Under Winter Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9000605

Award Number: 9000605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Dunton dunton@utmsi.zo.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The large size and rapid growth of kelp is due, at least in part,              
              to their ability to optimize growth under a variety of light                   
              conditions through changes in photosynthetic performance.  This                
              feature may be most pronounce in one arctic species, Laminaria                 
              solidungula, which increases its annual production by more than                
              half over 8-months of continuous ice cover when irradiance levels              
              are lowest.  Reported open-water saturation irradiance in this                 
              occurs during the summer, a period of minimal growth, when                     
              dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) concentrations are lowest.                  
              The project will test the hypothesis that photosynthetic                       
              sensitivity in L. solidungula increases considerably during the                
              ice-covered period, and that ambient increases in DIN, not low                 
              levels of irradiance, are primarily responsible for seasonal                   
              changes in the plant's photosynthetic performance.  Several                    
              photosynthetic parameters will be calculated from photosynthetic               
              irradiance (P-I) curves derived from radioactive carbon uptake                 
              and oxygen flux measurements, and the light harvesting                         
              characteristics of entire plants incubated in situ in Beaufort                 
              Sea.  In the lab, photosynthetic parameters of individuals grown               
              under different conditions of light and DIN over a four-month                  
              period will be compared to specifically address the role of these              
              factors in regulating winter photosynthesis at low light levels.               
              In addition, the photosynthetic response of L. saccharina, which               
              is common in temperate regions but is relatively rare in the                   
              central Alaskan Beaufort Sea, will be compared to that of L.                   
              solidungula.  Studies of photosynthesis in both species under                  
              natural conditions of light and nutrient limitation will enhance               
              our understanding of photoadaptation and will greatly improve                  
              our ability to accurately model kelp production from measurements              
              of in situ irradiance.
