Title       : Development of Methods for Biomolecular NMR, Structure and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1992        
File        : a9000360

Award Number: 9000360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349353             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Gorenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1103      TECHNIQUE DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the further development of the use               
              of Nuclear Magnetic resonance (NMR) for studies of the 3                       
              dimensional structure of proteins and nucleic acids in solution.               
              The approach developed by Gorenstein and his colleagues, the hybrid            
              matrix/complete relaxation matrix program (or MORASS), has proven              
              highly productive.  Planned work should increase the accuracy and              
              ease of application of these techniques.                                       
              Determination of the three dimensional structure of biopolymers                
              such as proteins and nucleic acids, and its relationship to the                
              biological function of the polymers, is a central problem in modern            
              biology.  The most successful approach to the study of large                   
              molecules like proteins has come with the use of crystallographic              
              methods.  These methods, however, are limited to study of the                  
              highly ordered structures found in crystals; the results may or may            
              not be directly applicable to the structure of (active) molecules              
              in solution.  Many investigators now see the use of NMR as the most            
              promising approach to studies of the solution structure of a                   
              variety of biomolecules.  However, further refinement of                       
              experimental techniques and the analytical tools needed for                    
              interpretation of the spectroscopic data is crucial to progress in             
              the application of this powerful tool.
