Title       : RFLP Patterns as a Measure of Diversity in Small Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9000031

Award Number: 9000031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia M. Miller mamiller@coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Studies of chickens have provided serological and nucleic acid                 
              probes useful in defining the major histocompatibility complex                 
              (MHC) in other avian species.  Methods used in detecting genetic               
              diversity at loci within the MHC of chickens and mammals will be               
              applied to determining the extent of MHC polymorphism within                   
              small populations of ring-necked pheasants, wild turkeys, cranes,              
              Andean condors and other species.  The knowledge and expertise                 
              gained from working with the MHC of the chicken should make for                
              rapid progress in defining the polymorphism of the MHC in these                
              species and in detecting the polymorphism of MHC gene pool within              
              small wild and captive populations of these birds.                             
                                                                                             
              Genes within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are known              
              to encode molecules that provide the context for recognition of                
              foreign antigens by the immune system.  Whether a given animal is              
              able to mount an immune response to the challenge of a pathogen                
              is determined, in part, by the allelic makeup of its MHC.  In                  
              many species, an unusually high degree of polymorphism is                      
              maintained at multiple loci within the MHC in freely breeding                  
              populations.  The allelic pool within a population presumably                  
              provides diversity upon which to draw in the face of                           
              environmental challenge.  The objective of the proposed research               
              is to extend ongoing studies of the MHC of domesticated fowl to                
              include avian species experiencing severe reduction in population              
              size.  Knowledge of the MHC gene pool within populations and of                
              the haplotypes of individual animals may be useful in the                      
              husbandry of species requiring intervention for their                          
              preservation.
