Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of Stylocline (Asteraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1990        
File        : a9000893

Award Number: 9000893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9845               (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren H. Rieseberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Morefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rancho Santa Ana Bot Gdn
	      1500 North College Avenue
	      Claremont, CA  917113157    714/626-3922

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Gradute student Morefield under the guidance of Dr. Loren                 
              Rieseberg of the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is studying the               
              several species of an American Southwest sunflower relative,                   
              Stylocline, and its relatives, in order to assess levels of                    
              genetic and genomic variability within and among populations of                
              these annual and highly inbreeding plants.  Primary methods of                 
              analysis include protein electrophoresis to sample variation in                
              soluble enzymes extracted from the plants, along with methods of               
              DNA analysis to measure mutational differences in nuclear                      
              ribosomal genes and in chloroplast genes.  Several related groups              
              of plants also will be studied, in order to construct a                        
              phylogenetic framework indicating evolutionary relationships                   
              among the species.                                                             
                   Much of the theoretical discussion about speciation                       
              processes relies upon knowledge acquired from organisms that                   
              cross-breed, but many groups of plants include high proportions                
              of self-fertilizing individuals.  It is unclear whether these                  
              inbreeding groups follow the same evolutionary rules, and whether              
              they harbor similar amounts of genetic variability within local                
              populations.  With additional data from studies of morphological               
              features, the student will also be able to determine reliable                  
              features for species identification, map geographic distributions              
              for all the taxa, and evaluate the correct scientific names for                
              all those groups with distinguishable characteristics.  The                    
              student will thus gain valuable training in a broad range of                   
              modern systematic methods in the analysis of plant diversity.
