Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Operator-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1990        
File        : a9000418

Award Number: 9000418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Lin Journe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The study of partial differential equations of three types                
              motivates this work, which combines methods of harmonic and                    
              classical analysis in treating the problems outlined in the                    
              research plan.                                                                 
                   It is well known that the free Schrodinger operator defined               
              on Euclidean space of any dimension maps integrable functions                  
              into bounded functions whose bound decays with reciprocal powers               
              of time.  Global existence for some non-linear Schrodinger                     
              equations with small initial data as well as results in                        
              scattering theory derive from this fact.  The estimate is poorly               
              understood and allows no flexibility for applications to the                   
              case where a potential is added to the Laplace operator.  Very                 
              recent results have now resulted in positive and sharp estimates               
              on the operator-plus-potential.  However, the conditions                       
              required of the potential are too restrictive to include                       
              physically significant examples.  This work will continue efforts              
              to determine the full set of potentials for which the estimates                
              actually hold.                                                                 
                   A second line of investigation concerns the Euler equation                
              for an inviscid and incompressible fluid flow.  When                           
              incompressible fluid flow occurs with a high Reynolds number (a                
              measure of viscous resistance) in 3-dimensions, singularities                  
              form in finite time.  However, this has only been demonstrated                 
              numerically.  Because the singularities can only occur if the                  
              vorticity is stretched, numerical approximation of solutions                   
              which form singularities is very subtle.  In this project a                    
              rigorous study of some prototype models with exact solutions will              
              be made.  These will then be used to check numerical methods and               
              possibly design new ones if the available ones are not sensitive               
              enough.                                                                        
                   The third problem area concerns operators arising in the                  
              study of partial differential equations with rough coefficients.               
              The focus is on a question which has become known as the square-               
              root Kato conjecture.  It concerns the natural domain of the                   
              square-root of a divergence type second order differential                     
              operator.  This domain is believed to be a specific Sobolev space              
              of functions.  A discovery by A. McIntosh led to a deep                        
              connection between the identification of this domain and the                   
              boundedness of Cauchy-kernal operators on Lipschitz curves, a                  
              problem of considerable interest, which harmonic analysts have                 
              been studying for nearly two decades.  Recent work suggests that               
              a resolution of the conjecture may be at hand - at least in                    
              spaces of dimension less than five.  Work will continue toward                 
              this goal.
