Title       : REU: The Study of Ecology as an Interactive Process: Research Problems and
               Strategies for the Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1992     
File        : a9000692

Award Number: 9000692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Berkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart E. Findlay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steward T. A. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides continuing support to The Institution of                   
              Ecosystem Studies' Research Experiences for Undergraduates SITE.               
              The program will immerse students in a highly interactive, research            
              oriented environment.  The major tenet is that success in science              
              depends on understanding the context of research, as well as the               
              substance and procedures of a particular discipline.  Program goals            
              are:  (1) to provide intensive training in ecological research; (2)            
              to broaden students' perspectives; (3) to give students direct                 
              exposure to the life of a research scientist; and (4) to promote               
              an understanding of ecology.   Eight students will be brought to               
              the Institute for a twelve-week summer program.  The program will              
              include the following components:  (1) Student Research Projects;              
              (2) Research Strategies for the Undergraduate, a series of                     
              intensive training sessions; (3) Research in Context,  a seminar               
              series designed to broaden students' perspectives on the various               
              components and applications of science; (4) Forum on Opportunities             
              in Ecology, a full-day program with representatives from a broad               
              spectrum of ecological and related disciplines; and (5)                        
              supplementary activities.  Under the guidance of a mentor                      
              scientist, each student will delineate a research question and                 
              associated hypotheses, select appropriate methods, and develop a               
              research plan.  Students will then implement the project, finishing            
              with analysis and report writing.  Presentations in a formal                   
              Research Symposium will conclude the summer program.  Final Papers             
              will be collated and published as an IES Occasional Publication.
