Title       : Geographical Variation in the Effects of Brown Algal Secondary Metabolites on
               Temperate Marine Herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9000264

Award Number: 9000264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Estes jestes@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Steinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
              This research builds on previous findings that qualitative and                 
              quantitative differences exist in the secondary metabolites                    
              produced by kelp-like plants between the temperate northeast and               
              southwest Pacific regions. The purpose of the research is to: 1)               
              further document variation in the levels and kinds of secondary                
              chemicals among large brown algae from California and New                      
              Zealand, and 2) determine behavioral and long term responses of                
              selected marine plant-eating invertebrates to these compounds.                 
              Extensive collections will be made from both areas to document                 
              variation in concentrations of polyphenolic and lipophilic                     
              compounds among the common brown algal species; among individuals              
              and tissues within species; and through time in detached plants.               
              Feeding preferences of common sea urchins and snails from both                 
              regions will be tested for the effects of these secondary                      
              compounds by measuring variation in consumption rate.                          
              Physiological influences of secondary metabolites on various                   
              plant-eating invertebrates will be evaluated by measuring                      
              absorption efficiencies, growth rates, and gonadal development                 
              among experimental treatments in which the kinds and levels of                 
              secondary metabolites are varied.  Hypothetically interactions                 
              between algae and the animals which consume them will differ                   
              among these regions in two important ways: 1) the amount and                   
              diversity of chemical defenses in New Zealand algae will be                    
              greater than in California species; and 2) the algae eaters in                 
              New Zealand will be more tolerant of polyphenolics than will                   
              similar algal consuming invertebrates from California.  Overall,               
              the mechanisms which mediate transfer of energy from the algae                 
              which are the dominant primary producers on temperate rocky                    
              shores to the invertebrates which consume them are predicted to                
              vary greatly on a biogeographical scale.
