Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research: Microspherical Polymer Matrix
               Formation by Rapid Expansion of SupercriticalSolutions (RESS) and Mathematical
               Modelling of RESS.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1992   
File        : a9000614

Award Number: 9000614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo G. Debenedetti pdebene@pucc.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Prud'homme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is an investigation of the rapid expansion of                     
              supercritical solutions (RESS) as a means of producing                         
              monodisperse polymer microspheres and of incorporating low                     
              molecular weight compounds into the polymer matrix.  Polymers                  
              studied include polylactic and polyglycolic acids and their                    
              copolymers, polystyrene, and polymethacrylates.  Low molecular                 
                                                                                             
              weight co-precipitates studied include the model compounds                     
              naphthalene and phenanthrene, as well as progesterone, a                       
              contraceptive steroid.  The mathematical modeling of the RESS                  
              process constitutes the theoretical component of this project.                 
                                                                                             
              The goal is to understand quantitatively how process variables                 
                                                                                             
              influence the size distribution of RESS powders.                               
                                                                                             
              Precipitation in RESS occurs as a result of a sudden expansion                 
                                                                                             
              which propagates at the speed of sound.  This leads to                         
              essentially uniform supersaturation in the nucleating medium,                  
              giving rise to particles with narrow size distributions.  The                  
              nonideality of supercritical solutions gives rise to                           
              exceptionally high supersaturation ratios upon expansion, and                  
              hence to very small particles.  To date, the idea of applying                  
              this novel process to the  production of polymer microspheres                  
              for sustained drug release, combining into one step particle                   
              production, low molecular weight drug incorporation and size                   
              reduction has not been explored.  No quantitative treatment of                 
                                                                                             
              the RESS process exists to date.  The proposed model accounts                  
              for nonidealities peculiar to supercritical mixtures, such as                  
              endothermic solute condensation, and high solvent                              
              compressibility.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Polymer microspheres are used as chromatography packings,                      
              calibration standards, and sustained drug delivery devices.                    
              Problems associated with current methods for the production of                 
                                                                                             
              polymeric microsphere powders include the need for solvent and                 
                                                                                             
              surfactant elimination, poor control of particle size                          
              distribution, and, for drug delivery applications, the                         
              difficulty of incorporating drugs into the carrier particles                   
              uniformly and at high concentration.  For micron or sub-micron                 
                                                                                             
              particles, which can be made monodisperse but are colloidally                  
              stable, purification and drying are especially difficult                       
              steps.                                                                         
              The RESS process has the potential for unifying particle                       
              production, incorporation of low molecular weight drugs,                       
              purification, and size reduction in a single step leading to                   
              solvent-free microspheres with a narrow size distribution.                     
              The resulting reduction in sample loss and contamination is                    
              especially important in drug delivery applications.
