Title       : Determinants of Male Reproductive Success in the Marine Hydrozoan Hydractinia
               Milleri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9000153

Award Number: 9000153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Grosberg rkgrosberg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical and empirical studies of reproductive success and                  
              life-history evolution primarily focus on the regulation of                    
              female performance.  This emphasis is justifiable only if it can               
              be assumed that the determinants of male reproductive success are              
              like those regulating female reproductive success.  Yet, in                    
              virtually all multicellular organisms, there is substantial                    
              gender-specific variation in reproductive behavior, which leads                
              to fundamental differences in the determinants of male and female              
              reproductive success.  One of the simplest and most phyletically               
              widespread gender-specific differences in reproductive behavior                
              is the retention of female gametes within the parent until some                
              time after fertilization, and the broadcasting (or transfer by                 
              pollinators) of male gametes into air or water.  This                          
              reproductive dichotomy potentially enhances levels of (1)                      
              intermale gametic competition, (2) gender-specific variance in                 
              pre-fertilization reproductive success, and (3) diversity of                   
              paternity within sibling relationships.  Consequently, this sort               
              of gender-specific variation in reproductive pattern potentially               
              affects the intensity of sexual selection levels of gene flow,                 
              the structure of breeding systems, and the evolution of social                 
              behaviors.  At present, virtually nothing is known about the                   
              determinants of male versus female reproductive success for any                
              non-motile, aquatic invertebrate. This research will                           
              make direct field measurements of individual male (and,                        
              necessarily, female) reproductive success and dispersal in the                 
              colonial hydrozoan, Hydractinia milleri.  DNA sequence analysis                
              (i.e., DNA fingerprinting) to determine parent-offspring                       
              relationships of brooded larvae and adults that are members of,                
              and recruit into, mapped populations over a three-year period.                 
              Data obtained from a combination of field and laboratory                       
              manipulations will allow an assessment of how colony density,                  
              size and proximity affect the relationship among reproductive                  
              investment, fertilization success, and reproductive success.
