Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at The University ofNorth Carolina at
               Chapel Hill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1990     
File        : a9000801

Award Number: 9000801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Fried refried@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Program in Molecular Biology and              
              Biotechnology (PMBB) to establish a research experiences for                   
              undergraduates (REU) Site.   PMBB is an independent campus-wide                
              unit created to promote genetic engineering research and education             
              at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.  Academically                
              promising students chosen from a national pool will participate in             
              ongoing research carried out by a select group of PMBB faculty.                
              Emphasis will be placed on recruitment of students with limited                
              research opportunities and on students from groups historically                
              underrepresented in the sciences.  Two students will be funded by              
              the UNC School of Medicine and eight funded by the NSF REU program.            
              In addition, matching University funds will be available and                   
              earmarked for two additional minority students, for a total of 12              
              participants.  The overall goals are to (1) introduce students to              
              a range of biological research and techniques, particularly in                 
              molecular biology and molecular genetics, (2) familiarize students             
              with the process of independent research, (3) promote developments             
              of laboratory and communication skills, and (4) provide counseling             
              to aid students in selection of graduate programs.  To meet these              
              goals students will (1) work for ten weeks with faculty on projects            
              having meaningful scientific objectives and derived from ongoing               
              research, (2) attend weekly research topic discussions with each               
              faculty preceptor, (3) attend a workshop in which Directors of                 
              Graduate Studies from various departments provide students with                
              advice and information about Ph.D programs, and (4) present the                
              results of their research in talks before the campus community.
