Title       : Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Sociology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1990      
File        : a9000769

Award Number: 9000769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35537              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. A. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Amato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Corzine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Benford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne T. Ortega  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides continuing support to the Department of                    
              Sociology at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln for a Research                 
              Experiences for Undergraduates SITE designed to give undergraduate             
              sociology and social science majors attending academic institutions            
              in the Northern Great Plains region a ten-week research experience             
              in sociology.  The primary objective of this program is to provide             
              a high-quality research experience to students who have limited                
              access to research facilities and training at the schools they are             
              attending and to students who are underrepresented in science                  
              careers (women, racial and ethnic minorities, and the disabled).               
              Using the research facilities of the Bureau of Sociological                    
              Research and under the close guidance of faculty supervisors,                  
              students will initiate and carry out research projects from                    
              formulating a problem to writing a final report.  Students will                
              participate in morning seminars where they will learn research                 
              methods and share their on-going experiences with each other.                  
              Under the supervision of faculty and a Research Assistant,                     
              afternoons will be spent engaging in individual projects and                   
              learning to use appropriate research technologies.  The papers                 
              written for the course will be presented at the annual Nebraska                
              Undergraduate Sociology Symposium held each fall and submitted for             
              presentation at the Annual Meeting of the Midwest Sociological                 
              Society.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              A recruiting plan that takes advantage of an existing regional                 
              network of colleges and universities will be used to locate and                
              recruit qualified students from the Northern Great Plains region.
