Title       : Mathematical and Computational Studies in Quantum Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9000935

Award Number: 9000935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Nenad Trinajstic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rudjer Boskovic Institute
	      Bijenicka cesta 54 PO Box 1016
	      Zagreb, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in theoretical organic chemistry between Nenad Trinajstic of           
              the Rudjer Boskovic Institute and Douglas J. Klein of Texas A&M                
              University at Galveston is to investigate the electronic structure             
              and properties of novel molecular systems by applying quantum                  
              chemical models.  The investigators will extend their conceptual               
              models in graph theory to elemental carbon clusters, high spin                 
              hydrocarbons, polymers and high temperature superconductors                    
              (inorganic perovskites).  The collaborative effort combines the                
              complementary expertise of Dr. Trinajstic in chemical graph theory             
              and theoretical organic chemistry and Dr. Klein's expertise in                 
              quantum and computational chemistry.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.  NSF's goal of advancing scientific knowledge is                  
              promoted through the joint efforts of the Yugoslav and U.S.                    
              scientists.
