Title       : Benthic Mineralization of Organic Matter on the Continental Rise and the
               Dissolution of CaCo3 at the Deep Seafloor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1991  
File        : a9000323

Award Number: 9000323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Jahnke rick@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the preceeding grant periods, the instrumentation                       
              required to perform in situ benthic flux chamber measurements                  
              and to retrieve and maintain sediment cores at in situ                         
              temperatures and pressures during shipboard pore water sampling                
              and incubations were developed.  This project will utilize                     
              these instruments to study two important aspects of the marine                 
              carbon cycle, the mineralization of organic matter and the                     
              kinetics of CaCO3 dissolution in deep sea surface sediments.                   
              Specifically, sites adjacent to the highly productive west                     
              African margin (in collaboration with the French-sponsored                     
              EUMELI program) and sites above and below the lysocline in the                 
              western equatorial Pacific will be studied.  At each location,                 
              the particulate input of organic matter, opal, and CaCO3, the                  
              mineralization and dissolution rate of these phases in surface                 
              sediments, and the burial rate will be determined.  This                       
              information, when coupled through models to environmental                      
              parameters such as bottom water CaCO3 saturation state,                        
              diffusive boundary layer thickness, etc., will permit the                      
              following questions to be addressed:  1. Are organic matter                    
              fluxes to the seafloor off Africa important to deep Atlantic                   
              carbon budgets?  2. Can organic matter fluxes off Africa be                    
              supported by vertical rain rates as measured by sediment traps?                
              3. Is denitrification at the deep seafloor important off west                  
              Africa?  4. What is the CaCO3 dissolution rate constant at the                 
              seafloor?  5. To what extent is metabolic CO2 neutralized by                   
              the dissolution of sedimentary CaCO3?  6. Does transport across                
              the diffusive sublayer limit the total CaCO3 dissolution rate                  
              in the deep sea?
