Title       : REU Site in Biopsychology and Animal Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1990       
File        : a9000845

Award Number: 9000845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack G. May   (Principal Investigator current)
              Heywood M. Petry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the State University of New York,                 
              Stony Brook to establish a summer program designed to immerse a                
              small group of undergraduate students in an active research                    
              environment spanning the areas of behavioral neuroscience,                     
              psychophysiology and the experimental study of decision, choice and            
              self-control.  The goal underlying this initiative is to introduce             
              students who are not currently involved in a laboratory research               
              program to state-of-the-art psychological research in some of the              
              most interesting and important areas of experimental psychology.               
              This program is intended to foster interest in, and an appreciation            
              of, scientific research, especially for those students who might               
              not otherwise have an opportunity to participate in this type of               
              activity.  Students will participate in an intense eight-week                  
              "hands-on" research experience where, in addition to learning                  
              specific laboratory skills, they will be exposed to all phases of              
              the research process.  They will also receive academic counseling              
              and have access to a variety of support services.                              
                                                                                             
              Undergraduates will conduct independent research projects in one               
              of nine active research laboratories in the Department of                      
              Psychology.  They will be closely supervised by faculty but will               
              be encouraged to take as much responsibility as possible for these             
              projects.  To supplement the laboratory experience, a variety of               
              group activities are planned (e.g., lab visits, lab meetings,                  
              "brown bag" lunches, seminars and a mini-symposium).  These                    
              activities are designed to facilitate student interactions with the            
              faculty mentors, as well as provide opportunities to share                     
              experiences with one another.  Since a positive research experience            
              may significantly affect a student's decision to pursue a career               
              in scientific research, it is important that an exciting and                   
              stimulating environment be created.
