Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Research Initiation for Undergraduates Via Differential
               Equations, Difference Equations and Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1990        
File        : a9000643

Award Number: 9000643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willie E. Taylor ZGZZ12A@prodigy.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Southern University
	      3100 Cleburne
	      Houston, TX  770044501    713/527-7011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   Support for five undergraduate students engaged in                        
              mathematical research will be supported by this Research                       
              Experiences for Undergraduates award.  The students will perform               
              numerical analysis, investigate difference equations and engage                
              in studies of chaos as modeled by the process of iteration of                  
              continuous maps.  The main focus of the research will be on the                
              oscillatory behavior of difference equations and the role of                   
              symmetry in chaotic planar dynamics.  The program will run for                 
              eight weeks.                                                                   
                   Faculty from the University of Houston (UH) will also                     
              participate in the program.  This will be done in several ways.                
              First, the University of Houston will provide a faculty member to              
              work with the students on problems of differential equations and               
              chaos.  A second faculty member from Furman University will teach              
              the necessary introductory material on chaos.  Her salary will be              
              paid by UH. Students will spend each Friday morning at UH                      
              visiting laboratories such as the Dynamics Laboratory and                      
              laboratories in the Departments of Physics, Mechanical                         
              Engineering and Chemical Engineering where chaotic dynamics is                 
              observed experimentally.                                                       
                   A portion of the program's research component will involve                
              transferring of software, which has been developed at UH to study              
              iterates of mappings and dynamics with symmetry, to the PC                     
              environment which is being developed at TSU.  A study of these                 
              mappings can be made at many levels, from proving theorems in                  
              group representations to parameter exploration in quadratic                    
              maps.  In addition, UH will provide funds for three REU students               
              to work with the five from TSU.                                                
                   An active program of colloquium lectures, counselling and                 
              social events is also planned.  Students will be encouraged to                 
              present the results of their work at the annual meeting of the                 
              Association of Minority Professors.
