Title       : Collision of Metal Clusters and Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9000933

Award Number: 9000933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 1,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Slobodan Bosanac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rudjer Boskovic Institute
	      Bijenicka cesta 54 PO Box 1016
	      Zagreb, YO  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5954      YUGOSLAVIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research            
              project in theoretical and computational chemistry between Slobodan            
              Bosanac of the Rudjer Boskovic Institute and David A. Micha of the             
              University of Florida is to continue their investigators of the                
              fundamental properties and structure of complex metal atom                     
              clusters.  They are planning to investigate energy transfer in                 
              atom-cluster collisions and the vibronic structure of metal                    
              clusters.  Dr. Micha's mathematical methods utilizing time                     
              correlation functions and quantum mechanics will be tested further             
              in cooperation with Dr. Bosanac.  This award adds an international             
              dimension to Dr. Micha's NSF grant on theoretical methods of quantum           
              molecular dynamics.  His research has relevant applications relating           
              to properties of materials and behavior of electronic devices.                 
                                                                                             
              This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on                  
              Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a               
              joint fund consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and              
              Yugoslav governments.  The U.S. contribution is provided annually by           
              the Department of State.  No NSF funds are involved.  The award,               
              except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the Yugoslav            
              institution.  NSF's goal to advance scientific knowledge will be               
              promoted through the joint efforts and complementary expertise of              
              the Yugoslav and U.S. scientists.
