Title       : Biological Control of Phosphorus Cycling in a Temperate Deciduous Forest
               Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1989  
File        : a9000367

Award Number: 9000367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1989  
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Walbridge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                   Biological recycling of phosphorus (P) in surficial organic               
              horizons has been suggested as an important mechanism maintaining              
              soil P availability in some tropical forests.  A similar                       
              mechanism has been proposed for some temperate forests, but no                 
              direct evidence has been gathered with respect to this surmise.                
              More recent studies suggest that high densities of microorganisms              
              in tropical forest floors may actually inhibit plant uptake, and               
              that P might be particularly susceptible to leaching in organic                
              form.                                                                          
                   Preliminary investigations at the Coweeta Hydrologic                      
              Laboratory in North Carolina have shown strong geochemical P                   
              adsorption in all mineral soil horizons and the importance of                  
              microbial immobilization in the forest floor, suggesting that                  
              forest floor organic matter also inhibits geochemical adsorption.              
              Collectively, these data strongly suggest that tight biological                
              control of P cycling in the forest may contribute significantly                
              in maintaining long-term P availability in these southern                      
              Appalachian forests.                                                           
                   Research sponsored by a two-year postdoctoral fellowship                  
              award will allow tests of the "biological control" hypothesis by               
              means of a series of laboratory and field radiotracer                          
              experiments.  Specific objectives are to determine the relative                
              importance of microbial immobilization, plant/mycorrhizal uptake,              
              and mineral adsorption in controlling P dynamics in forest floor               
              and mineral horizons of a temperate deciduous forest soil, and to              
              examine vertical movement of organic and inorganic P.  The                     
              Fellow's host institution for the study is Duke University.
