Title       : REU Site Award: Basic Research in Life Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9000787

Award Number: 9000787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123733             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall D. Sundberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Louisiana State University to                   
              continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates SITE.  The                  
              primary activity will involve eight-week summer sessions of                    
              independent research in biological science.  Program focus will be             
              on comparative animal physiology during year one, plant                        
              physiology/biochemistry during year two, and molecular biology                 
              during year three.  Each year a select group of ten students, of               
              junior or senior standing, will be invited to participate in the               
              program.  Each student will be under the direct supervision of an              
              LSU faculty member who will serve as the research mentor and be                
              directly responsible for the student's progress.  Faculty                      
              participants have been chosen on the basis of their experience                 
              working with undergraduates in the laboratory, suitability of                  
              research projects and general research productivity.  Additional               
              components of the program will be an intense pre-summer session                
              library orientation and communication skills workshop.  The program            
              will also involve a weekly seminar series for all participants,                
              including the faculty advisors and members of their research                   
              laboratories.  The latter activities will be coordinated by the                
              P.I..  Upon completion of the summer research program, each REU                
              investigator will present his/her research results as an oral paper            
              at an undergraduate research symposium, and a written paper in a               
              form suitable for publication.  Additional follow-up activities are            
              planned to encourage REU investigators to present the results of               
              their completed work to a scientific audience.
