Title       : Population Biology of Tropical Rain Forest Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9000063

Award Number: 9000063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamaljit S. Bawa kamal.bawa@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The effects of deforestation on the extinction rates of plant                  
              species in tropical rain forests are well documented.  Less is                 
              known about the impact of deforestation on the loss of genetic                 
              variation within tree species because there is not enough                      
              information about the amount and patterns of spatial distribution              
              of genetic variation in natural populations.  Genetic variation                
              is considered to be important in the long term survival of                     
              populations.  Thus, information about the amount and patterns of               
              genetic variation within and among populations is central to the               
              design of appropriate measures to conserve tropical tree                       
              populations.  Equally important is to understand the genetic                   
              factors, such as mating systems and the level of gene exchange                 
              among populations, which greatly influence the distribution of                 
              genetic variation.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Many tree species in tropical rain forests have low population                 
              density.  Small populations may lose genetic variation, and may                
              also be subject to inbreeding depression (deleterious effects in               
              reproductive output due to mating among close relatives).  Thus,               
              it is paricularly important to study factors regulating genetic                
              variation in species that typically occur in low densities.  The               
              objectives of this research are to 1.  analyze the amount and                  
              patterns of genetic variation, 2.  estimate effective population               
              size, 3.  measure the rate of outcrossing (or inbreeding), 4.                  
              determine the level of gene exchange among populations, and 5.                 
              examine the effects of density on the level of inbreeding and                  
              reproductive output in natural populations of tropical lowland                 
              rain forest trees.  The field work will be conducted at the La                 
              Selva Biological Field Station of the Organization for Tropical                
              Studies in Costa Rica, and the laboratory work at the University               
              of Massachusetts at Boston.
