Title       : Federal Personnel Data Tape Files
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1989  
File        : a9000373

Award Number: 9000373
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Brown                        
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1989  
Expires     : October 31,  1990    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1081               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. D. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Office of Personnel Mgmt
	      
	      Washington, DC  20415    /   -

NSF Program : 8800      SCIENCE RESOURCES STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Office of Personnel Management will provide the National              
              Science Foundation (NSF) data tapes containing information on                  
              workers employed by the Federal government as of September 30,                 
              l989 and the accompanying documentation of the requested                       
              variables.  This project is designed to gain a better                          
              understanding of the employment characteristics of Federal                     
              scientists, engineers, and technicians.  The data collected will               
              be used to (l) develop current profiles on the Federal scientific              
              and technical workforce and to (2) supplement a historical time                
              series which began in l954.                                                    
                   The Federal goverment is the largest single employer of                   
              scientists, engineers and technicians.  The importance of these                
              personnel is reflected in their participation in critical                      
              activities such as defense, agriculture, environmental                         
              protection, and the management of basic research.  These data                  
              will provide more insight on the factors affecting the supply and              
              demand of these employees.  This project is part of NSF's                      
              Congressional authorization to provide a central clearinghouse                 
              for the collection, interpretation, and analysis of data on the                
              availability of and the current projected need for scientific and              
              technical resources in the United States.
