Title       : Dynamics of Catalytic Reactions and Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9000117

Award Number: 9000117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252238             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rutherford Aris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lanny D. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Nonsteady state performance of chemical reactors are difficult                 
              to predict and analyze.  Many industrial reactors exhibit such                 
              behavior and the result is that the large and unexpected                       
              swings in performance mandate their operation far from                         
              productivity maxima. This also has the potential to cause                      
              serious accidents.  By understanding the mechanisms and                        
              manifestations of reactor dynamics, existing processes can be                  
              improved, reactor safety can be increased, and new modes of                    
              reactor operation may become feasible.                                         
                                                                                             
              The PIs plan to focus on the dynamic behavior of a class of                    
              nonlinear systems:  catalytic reactors.  They are planning a                   
              program designed to characterize catalytic reactions and                       
              reactors experimentally and theoretically in order to develop                  
              a more fundamental understanding of these systems and an                       
              improved ability to control them.  Experiments will probe the                  
              dynamics of oscillatory and multiple steady states by                          
              monitoring spatial and temporal variations of spontaneous                      
              catalytic oscillators and of systems perturbed between states.                 
              Systems studied will primarily be fast reactions on noble                      
              metals where heat effects and nonlinear kinetics combine to                    
              produce these behaviors.  In particular, the selectivities of                  
              endothermic decomposition reactions and exothermic oxidation                   
              reactions on Pt and Rh surfaces in single crystal, wire, foil,                 
              monolith, and supported forms will be studied.  Models will be                 
              developed to simulate spatial and temporal dynamics in these                   
              systems, to determine the types of behavior which may occur,                   
              and to develop more efficient algorithms to solve nonlinear                    
              reactor problems.  Effects of strong attractive adsorbate                      
              interactions, multiple surface phases, and surface diffusion                   
              limitations on reaction systems will be modelled.  New                         
              computational methods such as inertial manifold theory will                    
              also be applied to these problem.  ***//
