Title       : Some Fourier Analysis Problems Related to Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9000968

Award Number: 9000968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Der-Chen E. Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Although this mathematical research concerns theory on                    
              smoothly bounded domains in the space of several complex                       
              variables, the focus is on studying the behavior of solutions of               
              first- and second-order partial differential equations.  The main              
              theme is to determine function classes determined by projecting                
              functions onto the spaces of solutions of the differential                     
              equations.  Specifically, one would like to know if functions in               
              the classical Lebesgue classes, or those which are Holder                      
              continuous project onto functions of the same type.  The answer                
              depends on the smoothness of the boundary and, possibly, on the                
              dimension of the ambient space.  In the case of strongly pseudo-               
              convex domains, results are quite complete.  For weakly pseudo-                
              convex domains of finite type in two complex dimensions, the same              
              can be said.  This is the current dividing line.                               
                   The work to be done in this project first will take up the                
              regularity question for the Lebesgue spaces for powers less than               
              one.  A concrete approach will be made by focusing on the                      
              specific case where the domain is the Siegel upper half plane.                 
              In this setting the powerful machinery of harmonic analysis can                
              be brought to bear using existing theory of Hardy spaces.                      
                   A second line of investigation will center on studies of the              
              regularity of the Szego kernel (projection) in two complex                     
              dimensions for domains with a boundary point of infinite type.                 
              These types of boundaries have a resistance to dilation - at                   
              present the only technique available to prove regularity.  Some                
              progress has been made here in showing that the first few terms                
              of the Szego kernel can actually be computed.
