Title       : RNAs that Bind Small Substrates and Cofactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9417933

Award Number: 9417933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Szostak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rare RNA sequences capable of binding specific ligands can be isolated from
              large pools of random sequence molecules. Such ligand binding sequences, known
              as aptamers, may be enriched by affinity chromatography, and isolated by
              repeated cycles of enrichment and amplification. The P.I. will characterize
              several recently isolated aptamers with specificity for common metabolic
              substrates and cofactors. He will also isolate new aptamers to additional
              substrates and cofactors in order to explore the affinity and specificity with
              which chemically diverse ligands can be bound by RNA structures. He will study
              the nature of the binding sites and the types of interactions that are
              important for binding by chemical and molecular biological means. Structural
              studies will be pursued in collaboration with NMR and X-ray crystallography
              labs. As functional RNA sequences are isolated, the P.I. will search for
              occurrences of these structures in the sequence databases for possible examples
              of the use of these structures in biology; the significance of any such
              occurrences will be tested genetically. This work will have significant
              implications for a number of areas of research. The isolation of RNA structures
              capable of binding all major classes of biological substrates and cofactors
              increases the plausibility of models in which the evolution of intermediary
              metabolism occurred at the time of the RNA world. Studies of the directed
              evolution of RNA structures from one binding specificity to another will
              improve our understanding of the evolutionary flexibility of RNA, and will
              eventually allow a comparison of the abilities of nucleic acids and proteins to
              evolve new functions, including the development of new catalysts. The solution
              of new RNA structures should lead to a better understanding of the principles
              of nucleic acid folding. Finally, the technology developed in the course of
              this work may have applications in the areas of molecular recognition,
              diagnostics, biosensors, and pharmaceuticals.   %%%   Many scientists now
              believe that RNA enzymes played an important role in the origin and early
              evolution of life. For this to be true, RNA molecules would have to be able to
              speed up a wide range of different chemical reactions; this in turn implies
              that RNA molecules would have to be able to bind tightly to a variety of
              different small molecules. This lab has recently been able to show that RNA's
              can in fact form very specific small molecule binding sites. They started with
              a large pool of random RNA sequences, and then used a laboratory version of
              Darwinian evolution to select for the rare RNA sequences capable of binding
              specific target molecules.  Several o of these RNA's will be characterized to
              try to understand how they recognize their targets.  The lab also plans to try
              to understand how they recognize their targets.  The lab also plans to search
              for possible examples of the use of such RNA structures in biology.  This work
              will improve our understanding of how RNA carries out its varied structural and
              catalytic roles in biology, and may lead to applications in the areas of
              molecular recognition, diagnostics, biosensors, and pharmaceuticals.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
