Title       : Classification of Mouse Chromosomes Using Artificial Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9417279

Award Number: 9417279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamad T. Musavi musavi@eece.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The specific goal of this proposal is to use adaptive  capabilities and parallel
              computational properties of novel  artificial neural networks (ANNs) for
              automatic  classification of mouse chromosomes.  The overall objective  is to
              provide a computer software system to automate the  mouse karyotyping process,
              thus signifcantly reducing the  time and human effort neccessary, and improving
              the quality  and efficiency of analysis.    Analysis of mouse chormosomes is
              important to many fields of  genetic research.  Example applications include
              gene mapping  by in situ hybridization to nucleic acid probes to mouse 
              chromosomes, substance screening which requires chromosome  analysis of large
              numbers of animals (most drequently mice)  after treatment with the substance,
              and testing breeders to  maintain stocks of mice that carry chromosome
              aberrations of  interest.  Mouse chromosomes are significantly more  difficult
              to classify than human chromosomes.  Although  automated human karyotyping
              systems are available, none have  been used successfully to classify mouse
              chromosomes  automatically.    Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) represent an
              emerging  technology rooted in many disciplines.  An ANN is an  information
              processing system that has certain performance  characteristics in common with
              biological neural networks.  ANNs have been developed as generalizations of
              mathematical  models of human cognition or neural biology.  An ANN consist  of
              a network architecture and a learning paradigm.  The  architecture defines the
              topology  and complexity of the  network necessary to acquire a specific level
              of knowledge  in the area of interest, which in this case is recognition  of
              specific chromosomes.  The learning paradigm involves a  training process for
              embedding the knowledge in the network.    We propose to design, train, test,
              and eveluate two novel  ANNs, Radial Basis Function (RBF) and Probabilistic
              Neural  Network (PNN), for classification of mouse chromosomes.  The  superior
              ANN will be integrated  into an existing karyotyping  software distribution and
              will replace the conventional  classification module.  Use  of the existing
              karyotyping  software allows us to concentrate on the important issue of 
              classification by providing the tools for capture of  metaphase spreads under a
              light microscope , segmentatiion  and enhancement of digitized images, as well
              as a user  interface.    To achieve the objective of this porposal, the
              specific  plans are to    1. obtain raw images of mouse chromosomes  2. 
              identify distinctive features of mouse chromosomes  3. develop the programs for
              automatic extraction of the  features,  4. prepare the training and testing
              data sets,  5. design, train, and test the radial basis function (RBF)  neural
              network classifier,  6. design, train, and test the probabilistic neural
              network  (PNN) classifier,  7. select the optimal artificial neural network
              classifier  for mouse chromosomes,  8. improve the classification performance, 
              9. develop the mouse karyotyping qystem.
