Title       : RUI: Terrane Analysis of Silurian Reefal Carbonates, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9417407

Award Number: 9417407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance M. Soja csoja@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9417907  Soja     The accretion of "exotic" crustal fragments, or terranes, to
              continental margins is the tectonic process believed by many geologists to have
              been responsible for continental growth along western North America in the last
              60-100 million years.  Because of the complex geologic relationships produced
              by accretionary tectonics, the complete geologic history of this tectonic
              collage in western North America is still unknown.  Paleobiogeographic research
              is of critical importance in Alaska because fossils preserved there occur
              within this complex zone of accreted terranes and occupy a present geographic
              position intermediate between the faunal provinces of North America and the
              circum-Pacific and circum-Arctic regions.  To gain a better understanding of
              the origins and geologic histories of terranes in Alaska, paleontologists have
              been seeking to identify distinctive suites of fossils that, on the basis of
              shared affinities in faunas which occupied similar habitats, link certain
              terranes together or establish biogeographic connections with continental
              source areas.  Using paleobiogeographic data in this way has enormous potential
              for resolving the controversies reflected in competing models that describe the
              tectonic evolution of western North America, in general, and Alaska, in
              particular.     The proposed project aims to build upon the PI's previous
              research by investigating Silurian reef and reef-related carbonate deposits in
              southeastern Alaska to determine their geologic relationship to Silurian
              limestones in southwestern Alaska.  Rocks exposed in southeastern Alaska belong
              to the Alexander terrane, which existed during the Early-Middle Paleozoic as
              volcanically active islands at an unknown site in the ancient Pacific Ocean,
              whereas deposits in southwestern Alaska (Nixon Fork terrane) represent an
              original, although dismembered part of the North American continent.  Strata in
              these two areas share in common distinctive Silurian sponge faunas preserved in
              unusual stromatolite ree fs.  In southeastern Alaska, Silurian carbonates have
              been examined in detail at scattered localities but principally only in one
              relatively small area in the southern part of the Alexander terrane.  The
              proposed research will enable detailed investigations of Silurian rocks that
              are exposed in other parts of the Alexander terrane, especially where
              reconnaissance studies have revealed well-preserved, but as yet unstudied
              biotas.   Field work involving undergraduate research students will focus on
              describing rocks and collecting fossils systematically from measured and
              photographed stratigraphic sections.  Samples will be shipped from the field
              for the extraction of fossils and to be prepared in the lab as thin-sections
              and polished slabs for petrographic purposes.  Compilation of petrologic,
              petrographic, and paleontolgic data will form the basis for determining the
              paleoecology, environmental setting, and faunal affinities of the preserved
              biotas and for identifying the degree of similarity in rock and fossil
              composition with Silurian rocks in southwestern Alaska.  Demonstrating that a
              diversity of fossils from more than one relatively small part of southeastern
              Alaska is shared in common with southwestern Alaska will represent an important
              advancement in our understanding of the early geologic history of the Alexander
              terrane.  These data will help to document supporting evidence for the
              hypothesis that the Alexander terrane was in close proximity to northwestern
              North America allowing faunal communication between the two localities.  Such
              data would be important in providing a definitive paleogeographic link between
              the Alexander terrane and North America proper.  Because similar Silurian
              sponge deposits also occur in the Ural Mountains, Russia, the proposed study
              will lay critical groundwork for exploring the idea that a seaway enabled
              migration of organisms along the northern rims of North America (Laurentia) and
              Europe (Baltica) in the Late Silurian.
