Title       : Direct Methods in Organic Electron Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9417835

Award Number: 9417835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Dorset dorset@hwi.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hauptman-Woodward Med Res
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  14201    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Douglas Dorset, Medical Foundation of Buffalo, is supported by a   grant
              from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in the   Chemistry
              Division and the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials   Research to
              continue his research in the development of direct methods   for use in
              electron crystallography of organic compounds and polymers.    He is working
              with Herb Hauptman (who shared the 1985 Nobel Prize in   Chemistry with Jerome
              Karle for related work) to develop a direct phasing   method for electron
              crystallographic data for the ab initio determination   of unknown crystal
              structures.  A number of steps are being taken to   improve the reliability of
              the technique including: 1) improving a figure   of merit for automated
              procedures that are more resistant to dynamical   scattering; 2) developing
              more reliable phasing procedures; 3)   incorporating a multislice calculation
              to improve refinement; 4)   developing a better understanding of the
              limitations of crystallographic   phase determination; and 5) increasing the
              use of higher voltage sources   to ensure data closer to the single scattering
              limit.  Applications   include: 1) oriented films of poly (tetrafluorotheylene)
              ; 2) small   molecules such as C60 and C70, copper phthalocyanine and copper  
              perfluorophthalocyanine, and 3) alkane chains substituted with ester,   ether,
              amine and keto groups.  By far the most widely used structural tool is X-ray
              crystallography.    One of the reasons for it's widespread use is the fact that
              techniques   have been developed for automatically solving the phase problem
              for many   systems.  In spite of this, there are limitations to X-ray  
              crystallography arising primarily from the difficulty of obtaining   crystals
              of suitable size.  Electron crystallography should provide a   complementary
              alternative to X-ray diffraction for cases where the latter   technique is
              problematic.  Dorset's work is directed at attempting to   improve the electron
              crystallographic technique to the point where it   will be as automated and as
              easy to use as X-ray crystallography now is.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
