Title       : The Role of Prey Capture Thread in the Origin and Evolution of Spider Orb-webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9417803

Award Number: 9417803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent D. Opell bopell@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417803    Spiders are unique in their use of orb-webs to capture prey. 
              Orb-weaving  spiders  and  their  webs  have  attracted  the  attention  of 
              biologists who study behavior,  ecology,  and  evolution  as  well  as  the 
              interest  of  biochemists  and  molecular biologists who study the properties
              of   the  silk  spiders manufacture to build those webs.  The ability of  an 
              orb-web  to  capture  prey depends  in  large  part  on  the  stickiness  of 
              its  prey  capture threads.   Without  these  threads, many insects that strike
              a web would escape  before  a spider could run to and subdue them.  Prey
              capture threads  also  help absorb the impact of prey that strike a web  and, 
              in  this  way, strengthen the web.  The properties of  these  prey  capture 
              threads, however, have received  very  little  study.  This research will
              examine changes in the properties  of   prey  capture  threads  and  determine 
              how  they   are  associated  with  the origin, evolution,  and  operation  of 
              spider   orb-webs.    The   most  primitive   orb-webs   are  horizontally 
              oriented  and  contained  dry,  fuzzy  capture  threads  called cribellar
              thread.  More advanced and diverse  groups  of  orb-weaving spiders produce
              vertically  oriented  orb-webs  that  contain  viscous adhesive  capture 
              threads.  This research will measure the stickiness, tensile strength,  and
              extensibility of the prey capture threads from webs that  are less highly
              organized than orb-webs, orb-webs containing  cribellar thread, and orb-webs
              containing adhesive  threads.  The  research will test the hypotheses that the
              precise  and  parsimonious  architecture of orb-webs places a  premium  on  the
               stickiness,  tensile  strength,  and  extensibility  of  capture threads; and
              that these characteristics become  even  more   critical  in  vertical 
              orb-webs  whose   orientation  requires   them  to  absorb  greater  forces 
              because   they  intercept  prey  that fly faster.  It  will  also  show  how 
              stickiness of cribellar prey captur e threads is related to a  spider's 
              spinning anatomy and determine whether changes  in  spinning anatomy
              facilitated the origin of the orb-web.  The  information  and  insights gained
              from this comparison  will  answer major questions about the evolution of
              orb-webs, more  fully characterize the functional properties of spider silk, 
              and foster a more integrated view of spider web composition,  structure,  and
              function.  These insights may ultimately  be  useful in the design of 
              composite materials and adhesive or  impact-absorbing structures.
