Title       : Need for Closure Effects on Interpersonal Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9417422

Award Number: 9417422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie W. Kruglanski arie@psyc.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9417422    Nine experiments will be executed over a three year period. They test
              predictions of a motivated social cognition model in which a major role is
              accorded the need for cognitive closure (Kruglanski, 1990). The need for
              closure represents a desire for firm knowledge. Its effects on social cognition
              are assumed to be mediated by two broad tendencies, toward immediacy and
              security of gratification. The immediacy-tendency implies the inclination,
              under heightened need for closure to "seize" on early hypotheses, and the
              security tendency to "freeze" upon them and stay relatively impervious to
              subsequent information. The proposed research applies the model to three major
              issues at the interpersonal level of analysis: persuasion, social perception
              accuracy and communication. Accordingly, three thematic projects are devoted
              respectively to these problem areas. Project 1 includes three experiments on
              the process whereby individuals under high (versus low) need for closure are
              persuaded by, and persuade, others. Project 2 includes three experiments
              testing various aspects of the hypothesis that need for closure may in some
              conditions increase the accuracy of social perception as well as the extent to
              which individuals with such need are accurately perceived by others. Project 3
              includes three studies testing need for closure effects on communicators'
              tendency to take into account the conversational context of social discourse
              and audience characteristics. The methodological approach in the present
              research adopts the principle of multiple operationalism in assessing or
              manipulating the need for closure. Accordingly, need for closure will be (1)
              assessed as an individual difference dimension, and manipulated via (2)
              environmental noise, (3) task attractiveness, (4) mental fatigue and (5)
              accuracy instructions. The major significance of the project lies in exploring
              how the process of motivated social cognition, affected by diverse situational
              conditions and personality tendencies, may impact fund amental social
              psychological phenomena as persuasion social perception accuracy, and
              communication.    This research explores the way various stressors pervasively
              present in contemporary urban settings affect individuals judgment and decision
              making processes. Furthermore, because judgment and decision making typically
              occur in social interaction contexts those stressors may indirectly affect the
              way individuals interact with each other. Generally, it is assumed that the
              various stressors induce a tendency toward closed-mindedness, referred to here
              as the "need for cognitive closure". The major stressors assessed in the
              present project will be (1) environmental noise, (2) mental fatigue, (3)
              boredom and dullness of tasks. Individuals' stable tendency toward
              close-mindedness will also be assessed via a scale developed especially for
              this purpose. Finally, we shall investigate the degree to which the inclination
              toward close mindedness can be counteracted by the goal of accuracy in
              judgment. The research will investigate three interpersonal processes from the
              need for closure perspective:   persuasion, social perception and
              communication. It promises to identify the environmental conditions that limit
              the efficacy of judgment and decision making in social contexts, hence to point
              to possible ameliorating conditions for carrying out these activities.
