Title       : The Short-Time Dynamics of Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9417546

Award Number: 9417546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Stratt Richard_Stratt@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richard Stratt, Brown University, is supported by a grant from the   Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his   theoretical research in
              the short time dynamics of liquids.   Stratt   seeks to interpret  recent
              spectroscopic data obtained from   time-dependent-Stokes-shift measurements of
              solvation dynamics as well as   Fourier transform Raman (Optical Kerr effect)
              spectra of neat liquids in   terms of the instantaneous normal mode (INS)
              theory of the liquid   vibrations.   Two fundamentally disparate research
              directions to be   undertaken are: 1) to explore the ways in which INS analysis
              can assist   in the interpretation of ultrafast spectroscopic experiments; and
              2)  to   find ways of extending the workable time span into the nonlinear
              regime   as much as possible, and to discover where the true limits of the  
              technique lie.  The effects of nonlinearity will be studied by examining   the
              time evolution, both via exact simulation and somewhat more   analytically, by
              considering the nonlinearity formally as  a   perturbation.   A significant
              fraction of what one thinks about as chemistry takes place   in solution, and
              chemical processes often look far different in a liquid   environment than they
              would if the molecules were completely isolated.    Just what the origins of
              these differences are, and precisely how these   distinctions arise from the
              molecular  properties of the solvent are   questions that have been pursued
              repeatedly with each new generation of   spectroscopic technique.   Recent
              theoretical progress in elucidating the   concept of linear excitations in
              liquids suggests that it may indeed be   useful to think in terms the short
              time evolution in the liquid-state   being governed by a set of liquid
              vibrations -- the so-called   instantaneous normal modes of the liquid.  The
              major purpose of Stratt's   research is to see if this theoretical construct
              can lead to   interpretation of recent results obtained from ultrafast
              spectroscopy,   and to provide a molecular level interpretation of the
              structure and   dynamics of the liquid state.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
