Title       : RUI: Charge Coupled Device (CCD) Observations of Supernovae, and Variable Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9417359

Award Number: 9417359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla J. Benson pbenson@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9417359  Benson    The research to be carried out will include making BVRI
              observations of  supernovae, novae, and variable stars with a Photometrics
              NU200  Charged-Coupled Device (CCD) camera on the Wellesley College 24" Boller 
              and Chivens telescope.  Observations will be made on most clear nights.   The
              image reduction and photometry will be done with the IRAF software  data
              reduction package.  Further analysis will be done by using  spreadsheets
              software programs.  A database of observations will be  kept.  For most
              objects, differential light curves will be made of the  stars.  For objects
              with calibrated fields, standard magnitudes of the  objects observed will be
              calculated.  These observations are a  continuation of a program begun about
              two years ago.  Light curves of  the objects observed will be published when
              appropriate.    The objectives of the research program are to 1), improve the
              quantity  of well-sampled light curves of supernovae, especially in the R and I
               bands; 2), provide well-sampled multicolor light curves of galactic  novae;
              3), correct classifications and periods for several variable  stars; 4),
              improve the knowledge of light curves and search for  outbursts or dimming of
              symbiotic and RCB stars; and 5) improve the  human resources base of women in
              science.    There are very few supernovae light curves that have been observed
              with  standard B, V, R, and I filters and thus have well-sampled light  curves.
               Recent observations of supernovae, which have well sampled  light curves, seem
              to indicate that there is more variation in  intensity of their light than
              previously recognized.  Since supernovae  are often used as standard candles to
              determine the distances to other  galaxies, it is important to identify each
              kind of supernova, and to  have well-calibrated samples of the various types. 
              Many stars listed  in the General Catalog of Variable Stars have incomplete
              information  about them.  Many of these stars will be observed and monitored. 
              At  least two misclassificat ions have already been discovered.  It is 
              important to monitor symbiotic stars in order to understand the  interactions
              between the stars as well as to catch outbursts from  interactions as they
              begin, in order to obtain observations in other  wavelengths of the
              electromagnetic spectrum during outbursts.   Similarly, RCB stars need to be
              monitored in order to detect dust  events when they occur.  Lastly, many of the
              observations will be made  by female undergraduates at Wellesley College.  They
              will learn the  procedures for data acquisition, processing by using the IRAF
              software,  and analysis of the light curves of various stars and supernovae.  
              Although some of the participating students may not be majoring in  science,
              they will learn how science is done.  It is valuable to have a  scientific
              literate society.
