Title       : Incision of Bedrock Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9417798

Award Number: 9417798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Anderson rsand@rupture.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1044,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anderson  9417798   Coupled models of topographic evolution that include both
              geomorphic and tectonic processes are becoming more common as a tool to
              understand the rich variety of feedbacks within the system, as illustrated by
              the September 1992 Chapman Conference on Tectonics and Topography.  Tectonic
              processes accomplish differential uplift of rock, creating discrete mountain
              cores whose geometries are set by either discrete faults or by distributed
              deformation.  Channels incised into this rock mass bound local hillslopes which
              transport weathering-produced particles, or which fail in landslides.  The
              channels then convey this material out of the mountain front, where it
              accumulates in local basins or is transported in alluvial valleys to the ocean.
               The mountain mass is thereby lightened by the degree to which relief is
              generated, while the range-bounding basins are loaded.  The resulting flexure
              associated with isostatic response is therefore driven by the geomorphology and
              is intimately tied to the ability of rivers to incise into bedrock.  In
              addition, the local relief sets the pattern of topographically-induced stresses
              in the valley, driving the pattern of microcracking, with the potential
              feedback of enhancing local incision rates (Miller, 1993).   We will study
              bedrock channel evolution through a set of related efforts including field,
              experimental, and theoretical work.  While our goal is to develop a
              quantitative, process-based understanding of the incision of bedrock by rivers,
              we are motivated strongly by the problem of landscape evolution at a scale
              relevant to tectonics.  To accomplish this we will strive toward establishment
              of a physically-based channel incision rule that will be faithful to the
              detailed morphology of a bedrock channel and to the details of the hydrological
              forcing of such systems, and useful to the community attempting to construct
              coupled landscape evolution models.  We feel strongly that the present models
              capture only broadly the incision process, and are  limited in their ability to
              trigger the important feedbacks and to adequately assess the roles of
              environmental variables of interest:  climate, lithology, tectonics.   The
              strongly nonlinearity of the incision process should emphasize the roles of
              large hydrologic events, either meteorological or catastrophic (ice or
              landslide dambursts) in origin.  The degree of nonlinearity in the process
              response to a hydrologic forcing is therefore crucial to understand.  As an
              extreme example, if the nonlinearity is so strong that only the damburst floods
              cause erosion, the local channel incision becomes intimately coupled to mass
              wasting processes upstream, and less coupled to meteorological events, making
              the coupling internal to the geomorphic system.
