Title       : RUI: Effects of Auxin and Abscisic Acid on Survival, Growth,and Differentiation
               of Cultured Guard Cell Protoplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9417761

Award Number: 9417761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76828              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Tallman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9417761  Tallman    The long-term objective of the project is to elucidate
              the  molecular mechanisms that regulate senscence of cells and  chloroplasts of
              plant leaves.  Guard cells which flank  stomata fail to undergo a senescence
              (aging) process like  that which takes place in cells of the underlying tissue 
              (mesophyll).  Thus a system to culture individual guard  cells has been
              developed to study the induction and  regulation of senescence.  Guard cells
              protoplasts (GCP,  guard cells isolated with cell walls removed)  have been 
              successfully cultured for a week at 36-40o C, but lower  temperatures were not
              effective at maintaining the guard  cells as guard cells, but allowed
              redifferentiation and  callus formation.  The following model is suggested to 
              account for the temperature sensitivity: 1) At lower  temperatures (24-34oC)
              the plant hormone auxin induces  synthesis of ethylene.  2) Ethylene synthesis
              results in  cellular senescence or a growth response that results in  callus
              formation. 3) Ethylene synthesis is inhibited at  higher temperatures.  4) At
              higher temperatures, abscisic  acid (ABA) counteracts the auxin/cytokinin
              response, thereby  preventing redifferentiation of GCP.  To test this model the
               following experiments are done: 1) The GCP are cultured at  the higher
              temperature in ABA to test if ABA itself could  induce dedifferentiation.  2) 
              Examine the levels of  ethylene produced by GCP at lower temperatures.  3) Test
               whether other conditions which which suppress ethylene  action also allow the
              GCP to maintain a non-senescent state.  This is a project supported through the
              Research at  Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program. Over the prior  award
              period of three years there were 26 undergraduates  involved in research. A
              similar level of involvement is  expected in this award.  %%%  The long-term
              objective the project is to elucidate the  molecular mechanisms that regulate
              the decline during aging  (senescence) of cells and chloroplasts of plant
              leaves.  Guard cells wh ich flank stomata fail to undergo an aging  process
              like that which takes place in cells of the  underlying tissue (mesophyll). 
              Thus a system to culture  individual guard cells has been developed to study
              the  induction and regulation of senescence.  In this set-up,  guard cells
              protoplasts (GCP, guard cells isolated with cell  walls removed)  are
              successfully cultured for fairly long  periods (days) at elevated temperatures 
              (36-40o C).  Lower  temperatures are not effective at maintaining the guard 
              cells as guard cells, but allow redifferentiation and  general cell growth or
              callus formation. The hypothesis is  that the plant growth regulator, ethylene,
              causes the cells  to senesce at lower temperatures, but is not produced by the 
              guard cells at higher tempertures.  Also at lower  temperatures, other growth
              regulators like auxin and  cytokinin are active, resulting in higher growth
              rates and  cellular dedifferentiation. These hypotheses are tested by 
              measuring the levels of ethylene produced by the cells at  different
              temperatures and by examining if exogeneously  added growth regulators such as
              abscisic acid interfere with  the aging process. The study leads to a better
              understanding  of why guard cells fail to senesce and the mechnisms that 
              induce and regulate senescence in plant cells.  ***
