Title       : (GRGC) Cyclostratigraphy and Carbonate Platform Evolution, Middle Cretaceous,
               Northeastern Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9417872

Award Number: 9417872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61183              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Osleger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9417872     Osleger    The proposed research intends to investigate the
              Mid-Cretaceous  (Albian) Coahuila carbonate platform of northeastern Mexico, a 
              laterally-extensive, passive-margin platform that represents the  final major
              episode of carbonate sedimentation in the Gulf Coast  region.  The first
              objective of the proposed research is to  determine the history of
              Mid-Cretaceous relative sea-level changes  at time scales ranging from 104 to
              106 years.  This aspect of the  project will involve the use of high-resolution
              sequence  stratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy to document cross-platform 
              relationships and interpret the temporal evolution of the Coahuila  platform. 
              The second objective is to determine the extent to which  Milankovitch-scale
              cyclicity is developed in Albian shallow-marine  carbonates of northeastern
              Mexico; Milankovitch periodicities have  been unequivocally recognized in
              coeval Albian deep-sea sediments  in Italy.  The third objective is to use the
              observed field  relationships to constrain two-dimensional computer models so
              that  rates, frequencies, and magnitudes of accommodation change through 
              Albian time can be quantitatively estimated for northeastern  Mexico.  The
              proposed cyclostratigraphic and sequence stratigraphic  research is part of a
              larger-scale collaborative effort on the Mid-  Cretaceous of northeastern
              Mexico currently underway involving a  multidisciplinary team of
              biostratigraphers and  magnetostratigraphers associated with Project Albicore
              of the  Cretaceous Resources, Events and Rhythms working group.  The proposed
              research is expected to result in several major  contributions.  More precise
              global correlations of Albian  depositional sequences should be possible after
              the  cyclostratigraphic and sequence stratigraphic results are  integrated with
              the refined chronostratigraphic resolution attained  by the collaborative
              researchers.  The improved geochronometry,  representing the merger of detailed
              sequence stratigraphy and  computer modeling with bio - and
              magnetostratigraphy, will permit  the quantitative estimation of rates and
              durations   of global  processes, and enhance interpretations of the regional-
              to global-  scale mechanisms governing sequence deposition (tectonism, eustasy,
               environmental change).  A further application of this  interdisciplinary
              research on the relatively-uninvestigated  Coahuila platform is that a new
              model will be developed for  comparison with other Albian platforms worldwide,
              including the  economically-significant carbonate platforms of the Middle East.
