Title       : Hybrid Control Systems: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9417370

Award Number: 9417370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pravin P. Varaiya varaiya@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Varaiya  9417370  Hybrid systems are models in which a discrete event system 
              supervises a continuous time system.  These models are especially  appropriate
              for describing situations in which a computer or  human symbol-processing
              system provides high level supervision of  a continuous process.  One example
              is an automated vehicle whose  maneuvers are planned and coordinated at a
              logical level, but  they are executed using continuous feedback laws that
              determine  the throttle, braking and steering actuator signals.  Another 
              example is our daily use of "common sense" rules to successfully  control
              sophisticated processes such as microwave ovens,  automobiles and copying
              machines, without understanding the  physical and engineering principles that
              govern the behavior of  those processes.    The study of hybrid systems is
              beginning to receive serious  attention, but our knowledge is very poor
              compared with what we  know about continuous time systems and discrete event
              systems,  considered in isolation.  The primary goal of this proposal is to 
              extend our understanding of decidable or computable hybrid  systems. 
              Informally, a hybrid system is decidable if important  questions of its
              behavior can be answered by finite algorithms.   Specifically, we propose to:  
                    1.   Extend the class of decidable hybrid systems;         2.   Design
              finite decision algorithms that attenuate the            "state space
              explosion" problem;         3.   Apply those algorithms to problems of control
              of            automated vehicles.    Our initial plan for meeting these
              objectives are as follows.   First, we will extend the range of nonlinear
              dynamics of the  decidable hybrid models and determine the class of hybrid
              systems  these models can approximate.  Second, we will attempt  to formalize
              the user-directed refinement procedure which  succeeded in containing the state
              space explosion.  Third, we  shall continue to verify the design of hybrid
              system controllers  for automated vehicles both as a test of our algor ithms
              and as a  guide to theory development.  ***
