Title       : International Conference on Ribosomes in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada May
               20-25, 1995.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9417985

Award Number: 9417985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter E. Hill weh@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Approximately every three years, for the past twenty years, international
              meetings have been held on the subject of ribosomes. The purpose of these
              meetings is to review the current research on the structure/function of the
              ribosome and the interactions of this complex macromolecule with other factors
              and ligands necessary for protein biosynthesis. PRIVATE    Topics to be
              discussed include rRNA structure/function; rRNA synthesis, processing and
              organization; ribosomal protein structure/function; rRNA/r protein
              interactions; ribosome assembly; evolution of the translational apparatus; mRNA
              interactions, tRNA interactions; fidelity of translation; and extrinsic
              factors/antibiotic interactions with ribosomes. This meeting, scheduled to be
              held May  20 25, 1995 in Victoria, British Columbia, will have a major impact
              on the international efforts being made in ribosome research.  It is a time
              when workers in the field from around the world will interact, discussing the
              progress made since the last meeting (Berlin, 1992) and outline that work which
              is expected to transpire in the future. Excel lent books summarizing the
              ribosome and its role in protein biosynthesis have emanated from most of the
              previous conferences.  Such a book is planned for this conference as well. 
              These books become rather standard in research  laboratories throughout the
              world as comprehensive references for the work done in this complex field.  %%%
                The ribosome is the cellular machinery for protein synthesis. The ribosome
              field is a small but  vibrant research arena for many workers throughout the
              world.  Even though this field does not enjoy  all of the popularity it once
              did, much critical research and many advances take place with great 
              regularity.  Further research on ribosomes is essential to our understanding of
              protein synthesis.  Of  special interest in the last few years is the evidence
              mounting that the ribosome interacts in a  pliable way with tRNA (the
              structural RNA) and mRNA (which carries the message to encode the protein).  A
              main emphasis of this meeting is to understand the dynamics of theqe complex
              interactions. This meeting, scheduled to be held May 20-25, 1995 in Victoria,
              British Columbia, will have a major impact on the international efforts being
              made in ribosome research.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
