Title       : Development of Atmospheric Chemistry Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9417061

Award Number: 9417061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Stedman dstedman@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9417061  Stedman         This four part research project is designed to improve
              the  ability to measure the flux of atmospheric species between the  ground and
              the atmosphere.  Detection systems developed, in part,  at the University of
              Denver, will be further developed and  investigated in terms of their ability
              to determine these fluxes.         Part 1.  Long-path UV (LPUV) spectroscopy
              will be coupled with  long-path IR (LPIR) spectroscopy and used to determine
              the fluxes  of various species.  Two new system approaches will be attempted.  
              Both make use of the fact that modern corner-cube based FTIR  systems have two
              input ports for light, and the system responds  intrinsically to the intensity
              difference between the two.  The  gradient method for flux measurement, which
              depends on the  measurement of small differences for its sensitivity, can make
              use  of this ability to directly measure species gradients.  Two light  beams
              from the same source will be designed to traverse the path at  two different
              altitudes to be combined in the FTIR for the  difference measurement.  Another
              configuration of the same system  will send the two beams around two sides of a
              suspected emission  source.  This should achieve automatic subtraction of all
              but  emissions from the suspect source.  The FTIR is available from  previous
              support, however, the telescopes, mirrors, software,  experimental protocols,
              etc. will be developed under this program.   The long-term goal is more
              reliable measurements of emission and  deposition of atmospheric species.      
                Part 2.  An available fast-response, in-situ, total sulfur  monitor will be
              optimized for response speed and sensitivity.  It  will be used for flux
              studies by means of the eddy-correlation  technique.  Some of the flux studies
              will be carried out in  collaboration with the National Center for Atmospheric
              Research  (NCAR) Atmosphere Surface Turbulence Exchange Research (ASTER) 
              facility.         Part 3.  An atmospheric pressure, flow system, free radical 
              dete ctor has been developed and shown to respond to concentrations  of
              hydroperoxyl (HO2) and organic peroxyl (RO2) radicals.  This  apparatus, named
              PERCA (PEroxy Radical detector using Chemical  Amplification) has also been
              shown to respond to a number of  hydrocarbon and oxygenated hydrocarbon peroxy
              radicals up to C8.   The research to be performed under this portion of the
              program is  to study interferences and to develop a portable calibration system
               for preparing standards containing known concentrations of free  radicals.    
                  Part 4.  The potential for atmospheric chlorine photochemistry  in oceanic
              regions has become the subject of an interesting  scientific controversy. 
              These researchers will develop a high-  sensitivity system that will detect
              atomic chlorine, thus  potentially detecting traces of halogen amines, which
              may be formed  if chlorine photochemistry is taking place.
