Title       : Transfer Functions of Conjugative Transposon, Tn 5252
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9417052

Award Number: 9417052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moses N. Vijayakumar nirmal@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417052  Vijayakumar  This project deaa novel class of transposable elements
              capable of intracellular as well as intercellular transposition.  Besides being
              the major vehicles for the horizontal spread of multiple antibiotic resistance
              among streptococci, they also have been shown to transfer between Gram-positive
              and Gram-negative bacteria.  Experimental observations have shown that there
              are at least two distinct classes of streptococcal conjugative transposons, one
              typified by Tn916 and the other class of much larger elements typified by
              Tn5252 originally discovered in pneumococcus.  In nature, these two independent
              classes of conjugative transposons are often found physically associated.  At
              present, the molecular basis for this relationship is unclear.  While
              considerable efforts are being spent investigating the smaller elements, little
              is known about the larger ones.  Studies relating to the physical structure of
              Tn5252 revealed at least six potemtial genes whose products could be related to
              its transposition functions.  This project aims to establish the
              structure-function relationships of two of these genes and their products, a
              repressor-like and a DNA relaxase-like proteins and to further localize other
              genes involved in the conjugal transposition of this element.  The experiment
              being performed employ a variety of genetic and biochemical techniques to
              mutagenize the loci involved and to characterize their protein products.  The
              lack of plasmids within pneumococcus, a naturally highly transformable
              bacterium, is an enigma that needs to be addressed.  Heterologous alaments such
              as Tn5252 appear to functionally replace plasmids in this organism.  Tn5252
              provides a model system to study unusual genomic rearrangements predicted to
              occur and play a role in the evolution of heterogeneity in this species.  %%% 
              The investigation could enlarge our understanding of the origin and
              autoaccumulation of mobile elements some of which may carry antibiotic
              resistance determinants.  Moreover, these st udies may enable the construction
              of a smaller version of the element to be used as a genetic tool to introduce
              heterologous genes of interest into nontransformable streptococci.  Such a
              system has advantages such as stability and the potential to add a series of
              genes to the same chromosome.  ***
