Title       : Americas Program Dissertation Enhancement Research: Historical Biogeography and
               Systematic Relationships of South American Murid Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9417252

Award Number: 9417252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Yates tyates@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge Salazar-Bravo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9417252  Yates    This Americas Program award will support the dissertation 
              research of Jorge Salazar-Bravo, a Bolivian doctoral student  working under the
              direction of  Dr. Terry L. Yates at the  University of New Mexico.  The
              research, on the historical  biogeography and systematic relationships of South
              American  Murid rodents, will take place in Ecuador.  The researcher  will test
              two current models of murid evolution in South  America using sigmodontine
              rodents, a genus of mice widely  distributed on the continent.  The hypotheses
              have specific  predictions in the form of area cladograms that can be  tested
              using a cladistic approach, but neither of the two  models have been adequately
              tested.  This project will  estimate the phylogenetic relationships of two
              distantly  related genera of the sigmodontine rodents, based on the  cladistic
              analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequence data and  outgroup comparisons with
              other closely related genera.  If  neither of the hypotheses fit the
              phylogenetic  relationships, alternative hypotheses will be tested.    This
              project will benefit the areas of macroecology and  biogeography because it
              will shed light on historical  factors that determine species richness at the
              local and  continental scale, which, in turn, will help in defining and 
              strengthening areas of potential interest for conservation  purposes.  The
              results may also be used in combination with  those of avian biologists and
              others to strengthen and/or  revise hypotheses of the evolution of open
              vegetation in  South America.    ***
