Title       : Permian and Triassic Biogenic Structures in the Shackleton Glacier
               Area,Transantarctic Mountains: Record of Nonmarine Benthic Communities and
               their Response to Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9417978

Award Number: 9417978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly F. Miller molly.f.miller@Vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to study trace fossils in the  Permian and
              Triassic portions of the Beacon Supergroup in the  central Transantarctic
              Mountains.  The sedimentary sequence in  the central Transantarctic Mountains
              indicates that during the  Permian and Triassic this portion of the
              paleo-Pacific margin of  Gondwana was successively covered by a continental
              glacier  (Pagoda Formation), flooded by an inland sea (Mackellar  Formation),
              blanketed with sediment deposited by rivers flowing  across a sandy braid plain
              (Fairchild Formation), and covered  with sands and silts deposited in braided
              river channels and  floodplains (Buckley and Fremouw Formations).  This
              sequence of  events was induced by amelioration of the climate and changes in 
              tectonic regime.    Although the rich floras of the Buckley and Fremouw
              Formations  and well preserved vertebrate fauna of the Fremouw Formation are 
              the subject of continuing extensive studies, little is known  about the benthic
              fauna that inhabited the widespread inland  waters throughout the Permian and
              Triassic and its response to  climate change.  The animals themselves are not
              preserved as  fossils, but biogenic structures, including both trace fossils 
              (ichnofauna; discrete tracks, trails and burrows) and ichnofabric  (general
              disruption caused by biologic activity), give  information about the benthic
              fauna that produced them.  This  information includes: 1) the size and general
              body plan of the  producers, giving keys to their identity; 2) an approximation
              of  the faunal diversity; 3) the behavior of the producers; 4) the 
              environmental preferences of the producers; 5) the use of trophic  and spatial
              resources by the producers; and 6) the activity and  abundance of the benthic
              fauna relative to physical and  depositional processes, as reflected by
              ichnofabric.    In this study, the trace fossils and ichnofabric in diverse 
              subaqueous facies within the Mackellar, Fairchild, Buckley and  lower Fremouw
              Formations will be described and interpreted t o  develop a picture of the
              Permian and earliest Triassic benthic  aquatic fauna and its response to
              climate change.  Trace fossils  and their sedimentological context will be
              described and  photographed in the field, representative specimens will be 
              collected for laboratory study, and the extent of sediment  disruption by
              animals will be evaluated.  Samples will be cut and  polished in the laboratory
              to elucidate trace morphology and  enhance ichnofabric.    Very little is known
              about ancient nonmarine aquatic benthic  communities and ichnofaunas, in spite
              of the fact that these  habitats have been occupied since the Paleozoic. 
              Recent work  suggest that major changes in these communities occurred during 
              the Permian and earliest Triassic when burrowers became more  abundant.  This
              study will provide rare documentation of  ichnofaunal (and indirectly faunal)
              distributions in diverse  aquatic environments at a crucial time during
              evolution of  aquatic benthic communities, and will uniquely address the 
              question of how aquatic benthic faunas responded to climate  amelioration after
              glaciation.    Equally important, data collected will be used to assess the 
              ichnofaunal similarity in correlative units between Antarctica  and other
              Gondwana continents, particularly South America and  Africa, and to test
              hypotheses regarding differences between  ichnofaunas found in equivalent
              depositional regimes in marine  and nonmarine environments.
