Title       : Mechanism of Smectite Illitization from Mineralogical Analysis of a
               Hydrothermally Altered Bentonite, Ponza Island, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9417758

Award Number: 9417758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Altaner altaner@aquifer.geology.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9417758  Altaner     The mineralogical reaction of smectite to illite occurs in
              many sedimentary basins and hydrothermal environments.  The reaction, termed
              smectite illitization, proceeds through mixed-layer illite/smectite (I/S)
              intermediates in which the percentage and ordering if illite interlayers
              typically increases with temperature and time.  In addition, illite polytype
              changes from 1Md to 1M to 2M1.  Therefore, mineralogical and geochemical
              analysis of I/S and illite polytypes can provide fundamental information in
              deciphering the geological history of an area.  In addition, because of the
              volumetric abundance of I/S and the chemical changes involved during smectite
              illitization, the reaction plays an important role in many sedimentary basinal
              processes (e.g., creation of high porewater pressures, maturation and migration
              of oil, formation of growth faults, chemical evolution of brines, and
              cementation of sandstone).  Radiometric ages of illite and I/S can date the
              timing of episodic migrations of hydrothermal fluids, oil migrations,
              emplacement of natural gas, regional overthrusting, and fault gouge formation. 
              Despite such broad significance, mechanisms of smectite illitization and illite
              polytype conversion are incompletely understood.  The broad categories of
              reaction mechanisms are solid-state transformation, in which the daughter
              crystal maintains the approximate size and shape of the parent, and dissolution
              and crystallization, in which the morphological characteristics of the parent
              crystal are lost during reaction.  A solid-state mechanism seems to best model
              illitization in rock-dominated systems such as bentonite and a
              dissolution/crystallization mechanism seems to best model illitization in
              fluid-dominated systems such as sandstone and hydrothermal environments.  
              Ponza island (Italy) contains an extensive area of hydrothermally altered
              Pliocene bentonite.  Although smectite is the dominant alteration phase in many
              ourcrop samples, significant illitization occurs at relative ly shallow
              intervals (>65m) of drillcore and in outcrops at the northern part of Ponza
              island and at the neighboring island of Gavi.  An integrated analytical
              approach is proposed to characterize the mineralogy and chemical composition of
              bulk samples as well as the mineralogy, size, shape, absolute age, chemical
              composition of bulk samples as well as the mineralogy, size, shape, absolute
              age, chemical composition, and stable isotopic composition of smectite, I/S,
              and illite in the Ponza bentonite from outcrops and two 50m deep drillcores. 
              Collected samples will be studied using X-ray diffraction, scanning and
              transmission electron microscopy, radiogenic and stable isotopes, nuclear
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, X-ray flurescence,
              inductively coupled plasma, neutron activation analysis, fluid inclusions, and
              optical microscopy.  A variety of analytical methods are needed to fully
              understand the hydrothermal history of Ponza and the nature of the complex
              mineralogical reactions.  Previous studies of mechanisms of illitization and
              polytype conversion have been hindered by presence of mineral impurities, small
              sample amounts, a limited range in I/S mineralogy, or limited information on
              geologic history.  Ponza island represents an ideal opportunity to gain
              considerable insight in mechanisms of illitization because there is a large
              variation in I/S mineralogy over small lateral and vertical distances.  In
              addition, the rocks contain abundant I/S ( which will allow for many kinds of
              analyses of selected samples) with a relatively low iron content (which will
              enhance resolution of important NMR analyses).  Study results should greatly
              improve understanding of the geologic history of Ponza, including temperature
              and timing of hydrothermal alteration as well as the composition and origin of
              hydrothermal fluids.  Anticipated information ol the nature of hydrothermal
              alteration of Ponza is expected to improve our overall understanding of
              mineralogical reactions.
