Title       : SGER: Tracking Ancient Epidemics: Survey of Plant Pathogens of Preceramic Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9417791

Award Number: 9417791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean B. Ristaino Jean_Ristaino@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Z. Gloria Abad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417791  Beagle-Ristaino   Ancient potato tubers and sweetpotato storage roots
              unearthed form the middens of four archaeological sites located near the
              coastal desert city of Casma in the Department of Ancash, Central Peru have
              been collected and are housed in the herbarium at Southern Illinois University.
               These ancient tubers and storage roots represent some of the oldest known
              mummified specimens of potato ans sweetpotato in the world.  The collections
              date from the Preceramic Period (2000 BC) to the Initial Period (1200 BC).  The
              potato tubers have been identified and belong to the cultivated potato (Solanum
              tuberosum L., sensu lato) and the storage roots have been identified as
              sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas Lam.) by their extant features and starch grains. 
              The state of preservation of the specimens is excellent because the
              archaeological sites are in a dry subtropical coastal desert that receives less
              than 5 mm of rainfall per year.  New techniques and approaches will be applied
              of these ancient plant specimens.  These tolls will permit research questions
              never before possible with ancient plant material.  The objectives of this
              study are to determine whether these ancient specimens contain morphological
              evidence of plant pathogenic fungi or actinomycets; DNA can be amplified from
              the organisms observed and the identity of the organisms be confirmed utilizing
              PCR technology; and the DNA sequences of the ancient plant pathogenic organisms
              compare to modern day plant pathogenic organisms that infect potatoes and
              sweetpotatoes.  There are over 100 specimens in the collection.  Some tubers
              have obvious symptoms of common scab caused by Streptomyces scabies.  It is
              highly unlikely that the samples have been recently colonized by plant
              pathogens since the dessert archaeological sites would not be conducive for
              infection or survival of plant pathogens and specimens were excavated below 1
              meter depths.  In addition, cultivated and wild solanaceous species and
              sweetpotatoes are not currently grown i n the area.  The research has
              potentially far reaching implications.  First, the plant pathogenic fungus,
              Phytophtora infestans, cause of potato late blight and the Irish potato famine
              may be present in the ancient tubers.  The disease is endemic in Peru but the
              supposed center of origin of the disease is in the Toluca Valley of Mexico, a
              secondary center of diversity of Solanaceous species.  The presence of the late
              blight pathogen in ancient tubers would challenge the current dogma in the
              science and could shift current research studies on the population genetics of
              the fungus and the search for sources of resistance in wild species to Peru. 
              Second, movement of tubers and storage roots and potential pathogens out of
              Peru after colonization by the Spaniards may have led to secondary centers of
              epidemic development in other areas of the world.  Third, ancient DNA
              amplified, cloned and sequenced from both the plant hosts and pathogen species
              may be useful in more clearly elucidating the phylogenetic relationships
              between ancient and modern pathogens and domesticated species of potato and
              sweetpotato.
