Title       : Crystallization of Complex Metal Oxides from Ionic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9417185

Award Number: 9417185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417185  Stacy    The long-term goal of the proposed research is to prepare  new
              metal oxides at temperatures below 400 C by selective  precipitation from ionic
              liquids. The general strategy is to  dissolve the reactants in a molten salt,
              and precipitate the  oxide product either by adjusting the acidity, by changing
               the electrochemical potential, by supersaturating the melt  by melt
              decomposition, or by adding a precipitating agent.  This scheme, which is an
              alternative to more typical  reaction routes involving solid-state reactions at
               relatively high temperatures (above 800 C), offers two key  advantages. First,
              low-temperature processing is desirable  for many applications of oxides,
              especially for the  formation of thin films for devices in which high- 
              temperature processing would destroy other components.  Second, new materials
              that are not stable at elevated  temperatures can be prepared. Specifically,
              the proposed  research is concerned with the use of molten alkali metal  and
              alkaline-earth metal hydroxides and nitrates for the  preparation of transition
              metal oxides with the metals in  high formal oxidation states. The chemistry of
              these two  melts will be explored in an effort to prepare: A) copper  oxides;
              B) rhodium oxides; and C) early transition metal  oxides. Interest in the
              copper and rhodium oxides stems from  the possibility of discovering new
              phases, potentially ones  that exhibit superconductivity. For the early
              transition  metal oxides, lowtemperature synthetic routes will be  designed to
              known phases that are electronic ceramics, and  potentially useful as device
              components.  %%%  Metal oxides, including most ceramics and cuprate 
              superconductors, generally are prepared by solid-state  reactions of reactant
              mixtures (e.g., metal oxides,  carbonates, oxalates, and/or nitrates). These
              mixtures can  be obtained by a variety of methods, including repeated 
              grinding, co-precipitation, or sputtering . Upon heating,  reactions occur due
              to solid-state diffusion. However,  beca use of high energies of activation,
              relatively high  temperatures (typically above 800 C) and long reaction times 
              are required to enhance homogeneity and ensure complete  reaction. As an
              alternative to this synthetic scheme, the  proposed research will explore
              low-temperature solution  routes to metal oxides involving the use of molten
              alkali  and alkaline-earth metal hydroxides and nitrates as  solvents. The
              utilization of fluxes for synthesis has become  a valuable technology,
              especially for the preparation of  high-quality single crystals and epitaxial
              films. These are  essential for many measurements of structure and physical 
              properties, and are
