Title       : Selective Dispersion and Flocculation in Alumina Hematite Mineral Suspensions
               using Polymeric Reagents, U.S.-India Collaborative Project, Award in Indian
               Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9417427

Award Number: 9417427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17258              (Estimated)
Investigator: N Pradip   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tata Res Develop & Des Ctr
	      1 Mangaldas Road
	      Pune, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5919,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417427  Pradip    Description:  This project supports  collaboration between
              Dr. P. Somasundaran of  the School of Mining at Columbia University and  Dr.
              Pradip of the Tata Research, Development &  Design Centre in Pune, India.  An
              integrated  approach is proposed to develop an accurate  understanding of the
              mechanisms involved to  alleviate the problems associated with  separation of
              fines and ultrafines from raw  materials.  It is planned to investigate 
              selective flocculation/dispersion of hematite-  alumina system of fines and
              ultrafines in the  presence of polymeric reagents.  Emphasis will  be on the
              identification of mechanisms by which  interactions between reagents at the
              interface  control selectivity.  A multi-pronged approach  using diffuse
              reflectance infra-red Fourier  transform (DRIFT) spectroscopy, fluorescence 
              spectroscopy, electron spin resonance  spectroscopy along with conventional
              techniques  of electrokinetics, adsorption, flocculation  and wetting will be
              employed.     Scope:  The project brings together two well  regarded
              laboratories in India and the U.S. to  conduct research in an important area of
               mineral processing.  The scientists have  complementary capabilities and
              resources and  also have excellent track record of research.   Students from
              the two countries will be  involved in the research.  The project meets  INT
              objectives for enhancing U.S.-foreign  collaboration in areas of interest to
              both  sides.  ***
