Title       : The Influence of Collective Interactions Between Colloidal Particles on
               Colloidal Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9417824

Award Number: 9417824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lutful B. Bhuiyan lbhuiyan@rrpac.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      P.O. Box 21926
	      San Juan, PR  009311926    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Lutful Bhuiyan, University of Puerto Rico Piedras, is supported   by a
              grant from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to   continue
              his theoretical research on the influence of collective   interactions between
              colloidal particles on colloidal stability.    Modified Poisson-Boltzmann (MPB)
               theory will be used to investigate the   importance of collective effects of
              all the charged species of a   colloidal solution on the interaction between
              two colloidal particles.   Four specific goals of the research are: 1) to adapt
              the MPB equation to   the situation where one or more of the species is the
              colloidal particle   so all interactions are treated on an equal footing; 2) to
              study the   interaction between colloidal particles on concentration, size, and
                charge of both the colloidal particle and the simple ions; 3) determine   the
              effect of steric interaction with solvent molecules on   colloid-colloid
              interactions; and 4) to consider further development of   the MPB approach.  A
              fundamental understanding of the nature of interparticle forces in   highly
              interacting colloidal dispersions does not as yet exist.    It is   still not
              well understood what keeps charged colloidal particles   dispersed in water
              from coagulating.  Because of their unusual physical   properties colloidal
              materials have found widespread industrial use, and   may in the future have
              important device applications.  In order to design   materials with desired
              properties, it is necessary to understand the   detailed atomic level
              description of the strong interactions between   these charged particles in
              solution.  Bhuiyan's research is directed at a   basic theory to explain these
              properties.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
