Title       : Octahedral Metal Clusters as Building Blocks, Active Sites and Markers in New
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9417250

Award Number: 9417250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duward F. Shriver shriver@chem.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic  Chemistry Program
              supports work on Group 5 and 6 metal clusters  with labile ligands by Dr.
              Duward F. Shriver, Department of  Chemistry, Northwestern University.  The
              overall goal of the work  is to synthesize extended solids and large molecular
              clusters  containing redox and photoredox active early d-block metal  clusters.
               New compounds will be synthesized and characterized  photochemically and
              electrochemically, and used as the basis for  preparation of micro- and
              mesoporous solids and for markers in  electron microscopy.  These compounds
              will serve as precursors  to: (1) mixed clusters with potentially interesting
              bonding,  reactivity, electrochemistry and photochemistry; (2) clusters 
              containing atypical ligands for these metals; and (3) solids  consisting of
              clusters of clusters with size and shape  selectivity for small molecules and
              redox or photoelectrochemical  activity.  A number of possibilities for
              interaction of clusters  with functional groups on solids will be investigated.
              For  example, silica-supported molybdenum clusters will be  investigated as a
              solid medium for photochemical or  photoelectrochemical transformations of
              small molecules.  Heavy  metal clusters will be employed as markers for
              functional groups  on polycarbon species.  Also, some clusters, which can be
              readily  imaged by high resolution electron microscopy and analyzed by 
              electron nanodiffraction and spectroscopy, will be utilized to  differentiate
              between competing structural models for carbon  nanotubes.    Molybdenum,
              tungsten, niobium, and tantalum form "clusters" in  which six metal atoms form
              an octahedral core around which are  associated ions, such as chloride.  In
              this project easily  exchangeable ions will be associated with some of these
              clusters  so that they can be attached to surfaces of novel materials.  The 
              size, photochemistry, and electrochemistry of these clusters can  then be used
              to determine the shape of the support material t o  which they are attached, or
              to increase the chemical capabilities  of both the cluster and the surface. 
              The results could be  helpful in characterizing known materials or in
              synthesizing new  materials.
