Title       : Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1996   
File        : a9417047

Award Number: 9417047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Nelson nelson@cmt.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417047  Nelson  This research is on a range of topics in condensed matter
              theory,  including columnar liquid crystals, vortex transport and pinning in 
              high-temperature superconductors and fluctuations in two-  dimensional spin
              systems.  The emphasis is on defects, intermediate  degrees of order, and the
              interplay between geometry and  statistical mechanics.  Columnar liquid
              crystals, often composed of  semiflexible polymers, provide fascinating
              examples of partially  ordered systems, with material properties influenced by
              linear  vacancy and interstitial defects.  Such defects have no analogue in 
              assemblies of point-like particles.  Additional challenging  problems arise
              when the polymers are chiral, as in DNA or the  polypeptide poly (y-benzyl
              glutamate) (PBG).  Work on flux pinning  in semiconductors is directed at
              predicting optimal vortex pinning  structures, such as splayed columnar defects
              induced by heavy ion  radiation.  A complete understanding of the resulting
              "splayed  glass" and flux liquid phases requires an extension of quantum 
              mechanics in the equivalent many-body boson problem to allow for a  quenched
              random imaginary vector potential.  Studies of vortex  smectics and
              entanglement around fixed obstacles are also planned.   The existence of the
              flat phase and a continuous broken symmetry in  flexible polymerized membranes
              raises interesting questions about  closely related spin systems in two
              dimensions.  Investigations  will be made on a dyadic spin model which
              interpolates between  Heisenberg-like systems, for which genuine long-range
              order is  impossible, and tehered membranes, which have now been observed 
              experimentally to exhibit continuous symmetry-breaking.  %%%  The interplay
              between geometry and statistical mechanics which  arises in certain liquid
              crystalline polymers, in high temperature  superconductors, and in magnetic
              materials will be studied.   Polymer liquid crystal phases, such as those
              prepared from  biological materials, like DNA double helix and certain a
              rtificial  proteins, can be strongly influenced by the effects of chirality, 
              i.e., by the lack of mirror symmetry in these macromolecules.    It is hoped to
              investigate vacancy and interstitial defects, and to  understand how chirality
              can cause such polymers to braid up  spontaneously.  This work may eventually
              lead to strategies for  synthesizing stronger polymeric materials.  Many
              applications of  the new high temperature superconductors require efficient
              pinning  of quantized lines of magnetic field called vortices.  In  additional
              work, optimal arrangements of defects in the underlying  crystal which pin the
              vortices in place will be searched.  Finally,  the relationship between oder in
              a special class of magnetic  materials and the crumpling of sheet polymers will
              be studied.
