Title       : Electronic Structure of Semiconductor and Main Group Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1996   
File        : a9417459

Award Number: 9417459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishnan Balasubramanian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Krishnan Balasubramanian at the Department of Chemistry and  
              Biochemistry, Arizona State University,  is supported by a grant from the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical  
              studies of the electronic structure of molecules and small clusters.   Accurate
              ab initio wavefunctions are being obtained for several systems,   all of which
              contain semi-conductor or other main group elements. The   systems being
              studied fall into three groups: (1) Mixed III-V, IV-V, and   II-VI clusters
              with up to 9 atoms. (2) Pure clusters with up to 8 atoms   formed from group
              III, IV, and V elements. And, (3) hydrides and halides   of group III and V
              elements. In this work relativistic effects are   explicitly treated because
              they are needed in order to be able to obtain   accurate energetic and
              geometric properties when the systems studied   contain heavy atoms. Examples
              of heavy atoms  treated in this work are   gallium, indium, lead, and selenium.
              Relativistic effective core   potentials are used to represent the electrons in
              the atomic cores in   order to make calculations of the wavefunctions
              tractable, especially for   the larger clusters. In order to obtain the
              required accuracy,   relativistic complete active space self-consistent field
              wavefunctions   are further correlated using multi-reference configuration
              interaction   and relativistic configuration interaction methods.  The work
              under this grant is directed toward resolving questions about a   wide range of
              properties of semi-conductor and main group clusters   containing heavy atoms.
              Clusters constitute a vital bridge between   molecules and solids. However,
              they also exhibit interesting and   technologically useful properties in their
              own right. In this project,   the systems studied have relevance for
              semi-conductor processing and for   chemical vapor deposition.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
