Title       : Taphonomy and Paleoecological Significance of a Living Fossil: The Lingulid
               Brachiopod Glottidia palmeri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9417054

Award Number: 9417054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95301              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl W. Flessa kflessa@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Flessa  9417054   The taphonomy and ecology of a living fossil, the lingulid
              brachiopod Glottidia palmeri, will be examined.  Lingulid brachiopods are
              common and paleoecologically significant fossils in nearshore deposits ranging
              from the Cambrian to the Recent.  Their occurrence is often taken to indicate
              shallow--water, variable salinity environments.  Large populations of the
              lingulid Glottidia inhabit the intertidal flats of the Colorado River delta. 
              These populations present a rare opportunity to examine the environmental
              factors controlling this species, the significance of growth--banding in the
              shell, and the post-mortem processes that affect the preservation and
              paleoenvironmental interpretation of lingulid fossils.   Samples will be
              collected from along two shore-perpendicular transects:  one from mudflats, the
              other from sandflats.  These data will be used to estimate the correspondence
              between live populations and their shelly remains, and the effects of substrate
              on morphology and taphonomy.  Taphonomic analysis will reveal the extent to
              which taphonomic features can be used as paleoenvironmental indicators.  Field
              and laboratory experiments will assess the patterns and rates of post-mortem
              alteration during burial and transport.  The environmental significance of
              disturbance--rings in the shells will be evaluated both by monitoring
              individual growth and through correlating banding patterns with meteorological
              and tidal records.  Patterns of seasonality or predation recorded in lingulid
              growth--banding can prove useful in studies of fossil lingulids.   This study
              will be the first comprehensive study of the taphonomy of a representative of
              this common and geologically useful group.  Our results will affect existing
              interpretations of lingulid--bearing rocks and will greatly enhance the
              paleoenvironmental utility of fossils of this long-ranging order.
