Title       : Molecular Genetics of Flower Scents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1996   
File        : a9417582

Award Number: 9417582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eran Pichersky lelx@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417582  Pichersky  Flower scents exert strong influence on plant reproductive 
              success, and thus are crucial determinants of yield in fruit  crops that
              require scent-seeking pollinators.  However, the  biosynthetic pathways of
              floral scents have scarcely been  investigated on the biochemical, genetic and
              molecular  levels.  Dr. Pichersky proposes to study scent production in 
              Clarkia, a genus of annual plants native to California.  Clarkia breweri is the
              only species in the genus with floral  scent; its flowers are visited mostly by
              hawkmoths.  The  odorless flowers of C. concinna, a closely related species 
              from which C. breweri arose, are visited mostly by  butterflies, whereas all
              other outcrossing Clarkia species  are pollinated by bees.  The investigator
              has identified two  major pathways that contribute to the floral scent of C. 
              breweri. One of these pathways, the subject of this propoal,  results in the
              production of the monoterpenes linalool and  linalool oxides.  It has been
              shown that this pathway also  operates in C. Concinna flowers as well, albeit
              at a greatly  reduced level, and it therefore appears that the evolution  of
              monoterpene emission in C. breweri has occurrred by up-  regulating this
              pathway.  To test this hypothesis, Dr.  Pichersky and his colleagues have
              already developed an  enzymatic assay for linalool synthase (LIS), the enzyme
              that  catalyzes the formation of linalool, and have purified the  protein. 
              They will now  develop a spectrophotometric assay  for linalool epoxidae (LIE),
              the enzyme that catalyzes the  formation of 6,7-linalool expoxide, an
              intermediate in the  formation of linalool oxides.  They will isolate and 
              characterize the Lis and Lie genes from both Clarkia species  and investigate
              the genetic and molecular control mechanisms  that govern their expression and
              are responsible for the  interspecific differences, using recombinant promoter
              - GUS  reporter gene fusion and plant transforation and DNA-protein 
              interaction assays.  The cellular and subce llular  localization of the enzymes
              will be determined using a  combination of immunological techniques.  The data
              obtained  will increase our understanding of the biochemical and  genetic
              control of flower scent production, and may lead to  future ability to
              manipulate these traits in agronomically  important plants.
