Title       : Effects of Alloying Additions on the Liquid and Solid State Processing
               Characteristics of Machinable SAE 4120 Steel Grades
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9417437

Award Number: 9417437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Matlock dmatlock@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Krauss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417437  Matlock    This award is a "Tie" project between two
              Industry/University  Cooperative Research Centers (I/UCRC) designed to evaluate
              the  effects of alloy additions, added to enhance machinability of the  steel,
              on the liquid and solid state processing characteristics  of SAE 4120 alloy
              steel.  The Industry/University Cooperative  Research Center for Advanced Steel
              Processing and Products at   Colorado School of Mines is determining the
              effects of alloying  and solute segregation on the hot working behavior and
              final  microstructures of the alloys.  The Industry/University  Cooperative
              Research Center for Iron and Steel Research at  Carnegie Mellon University is
              evaluating the effects of these  alloying additions in slag-metal interactions
              and solidification  characteristics.  The two efforts define independent yet 
              collaborative studies of selected alloy additions, and the  combined research
              creates a synergism in the understanding of  machinable steels that would not
              be possible at either  institution alone.    Environmental and health concerns
              increase the urgency of  replacing lead as an additive for enhanced
              machinability of  steels.  A number of chemical elements have potential  
              substitutes for the lead, for example copper, niobium, bismuth,  tellurium, and
              selenium.  Some of these elements are known to  adversely affect the hot
              shortness (a term that describes the  deformability of the steel over a
              reasonable processing  temperature), brittleness, segregation of alloying
              elements in  the steel, solidification and casting processes, and the reaction 
              of the steel melt with the refractory lining in the smelting  furnace.  Any
              utilization of these alloying elements as  substitutes for toxic lead must be
              done in a manner to avoid any  of the adverse situations above.  Colorado
              School of Mines is  investigating the properties of the steel and Carnegie
              Mellon  University is investigating the melting, casting and  solidification
              characteristics of the same experimental alloys.   This c ombination of
              expertise addresses the complete scope of  issues needed before these new
              alloys can become commercially  viable.    The Program Manager recommends
              Colorado School of Mines be  awarded $75,000 for 36 months for this "Tie"
              project.
