Title       : Molecular Foundation for Multilayered Surface Metal Oxide Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9417981

Award Number: 9417981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Israel E. Wachs iew0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Israel Wachs    The objective of this program is the establishment of
              a foundation for the rational design  of multilayered surface metal-oxide
              catalysts; this requires a data base that includes materials with a wide range
              of properties.  The primary supports used in this study are silica, a weakly
              interacting support and titanic a strongly interacting support. These are
              surface-modified with zirconia, alumina, silica, or titania to give a range of
              surface properties.  Vanadia is the second surface oxide layer deposited on the
              modified supports; it is selected because of its unique redox properties and
              the fact that a considerable amount of data on vanadium oxide overlayers on
              oxides already exists.  Characterization is performed under reactive
              environments to determine the structures of the surface metal-oxide layers and
              whether the vanadium-oxide layer is anchored to the support oxide.  Catalytic
              activities of the multilayered systems are probed with temperature-programmed
              reduction studies and with studies of methanol oxidation.  Structure and
              reactivity information are combined to illuminate the natures of the
              interactions in these multilayered surface metal-oxide phases and their effects
              on catalytic reactivity and selectivity.    Multilayered surface metal-oxide
              catalysts are widely regarded as the next generation of catalysts for partial
              oxidation and controlled reduction.  These systems have a wide range of
              applicability and are considered central to cost-competitive production of many
              products including drugs, gasoline additives, plastics, and pesticides.  This
              project aims to develop a rational strategy for design of these catalysts.   
              ***
