Title       : RUI: Coordinated Studies of Close Binary Stars as Tracers of Stellar Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9417035

Award Number: 9417035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Etzel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9417035  Etzel    Post main-sequence stars, having exhausted the hydrogen fuel
              in their  core, undergo core contraction, thermonuclear ignition of hydrogen in
              a  thin shell, and expansion of their outer layers.  When such a star is  in a
              close binary system, evolutionary expansion causes it to fill its  so-called
              Roche surface, a tear-dropped shaped lobe with a cusp pointed  at the other
              star.  Matter flows along the surface of this star (the  "loser"), through the
              cusp (where the gravitational forces are equal),  and is collimated in a stream
              that sends mass to the other star (the  "gainer").  This evolution by mass
              exchange occurs on a time scale of  one million to ten million years, some 100
              to 1000 times faster than  the rate of evolution when the star is on the main
              sequence path of  stellar evolution.    Nature has conspired to make the
              details of mass flows and accretion  processes especially observable in
              Algol-type binary star systems.   Research on these systems will improve our
              physical understanding of  these processes.   The research effort will be
              concentrated on studying   long-period Algol systems in which the transferred
              mass supplies a  flattened accretion disk rotating around the "gainer".   The
              viscous  dissipation in the disk allows matter to spiral inward to be accreted 
              by the "gainer", supplying mass and angular momentum to that star.  The  mass,
              structure, composition, viscous heating, and instabilities of  accretion disks
              will be studied using the strong hydrogen-alpha  wavelength emission lines and
              infrared wavelength absorption lines of  oxygen produced in these disks.  A
              diagnostic model to predict line  profiles will be developed.  The orbits of
              binary star systems are  viewed nearly edge-on, so the stars eclipse each
              other. The "losers"  also partially eclipse the disks, and the disks partially
              eclipse  losers, adding greatly to the observed spatial resolution of the 
              images.  Multi-color photometry of the stellar light variations and 
              spectroscopic observations of  stellar radial velocities will provide  data to
              calculate stellar masses and radii, which will set the  gravitation
              stratification in the accretion disks.     Equatorial accretion of matter from
              the disk onto the "gainer" leads to  rapid rotation of that star. Unless the
              angular momentum transport to  the star is very efficient, the surface rotation
              of the "gainer" should  be differential.  The detection of the differential
              rotation will be  sought by observing spectral line profiles as eclipses of the
              gainer  proceed and various portions of the stellar surface are eclipsed or 
              exposed.  Results from using other techniques that gauge the average  rotation
              of the stellar envelope, will be combined with the  differential rotation data
              to shed light on the ultimate mass and  angular momentum assimilation by
              "gainers".    Estimates of the rate of mass transfer in some systems will be
              made.   It will be possible to judge critically from photometric solutions 
              whether "losers" truly fill their Roche surfaces.  In a significant  number of
              cases, the Roche volumes are not filled.  Some mechanism  other than simple
              lobe overflow must therefore drive mass transfer and  evolution in these
              systems.  Magnetic activity on "loser" surfaces, and  cool stars in related
              systems, will be studied.
