Title       : Utilization of Unnatural Amino Acids in de novo Protein Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1993  
File        : a9104445

Award Number: 9104445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Imperiali   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research will develop an approach to de novo protein                       
              synthesis which is based on the assembly of supersecondary                     
              structural motifs stabilized by the incorporation of                           
              specifically designed unnatural amino acid residues.                           
              Synthesis, incorporation and structural characterization of                    
              unnatural amino acid residues within polypeptides are crucial                  
              elements of the research.  The residues will be used as the                    
              basis for constrained beta-type II reverse turns.  Further, the                
              unnatural amino acid residues should help in establishing                      
              beta-sheet stucture by providing a greater choice of                           
              beta-branched amino acid residues than that currently                          
              available.  The research proposes utilization of supersecondary                
              (rather than tertiary) structural elements as the basic                        
              building blocks in protein design to facilitate both predictive                
              and analytical processes.  Further functionalization of the                    
              unnatural residues can form the basis for the production of new                
              regulatory or catalytic biopolymers.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award from the Synthetic Organic Program, Dr. Barbara                
              Imperiali of the Department of Chemistry at the California                     
              Institute of Technology will conduct research in the area of de                
              novo protein synthesis.  The research will focus on developing                 
              building blocks which can be assembled in a rational manner to                 
              afford proteinaceous products with a predetermined                             
              three-dimensional structure.  Dr. Imperiali will use peptidyl                  
              compounds, based on unnatural amino acid residues, which can be                
              used to build new proteins.  Further functionalization of the                  
              unnatural residues can lead to the production of new regulatory                
              or catalytic biopolymers.
