Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nearly Integrable Nonlinear Wave Phenomena: Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9104806

Award Number: 9104806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134800             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Gregory Forest   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project concentrates on nearly-integrable nonlinear wave                  
              equations, that is, integrable partial differential equations and              
              their perturbations.  One of the goals is to use a complement of               
              pure mathematical theory, perturbation theory, and numerical                   
              experiments to describe, understand, and predict the behavior of               
              these systems.  A second goal is to apply these tools and                      
              concepts to study specific systems that arise in nonlinear                     
              optics.  A third goal is to use nearly integrable systems as a                 
              model for formulating questions of a statistical nature about the              
              physics of nonlinear interactions and nonlinear mode selection                 
              mechanisms.  The theme here is to focus on solutions, first the                
              exact integrable solutions and then their behavior under                       
              perturbations.  The integrable theory yields explicit solutions                
              and the full set of parameters for each N-mode solution,                       
              stability within the integrable system, and the nearby solutions               
              that result from unstable solutions.  Then numerical experiments               
              on the perturbed systems test whether nearly-integrable dynamics               
              can be approximated by modulated N-mode integrable solutions.  If              
              so, the corresponding perturbed equations are derived.  These                  
              tools are brought to bear on specific applied projects.                        
                   Integrable systems of partial differential equations often                
              have solutions whose properties can be exactly established.  This              
              is quite unlike the usual case for nonlinear partial differential              
              equations.  What is important here is that often the properties                
              remain when the system is perturbed.  Thus one can tell a great                
              deal about otherwise intractable problems.  Such problems arise                
              in nonlinear optics (for example, in the design of long-distance               
              communication networks using fiber optics and the design of                    
              optical cavities for very fast switches),  in the motion of waves              
              in nonlinear acoustic media, and in flows around thin wings.
