Title       : Cell Division Pattern in Plants: Division Plane, Cytoskeleton and Organelle
               Migration in Selaginella Stomatogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9104528

Award Number: 9104528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy C. Brown rcb@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty E. Lemmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The role of the cytoskeleton in regulation of the division                  
              plane, mitosis and morphogenesis will be investigated in                       
              stomatogenesis in the fern ally, Selaginella.  This simple system              
              takes advantage of two of the most dramatic examples of precisely              
              defined morphogenetic pathways known in plants: stomatogenesis and             
              monoplastidic cell division.  In stomatogenesis, the guard mother              
              cell differentiates from epidermal initials to depart on a pathway             
              leading to formation of a pair of specialized guard cells.  In                 
              monoplastidic division, nuclear and plastid division are intimately            
              coordinated by precise morphogenetic plastid migrations and by                 
              organization of the spindle at the plastids.  The overall objective            
              of this research is to use the determinated pathway of                         
              stomatogenesis and the phenomenon of morphogenetic plastid                     
              migration to answer questions of fundamental importance in plant               
              morphogenesis.  Morphogenetic plastid migration provides an                    
              accurate marker of changes in polarity during the cell cycle.  This            
              migration will be compared with the better known circadian and                 
              photostimulated chloroplast migration in Selaginella.  Movement of             
              chloroplasts has been well studied and provides one of the better              
              understood examples of actin driven motility in plants.  Proposed              
              studies include live observations and direct and indirect                      
              localization of f-actin and microtubules using light (video                    
              enhanced differential interference contrast, fluorescence, confocal            
              laser scanning) and transmission electron microscopy.  Drugs will              
              be used to perturb cytoskeletal proteins to determine function in              
              control of division plane, organelle migration, and division, and              
              in cell shaping and wall deposition that leads to the distinctive              
              form of mature guard cells.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Such studies will increase our understanding of the phenomenon of              
              plastid polarity in monoplastidic cell division, and will                      
              contribute to the general knowledge of the role of the cytoskeleton            
              in patterned development in a multicellular plant tissue.
