Title       : Hydromechanical Constraints on the Ontogeny and Evolution ofScaphitid Ammonites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1994 
File        : a9104888

Award Number: 9104888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 11,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil H. Landman landman@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   We plan to investigate the hydromechanical properties of                  
              closely related group of scaphitid ammonite species in the context             
              of their phylogenetic framework and their distribution with respect            
              to time, lithofacies, and geography.  We have chosen an endemic,               
              monophyletic group of approximately 25 species ranging from the                
              Turonian to Santonian (Upper Cretaceous) of the Western Interior               
              of North America.  These species preserve in their shells a record             
              of their growth and manifest profound morphological changes during             
              ontogeny, eventually developing an uncoiled body chamber at                    
              maturity.  In addition, these species display a wide diversity in              
              adult shell shape ranging from relatively compressed species with              
              a well-developed "scaphitid" body chamber to relatively depressed              
              species in which the body chamber is "normally" coiled.  Using a               
              flow tank and drag measuring apparatus, we will study the                      
              hydromechanical implications of ontogenetic changes in size and                
              shape for each species.  This will allow us to construct species               
              specific hydromechanical ontogenetic trajectories (HOT's) covering             
              all of postembryonic growth.  We will supplement this information              
              with studies of the siphuncle and septa, which may provide                     
              information on relative habitat depth.  We will compare these HOT's            
              with the paleoenvironmental and evolutionary distribution of the               
              respective species within the well documented context of the                   
              Western Interior Seaway.  Thus, this comparison will elucidate for             
              the first time the extent and way in which functional                          
              hydromechanical constraints have contributed to the evolution and              
              geographic distribution of a closely related group of ammonites.
