Title       : Molecular Analysis of Terminal Oxidases from N2-fixing Azotobacter vinelandii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9104280

Award Number: 9104280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Maier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9145,
Abstract    :
              Biological nitrogen fixation catalyzed by the procaryotic enzyme               
              nitrogenase is essential for a positive input of N on Earth.  The              
              N2-fixing bacterium Azotobacter vinelandii contains two terminal               
              oxidases responsible for aerobic O2-consuming respiration.  One of             
              the oxidases (cytochrome o) is coupled to ATP production, but the              
              other oxidase (cytochrome b/d) complex) appears not to be coupled              
              to energy generation.  The latter vigorously O2-consuming oxidase              
              is thought to be important in removing O2 so that the O2-labile                
              nitrogenase enzyme can function.  The specific roles of each of                
              these oxidases in respiratory protection of nitrogenase and                    
              respiratory metabolism of the bacterium are not well-understood.               
              It is proposed to compare structural gene mutants in the terminal              
              oxidase cytochrome b/d and cytochrome o with the wild type in many             
              parameters associated with N2 fixation respiration.  Also the cyt              
              b/d complex will be purified and reconstituted into lipid vesicles             
              to directly measure its ability to generate an electrochemical                 
              proton gradient (energy-generating ability).  Assuming lack of                 
              electrochemical gradient formation by the purified cyt b/d complex             
              in membranes, we will then characterize the pertinent structural               
              features that span the periplasmic and cytoplasmic portions of the             
              membrane,  and responsible for differences in the uncoupled (non               
              energy generating) terminal oxidase of A. vinelandii in comparison             
              with the well-characterized energy-coupled cyt b/d oxidase of E.               
              coli.  The transcriptional regulation of these two terminal oxidase            
              complexes, especially their regulation in response to N and O2                 
              levels will be addressed.  The results are expected to enhance our             
              knowledge of the diversity and flexibility of bacterial respiratory            
              metabolism and specifically on respiratory metabolism in                       
              conjunction with N2 fixation.
