Title       : Physics Of Solid State Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1992     
File        : a9104585

Award Number: 9104585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Warner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm B. Polk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Solid state polymerization is a technique commonly employed                    
              for increasing the molecular weight of condensation polymers                   
              after bulk polymerization has been completed.  Solid state                     
              polymerization offers one of the most attractive routes for                    
              obtaining extremely high strength, high modulus, thermally                     
              stable, chemically resistant polymers.  The technique involves                 
              heating the polymer to within about 50oC of the observed                       
              melting temperature in an atmosphere in which various                          
              molecular weight building reactions are driven towards                         
              completion by the removal of low molecular weight condensation                 
              byproducts.  The chemistry of solid state polymerization is                    
              relatively well understood, the mechanisms responsible for the                 
              enormous increase in tensile strength of thermotropic polymers                 
              have not been fully elucidated.                                                
                                                                                             
              This work is aimed at obtaining a better understanding of the                  
              large increase in tenacity that sometimes occurs during the                    
              solid state polymerization of oriented thermotropic polymers.                  
              Specific polymers that facilitate analysis of end group                        
              clustering, mobility, and reaction will be synthesized in                      
              order to elucidate the effect of end group mobility,                           
              reactivity, or clustering.  The changes in the number of end                   
              groups, and their proximity will be followed using solid state                 
              NMR after solid state annealing.  The effect of heat treatment                 
              will be analyzed using some chemical and physical techniques.                  
              It is hoped that the work will elucidate the optimal                           
              mechanisms for the synthesis of stiff, strong, chemically                      
              resistant, essentially defect-free, high dielectric, and                       
              lightweight materials.
