Title       : Fossiliferous Cave Breccias in South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9104676

Award Number: 9104676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick E. Grine fgrine@epo.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Africa appears to be the place in which our earliest ancestors                 
              evolved.  While the original discoveries of these earliest                     
              hominids were made in South Africa, most of the recent                         
              discoveries have been in East Africa. There are nonetheless many               
              sites in South Africa which are potential sources of fossils                   
              which could shed light on a multitude of exceptionally important               
              questions related to the early stages of our evolution.  For                   
              instance, we are uncertain as to the ages of the South African                 
              fossils known to date, their relationship to the East African                  
              materials, the numbers of species represented, the tool-                       
              manufacturing capabilities of the South Africans etc.  All of                  
              these are of clear importance in elucidating human evolution.                  
                                                                                             
              Yet, looking for fossiliferous sites is a truly risky                          
              undertaking.  Sites may be searched in vain for years on end and               
              thus programs are hesitant to invest in projects which have a                  
              limited likelihood of "paying off."  The current proposal                      
              requests funds to survey a region of South Africa which is known               
              to contain limestone deposits of the appropriate age.  No                      
              systematic survey of these deposits has yet been undertaken and                
              the PI intends to determine which breccias have indications of                 
              bearing fossils, more precise ages of the deposits.  The PI has                
              done some prior work in an area to the north and east.  There are              
                                                                                             
              reasonable geological and paleontological reasons to think that                
              the caves here to be investigated may prove to be fossiliferous.
