Title       : Instrumentation, Practice, and Observation: The Making and Use of Visual Records
               in American Astrophysics, 1860-1914
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9104786

Award Number: 9104786
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex S. Pang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Working with Dr. Timothy Lenoir of Stanford University, Dr. Pang               
              is examining the production and reproduction of visual records in              
              19th century American astrophysics.  Large telescopes, cameras, and            
              spectrographs were highly promising technologies to 19th century               
              astrophysicists, but they were difficult to use, and the images                
              hard to produce, replicate, and analyze.  Dr. Pang is studying how             
              those problems and opportunities were dealt with, and how they                 
              changed astrophysical research.                                                
                                                                                             
              Dr. Pang is beginning his research by examining how the                        
              technologies affected the work and workplaces of astronomers.  New             
              telescope systems, consisting of larger optics, accurate tracking              
              mechanisms, and photographic technology, created opportunities for             
              new research programs.   However, the new technical skills and                 
              training they required reshaped the craft of observing, and created            
              a need for specialists to analyze and reduce large masses of data.             
              He is then examining how printing technologies--engraving,                     
              lithography, etc.--defined what images astronomers could reproduce             
              and share with their colleagues in journals and personal                       
              communications.  He is also examining how the new images were used             
              in long-distance collaborative research.  Finally, he is examining             
              why large telescopes and photography did not displace drawing and              
              direct observation in a few research areas.  By taking this                    
              systemic view, and examining the entire range of work required to              
              produce, share, and use visual records--by moving from the                     
              telescope, to the analysis room, to the printer's shop, to the                 
              scientific journal and private letter--Dr. Pang will show how the              
              production of visual records changed the practice of astrophysical             
              observation and the making of astrophysical knowledge.
