Title       : Role of PDPK in the Mechanisms of Growth Factor Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9104769

Award Number: 9104769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick L. Hall fhall@hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Childrens Hospital of L A
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90027    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                This proposal is focused on the functional role of a newly-                 
              discovered cytosolic protein kinase that is involved in the                    
              regulation of cell proliferation. The kinase phosphorylates its                
              substrate proteins at serine or threonine residues that reside in              
              positions adjacent to a proline residue. Because of this                       
              specificity, the kinase is designated as a proline-directed protein            
              kinase (PDPK) by the PI. The active enzyme consists of a complex               
              of two subunits, namely the catalytic p34cdc2 kinase and a                     
              regulatory A-type cyclin. The kinase is thought to function at the             
              G1/S transition of the cell cycle in somatic mammalian cells and               
              to phosphorylate a number of potentially-important substrates,                 
              including growth factor receptors and key regulatory enzymes. The              
              activation of these substrates by phosphorylation may be an                    
              important facet of mitotic induction by growth factors and                     
              mitogens. The link between the activity of this kinase and the                 
              induction of proliferation by the treatment of cells with mitogenic            
              growth factors will be explored in a series of biochemical,                    
              pharmacological and immunological studies that focus on the role               
              played by the kinase in this process.                                          
                                                                                             
              The regulation of progression through the cell cycle and the                   
              induction of cell proliferation are areas of intense research that             
              have merged because of the discovery of several key factors that               
              are essential for both processes. Most prominent among these                   
              regulatory factors is a protein kinase known as p34cdc2 that is                
              present in all organisms from yeast to humans, and, as part of a               
              complex with certain regulatory subunits known as the cyclins,                 
              functions at particular times during the cell cycle to promote                 
              progression through mitosis. Studies on the cyclin proteins,                   
              performed largely in invertebrate embryonic cells, have                        
              demonstrated that the cyclins confer specific activity and                     
              substrate specificity to the kinase, but in these cells, the role              
              of the A-type cyclins has remained less clear than that for B-type             
              cyclins. Dr. Hall has shown that the binding of cyclin-A to p34cdc2            
              confers a particular type of activity for the kinase in somatic                
              mammalian cells. This activity appears to be essential for                     
              progression of another part of the cell cycle, when the cell begins            
              its DNA replication stage, long before mitosis. Dr. Hall has                   
              demonstrated that cyclin-A binding confers unique substrate                    
              specificity to p34cdc2 that could prove to be a major breakthrough             
              in our understanding of how somatic cells enter the mitotic pathway            
              prior to DNA synthesis.
