Title       : Geminiviruses as Models for Plant Nuclear DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9104150

Award Number: 9104150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin LINDA@BCHSERVER.BCH.NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              Geminiviruses constitute a family of plant viruses with single-                
              stranded DNA genomes that replicate via double-stranded DNA                    
              intermediates in the nuclei of infected cells.  They encode a                  
              single protein for their replication and can recruit the remainder             
              of the replication machinery from their host.  These                           
              characteristics suggest that geminiviruses are excellent models for            
              studying plant nuclear DNA replication.  The overall goal of our               
              research is to understand the molecular events that mediate                    
              geminivirus DNA replication using tomato golden mosaic virus (TGMV)            
              as our prototype.  We will identify the TGMV replication origin by             
              deletion analysis and by assaying viral DNA fragments for their                
              ability to support replication of nonviral DNA in plant                        
              protoplasts.  The sequence and structural requirements of the TGMV             
              origin will be characterized by analyzing replications containing              
              site-specific mutations.  Our initial studies of trans-acting                  
              factors involved in replication will focus on the single TGMV-                 
              encoded protein, AL1, required for replication.  Two important                 
              questions we will ask are does AL1 bind specifically to the TGMV               
              replication origin and what is its catalytic role in replication.              
              We plan to purify AL1, study its catalytic properties, and                     
              determine if it requires host proteins for activity.                           
                                                                                             
              The long term goal of our research is to identify and characterize             
              the plant proteins involved in TGMV replication and to determine               
              their roles in normal cellular processes.***//
