Title       : Protozoan Fauna of Poison Arrow Frogs: Taxonomy and Ecology(Biological
               Sciences): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9104020

Award Number: 9104020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Poynton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                Commensal and parasitic protozoa will be identified from                     
              Dendrobates auratus and Dendrobates pumilio, both wild caught                  
              in Costa Rica and captive bred.  Prevalence and density of                     
              infections will be recorded, and the fauna compared between                    
              species under both wild caught and captive bred conditions.                    
              Protozoa, (particularly the hemoflagellates and ciliates,                      
              opalinids and flagellates in the rectum), will be identified                   
              to genus and species using light microscopy (especially                        
              protargol impregnation), and scanning and transmission electron                
              microscopy.  Protozoa will also be examined in histological                    
              sections.                                                                      
                Little is known of the protozoan fauna of threatened poison                  
              arrow frogs, and the project results will:  increase knowledge                 
              of their biology; enable their fauna to be compared with that                  
              of other anuran families, increasing understanding of their                    
              evolution; and allow more effective care and treatment of                      
              captive dendrobatids.  Descriptions of several new species of                  
              protozoans are anticipated, of particular interest being the                   
              potentially pathogenic and poorly described diplomonads.  The                  
              project also furthers VPW program objectives to provide                        
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigators'                       
              enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In                   
              this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the                  
              second objective include:  participating in an outreach                        
              program, targeting high school minority women interested in                    
              pursuing a career in life sciences; teaching an undergraduate                  
              course in basic parasitology, emphasizing the impact of                        
              parasites on human health; and teaching a graduate course on                   
              parasites of aquatic animals.
