Title       : Function of a Lysosome Associated Membrane Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9104576

Award Number: 9104576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223993             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Cardelli jcarde@nomvs.lsumc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71105    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The project focuses on studies of the biosynthesis and function              
              of D-LAMP-2, a Dictyostelium protein which appears to be a                     
              homologue of the human lysosomal associated membrane protein 2 (H-             
              LAMP-2).  Antibodies to H-LAMP-2 and oligonucleotide probes will               
              be used to clone and sequence the cDNA coding for D-LAMP-2.                    
              Radiolabel pulse-chase, microscopy, and subcellular fractionation              
              approaches will be used to examine the transport and processing of             
              D-LAMP-2 in growing cells, and in mutant Dictyostelium cells                   
              altered in secretion and transport of lysosomal hydrolases.  The               
              biosynthesis and intracellular location of D-LAMP-2 will also be               
              examined as a function of the developmental cycle of Dictyostelium.            
              Also, antisense RNA and gene disruption techniques will be used to             
              generate strains unable to produce D-LAMP-2.  The function of the              
              lysosomal system will be assessed by: determining if "normal"                  
              lysosomes are formed; examining the transport, sorting, and                    
              secretion of lysosomal enzymes; measuring the rate of endocytosis              
              and phagocytosis; and determining if cells undergo normal                      
              differentiation.  Together, these approaches will provide relevant             
              new information on the role of LAMPs in the biosynthesis and                   
              function of lysosomes in growing and differentiating cells.                    
                                                                                             
              Until now, most studies on lysosomal biogenesis (in both animal and            
              slime mold systems) have focused on how the lysosomal enzymes enter            
              the lysosomal compartment.  Recently, a few lysosomal membrane                 
              marker proteins have been identified in mammalian cells; while                 
              these have been well characterized with respect to protein                     
              structure, there is as yet no clue as to their possible function.              
              The discovery of a possible homologue of one of these lysosomal                
              membrane proteins in the slime mold Dictyostelium comes at a                   
              fortuitous time, since it is only recently that Dictyostelium has              
              become readily amenable to genetic and molecular-genetic                       
              manipulations.  It is now possible to create mutant strains of the             
              cells with specific genetic alterations.  By creating mutants with             
              specific alterations in the LAMP homologue, and assessing the                  
              resultant phenotypes with respect to lysosomal function, it should             
              be possible to address the question of function of these proteins.
