Title       : Calcium/Calmodulin-dependent Protein Kinase(s) in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9104586

Award Number: 9104586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274200             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. W. Poovaiah poovaiah@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plants respond to various signals such as hormones, light and                  
              gravity.  How plants perceive and transduce these chemical and                 
              physical signals is not clearly understood.  Accumulating evidence             
              indicates that calcium acts as a messenger in signal transduction              
              in plants.  Many of the signal-induced responses are mediated by               
              calcium.  Increased calcium can affect diverse physiological                   
              processes through the action of calmodulin, a ubiquitous calcium-              
              binding protein.  Much of this diversity in response in plants is              
              believed to be achieved by the modulation of the activity of the               
              calcium and/or calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinases.                   
              Although calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphorylation is               
              implicated in regulating a number of cellular processes in plants,             
              nothing is known about the calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein                
              kinase(s) and its substrates.  Dr. Poovaiah has isolated several               
              cDNA clones by immunoscreening the expression libraries with the               
              antibody produced to the sequence corresponding to alpha subunit               
              of animal calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II.  The                 
              principal investigator proposes to perform biochemical analyses of             
              the encoded protein to verify its protein kinase activity,                     
              determine its mode of regulation by calcium and calmodulin, and                
              analyze its substrate specificity.  Furthermore, Dr. Poovaiah                  
              intends to use auxin resistant mutants of Arabidopsis and light-               
              responsive corn mutant to study the role of calcium/calmodulin-                
              dependent protein kinase in auxin and light signal transduction,               
              respectively.  The information derived from these studies would be             
              of immense value in understanding the role of calcium/calmodulin-              
              dependent protein kinase(s) in signal transduction in plants.//
