Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9104195

Award Number: 9104195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Wheeden wheeden@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will continue his              
              study of questions related to weighted norm inequalities for                   
              integral and differential operators.  Specifically he will focus               
              upon weighted norm inequalities for Poisson integrals, fractional              
              integrals, Hilbert transforms, and elliptic and parabolic                      
              operators.  This theoretical work is applicable to (and motivated              
              by) the following problems:  the derivation of sharp estimates                 
              for the fundamental solutions of degenerate parabolic equations,               
              the estimation of the distribution of eigenvalues of various                   
              operators, and the elucidation of the continuity properties of                 
              solutions of integral and differential equations.                              
                   Much of what mathematicians call "analysis" involves                      
              deriving and applying "a'priori" estimates on the solutions of                 
              integral and differential equations.  An a'priori estimate                     
              esentially provides a mathematician with information about a                   
              solution that is contained in the equation itself, and its                     
              derivation does not require a detailed knowledge of the putative               
              solution. As an illustration,  solutions of certain types of                   
              boundary value problems for elliptic equations satisfy an                      
              a'priori estimate of the following type; namely, the solution is               
              bounded from above (below) by the largest (smallest) value of the              
              boundary values.  In this project the principal investigator will              
              use what are called "norm inequalities" to derive sharp a'priori               
              estimates on the solutions of various integral and differential                
              equations.
