Title       : Theoretical Research on the Terrestrial Exosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9104652

Award Number: 9104652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Richard Hodges hodges@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Breig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Tinsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project addresses the exosphere, the outermost fringe                
              of the earth's atmosphere.  A preliminary investigation of                     
              existing terrestrial exosphere models indicates that errors, in                
              some cases in excess of 2, are likely to have accrued from the                 
              use of simplistic approximations of collision processes.  The                  
              traditional concept of the exobase as a boundary between the                   
              thermosphere and a collisionless exosphere appears to have caused              
              major discrepancies.  Recent work by the Principal Investigator                
              of this project on the quantum mechanics of H-H+ collisions shows              
              that the common presumption that charge exchange in non-                       
              scattering process has led to artificially low abundances of H                 
              atoms with satellite velocities.  With modern computers, many of               
              the inaccuracies that have resulted from traditional exosphere                 
              approximations can be avoided.  Works in progress to derive                    
              quantum mechanically correct methods for computer simulations of               
              key neutral-ion and neutral-neutral collision process.  These                  
              tasks are essential precursors to the accomplishment of the main               
              objective of this project:  the creation of realistic model                    
              exosphere distributions of atomic hydrogen and "hot" oxygen for                
              equinox and solstice conditions over the solar cycle.                          
                   The exosphere models to be addressed in this project are                  
              produced by computer simulation, using Monte Carlo methods that                
              have been developing at UTD since 1973.  In an exosphere                       
              simulation, the trajectories of a large set of test atoms are                  
              traced from their entry into the exosphere to their escape from                
              the planet.  Throughout the life of each atom, the computer                    
              accounts for kinetic and chemical effects of collisions with                   
              atoms, ions, and protons.  Statistical data representing the life              
              histories of the test atoms are converted into phenomenological                
              hydrodynamic parameters in a process that is equivalent to Monte               
              Carlo integration of moments of the Boltzmann equation.
