Title       : Turbulence and Vortex Interactions with Shock Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9104767

Award Number: 9104767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yiannis Andreopoulos andre@me-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1242,
Abstract    :
                This research project is designed to investigate                             
              experimentally the interaction of a shock wave first with                      
              homogeneous/isotropic flow and second with a longitudinal or                   
              traverse vortex in the so called vorticity mode.                               
              Specifically, the research will focus on the phenomenon of                     
              turbulence and vorticity amplification across an unsteady                      
              shock  propagating inside the flow and the                                     
              distortion/deformation of the shock by turbulence or vortex.                   
              A shock wave which is formed inside a shock tube, passes                       
              through a grid and the induced flow behind the shock has the                   
              features of a compressible flow with free stream                               
              turbulence.  The decaying turbulence is subjected to                           
              interaction with the reflected shock and travelling in the                     
              opposite direction.  In the vortex/shock wave interaction,                     
              the induced flow over a transverse circular cylinder or a                      
              small delta wing at incident will generate the required                        
              vortices with transverse or longitudinal vorticity                             
              respectively.  Preliminary results indicate that turbulence                    
              amplification is not the same for all investigated                             
              turbulence intensities and length scales during interactions                   
              with the shock waves of the same strength.  The proposed                       
              program with its unique characteristics will provide the                       
              opportunity to a number of minority students in Mechanical                     
              Engineering to participate in an advanced research project                     
              aimed at a better understanding of compressible turbulence.                    
              Minority students will be exposed to the-state-of-the-art in                   
              experimental and computational techniques and, therefore,                      
              will be encouraged to enter research careers.
