Title       : Role of Metal Sulfides in Carbon-Heteroatom Bond Cleavage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9104521

Award Number: 9104521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Rakowski DuBois duboism@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Mary Rakowski-DuBois of the Chemistry Department,                          
              University of Colorado at Boulder, is supported by the                         
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program                  
              for investigation of C=O, C-S, and C-N bond cleavage reactions                 
              promoted by transition metal complexes containing sulfide                      
              ligands.  In the case of C=O, for example, it is expected that                 
              carbon monoxide would insert into an SH bond of an SH ligand                   
              which serves as a bridge for a molybdenum dimer.  The                          
              formylthiolate thus produced is susceptible to reductive                       
              cleavage of the C=O bond by hydrogen. This could model a first                 
              step of the conversion of CO to methane, a reaction not                        
              commonly promoted by transition metal complexes, and here                      
              promoted by bonding to sulfur rather than to the metal.  This                  
              study might provide insight into the mechanism of CO reduction                 
              catalyzed by heterogeneous molybdenum sulfides.  In studies of                 
              C-N bond cleavage by hydrogen, the sulfided metal complexes                    
              would serve as models of the heterogeneous catalysts used in                   
              commercial HDN (hydrodenitrogenation) processes. In addition to                
              the reactions described above, novel complexes containing Ir,                  
              Rh, Re, Mo, and Mo-Cr and a variety of sulfur- and                             
              nitrogen-containing ligands will be prepared.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This project is expected to provide insight into the reactions                 
              of transition metal complexes with small molecules, which are                  
              important in the use of such complexes as heterogeneous and                    
              homogeneous catalysts.  Specifically, these studies may provide                
              information pertinent to understanding the behavior of                         
              commercial heterogeneous catalysts used for                                    
              hydrodenitrogenation.
