Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Joint Seminar: Transfer of Mathematics to Industry in the
               U.S. and France, Minneapolis, Minnesota, October 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9104424

Award Number: 9104424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9750               (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Willard Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a joint seminar between US and                         
              French mathematicians on the topic of the transfer of                          
              mathematics to industry in the US and France. The seminar                      
              will be held at the Institute for Mathematics and its                          
              Applications (IMA), University of Minnesota, in October                        
              1991.  The US organizers are Drs. Avner Friedman and Willard                   
              Miller of the IMA.  The co-sponsoring organization is the                      
              French National Institute for Computer Science and Automation                  
              (INRIA), Roquencourt, France.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Both the IMA and INRIA have extensive contacts with industry.                  
              The IMA has recently initiated a program "Postdoctorates in                    
              Industrial Mathematics" and the annual and summer programs                     
              at the IMA also bring in large number of visitors from                         
              industry.  A different experience of contact with industry                     
              is going on at INRIA, which has a long tradition of                            
              multidisciplinary research, mixing computer science  and                       
              applied mathematics (control and scientific computing).                        
              This research is done in cooperation with various industries,                  
              such as Dassault, Aerospaciale, Peugot and Electricite de                      
              France.  It is largely performed in common projects,                           
              involving INRIA researchers, engineers from industry and PHD                   
              students, most of whom are later recruited by industry.  In                    
              addition, INRIA organizes many seminars, symposia and                          
              advanced courses aimed at transferring new ideas and                           
              techniques to industry.  The proposed seminar is the result                    
              of a decision by IMA and INRIA to bring together key                           
              individuals from universities and industry, who are playing                    
              roles in building bridges between the two communities.  The                    
              goals of the seminar are:  1) to facilitate transfer of                        
              mathematical problems of present interest to industry, and                     
              mathematical knowledge applicable to industry, 2) to outline                   
              future mathematical research directions in industry, and 3)                    
              to discuss the best methods of educating mathematics                           
              graduate students to be successful in industry, while doing                    
              good mathematics.
