Title       : Polar Terrestrial Climate During the Coniacian Age (Middle Late Cretaceous)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1991      
File        : a9104275

Award Number: 9104275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith T. Parrish-Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Tuluvak Tongue of the Prince Creek Formation, North Slope             
              of Alaska, contains the highest-latitude flora of Coniacian (middle            
              Late Cretaceous) age.  Preliminary work suggests that the flora                
              probably represents a mixed coniferous forest, and that it contains            
              a diverse assemblage of angiosperms.  Leaf-margin analysis of                  
              angiosperms can provide quantitative information on mean annual                
              temperature.  The temperature estimates can be supported by                    
              analysis of the vegetational physiognomy (overall aspect of the                
              vegetation, which is strongly controlled by climate) and of the                
              growth-ring characteristics in fossil wood, particularly if these              
              characteristics can be compared with those of under= and overlying             
              floras.  Thus, the flora of the Tuluvak Tongue provides the                    
              opportunity to quantify near-polar terrestrial temperatures for the            
              Coniacian Age.  Because the Coniacian may have been a thermal                  
              maximum in the Late Cretaceous, based on isotopic evidence from                
              marine fossils at lower latitudes, it is particularly important to             
              understand the climate in polar regions for that time.  In                     
              addition, comparison of the Tuluvak flora with the floras of the               
              Albian-Cenomanian Niakogon Tongue (Chandler Formation) and                     
              Campanian-Maastrichtian Kogosukruk Tongue (Prince Creek Formation)             
              will help determine whether climate change near the North Pole was             
              synchronous, within the resolution of the data, with the changes               
              observed at lower latitudes.  The information gathered from the                
              Tuluvak Tongue can be used not only to help establish latitudinal              
              temperature gradients for the Coniacian Age, but also will complete            
              the history of near-polar climate change already determined from               
              older and younger floras in the region.
