Title       : U.S.-U.S.S.R. Cooperative Science: Workshop in Quarternary Terrestrial Records
               (Fairbanks, AK; June 1, 1991)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9104068

Award Number: 9104068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29404              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Edwards Mary.Edwards@sv.ntnu.no  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Dale Guthrie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5973      FSU SUPPLEMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5202,5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Mary E. Edwards and Russell D.Guthrie, University                         
              of Alaska, Fairbanks and Andrei V. Sher, Severtsov                             
              Institute of Evolutionary Animal Morphology and Ecology,                       
              Moscow, USSR will hold a workshop at the University of                         
              Alaska, Fairbanks in June 1991 to deal with common                             
              problems in the interpretation of paleoecological and                          
              paleoclimatological records in Beringia, eastern Siberia                       
              and Alaska.  The workshop would be preceded by extended                        
              work in the field at two critical fossil localities                            
              which contain somewhat comparable records to those in                          
              northern Siberia.  This reciprocates a field-workshop                          
              held on the lower Kolyma lowland in Siberia, sponsored                         
              by the Soviet Academy of Science.  The far north is a                          
              special place for studies of past environments and their                       
              relevance to future global changes.  Beringia has                              
              repeatedly linked the biota of eastern and western                             
              hemispheres, affecting both continents in major ways.                          
              Beringia is an important location for Quaternary                               
              studies, as this region contains a good record of past                         
              climatic events and their resulting ecological changes.                        
              The datable sediments document the effects of these                            
              changes in the form of paleosols, plant micro- and                             
              macrofossils, and in rapid mammalian evolution.  Their                         
              main objective is to bring together U.S. and U.S.S.R.                          
              scientists in an extended field-workshop situation to                          
              increase the flow of information east and west, and to                         
              develop a joint research strategy for the future.                              
                                                                                             
              This project in paleoecology/paleoclimatology fulfills                         
              the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge                        
              by enabling leading researchers in the United States and                       
              Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool                       
              research resources in areas of strong mutual interest.
