Title       : Regulation of Adrenal Steroidogenesis in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9104560

Award Number: 9104560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153400             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Cronshaw   (Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Holmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The bird adrenal gland is capable of synthesizing several                      
              cortisone-like hormones.  One of these is responsible for the                  
              regulation of certain aspects of carbohydrate metabolism in the                
              organism, while another acts on the kidney to ensure proper salt               
              and water balance.  Cells isolated from the gland respond to                   
              incubation media containing the pituitary hormone, corticotropin               
              by producing the two types of cortisone-like hormone.  The cells               
              also respond to incubation media containing a hormone called                   
              angiotensin II.  Under these circumstancs, they produce relatively             
              large amounts of the salt- and water regulating hormone, but none              
              of the carbohydrate-regulating hormone.  These effects of                      
              corticotropin and angiotensin II on isolated tissue samples                    
              simulate the responses of the adrenal gland in organisms subjected             
              to stress and diets containing different levels of salts.  Until               
              a few years ago, it was assumed that the secretion of these                    
              hormones was controlled exclusively by corticotropin and                       
              angiotensin II but evidence has recently accumulated to indicate               
              that factors of neural origin may also act, to regulate the                    
              synthesis and release of adrenal steroid hormones. Nerve cells                 
              terminating in the adrenal gland contain, and may secrete, a                   
              variety of polypeptides, in addition to the typical adrenalin-like             
              hormones.  The proposed studies will contribute to our                         
              understanding of the ways in which regulators derived from nerve               
              cells influence the overall control of adrenal steroid hormone                 
              synthesis.  The experimental model will be the developing adrenal              
              gland in the duck embryo.  Through the use of the latest                       
              ultrastructural, histochemical and immunocytochemical techiques                
              the nature, the loci and the distribution of the adrenalin-like and            
              peptide factors will be investigated.  At the same time the                    
              functional development and responsiveness of the adrenal                       
              steroidogenic cells during embryonic development will be assessed              
              in terms of their secretory and synthetic properties.                          
                                                                                             
              Since the hormones produced by the adrenal gland are absolutely                
              essential to the survival of all vertebrates, including Man, it is             
              important to understand the nature of the control mechanisms                   
              involved in the regulation of this important endocrine gland.                  
              Also, knowledge of how these glands function in birds is not only              
              of fundamental interest to the biologist, it is also important to              
              society in general, for birds constitute an important source of                
              food for many millions of people around the world.//
