Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in "Stochastic Processes andtheir Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1993  
File        : a9104421

Award Number: 9104421
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Sjogren   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Ross Leadbetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gopinath Kallianpur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : A-F-Office Scientific Res
	      Bolling Air Force Base
	      Washington, DC  203326448    /   -

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award will support the research activities of the                    
              principal investigators as well as the visitor program.  The                   
              investigators and visitors conduct research in the broad area of               
              stochastic processes and their applications.  Specific research                
              topics include non-guassian models and digital processing of                   
              random analog signals, infinite dimensional stochastic                         
              differential equations with applications to neuroscience;                      
              nonlinear filtering and random fields, and stochastic extremes                 
              and point processes.  This project is being jointly supported by               
              the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, the Army Research                 
              Office, the University of North Carolina, and the National                     
              Science Foundation.                                                            
                   This award will support the research activities of the                    
              principal investigators as well as the visitor program.  The                   
              investigators and visitors conduct research in the broad area of               
              stochastic processes and their applications.  The visitor program              
              supports short- and long-term senior and junior visitors.  This                
              project is being jointly supported by the Air Force Office of                  
              Scientific Research, the Army Research Office, the University of               
              North Carolina, and the National Science Foundation.
