Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Exploitation of Symmetry in Discretization Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9104058

Award Number: 9104058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene L. Allgower allgower@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Georg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   Boundary element and finite element discretizations of                    
              integral equations and partial differential equations over                     
              surfaces and bodies often lead to very large linear systems of                 
              equations.  If the domain enjoys any symmetry, the computational               
              effort involved in numerically solving these systems can be                    
              significantly reduced via the effective use of techniques based                
              upon group representation theory which have recently been given                
              by the investigators.  This algebraic approach yields a                        
              decomposition of the original large problem into a number of                   
              smaller subproblems, each corresponding to an irreducible                      
              representation of the symmetry group of the domain.  The size of               
              each reduced problem is that of the large problem divided by a                 
              factor equal to the order of the group divided by the dimension                
              of the representation.  Previous work on exploiting symmetry has               
              involved reducing partial differential equations to subdomains                 
              and adapting boundary conditions over the symmetry axes.  Such                 
              techniques do not apply to boundary integral methods.  It is                   
              proposed in this project to develop flexible codes which                       
              systematically implement reductions for a variety of symmetry                  
              structures.  Constructions of symmetry-respecting                              
              discretizations and theoretical investigations relating to                     
              sparseness and parallel implementations will be carried out.                   
                   Many problems in science and engineering have as their                    
              natural domain a surface or body which is symmetric in some way.               
              For example, circles, circular disks, spheres, intervals,                      
              squares, and cubes, of any dimension, all have obvious symmetry.               
              In addition to the symmetry of the domain of the problem,                      
              often the equations themselves reflect a symmetry in the physics               
              of the problem.  For example, the differential equations                       
              governing heat flow are symmetric, in the sense that heat will                 
              flow in all directions without any preferences in the absence of               
              any outside stimulus.  When both the equations and the domain of               
              the problem enjoy some symmetry, algebraic techniques may be used              
              to reduce the computational effort involved in numerically                     
              solving the given problem on the given domain.  This project will              
              focus on making the necessary theoretical investigations and                   
              developing algorithms for exploiting symmetry in the field                     
              of numerical analysis.
