Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Lie Theory of Semigroups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9104582

Award Number: 9104582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmie D. Lawson lawson@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The aim of this project is to carry out basic mathematical                
              research in the emerging discipline of the Lie theory of                       
              semigroups and to explore and develop points of contact of the                 
              theory with other disciplines such as geometry, control theory,                
              and notions of causality in physics.  In the area of control one               
              considers right invariant vector fields on a Lie group and seeks               
              to understand various attainability questions as controllability               
              and maximality with respect to Lie saturation.  In casuality, the              
              tangent objects in the Lie theory of semigroups, the Lie wedges,               
              give rise in a natural way to homogeneous casual manifolds.  One               
              seeks a better understanding of when the resulting manifolds have              
              such desirable physical properties as being strongly casual or                 
              globally hyperbolic (as useful property for solving partial                    
              differential equations on the manifold).  Another line of                      
              proposed research centers on the development of a semigroup                    
              approach to topological dynamics via the Ellis semigroup.                      
                   The Lie theory of groups is a highly developed theory.  It                
              brings modern analysis and modern algebra to bear upon geometric               
              objects which arise in mathematical physics and in the theory of               
              differential equations.  This theory has been very successful in               
              answering difficult and important questions, and equally, in                   
              suggesting promising lines of inquiry.  Semigroups are algebraic               
              systems related to groups but without so much structure.  They                 
              have a role to play in mathematics and some applications, but                  
              they do not have the central importance that groups have come to               
              enjoy.  Their Lie theory has not been so thoroughly investigated,              
              partly for this reason, partly because of difficulties in seeing               
              how to proceed.  Professor Lawson has overcome some of these                   
              difficulties and has made impressive progress in putting the Lie               
              theory of semigroups on a firm footing.  He will continue to                   
              pursue this line  of inquiry and its ramifications in related                  
              areas of geometry, control theory, and mathematical physics.
