Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modelling, Analysis, and Computational Simulation of
               Platelet Aggregation in Large and Small Vessels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1992    
File        : a9104410

Award Number: 9104410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron L. Fogelson fogelson@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   Platelet aggregates form on blood vessel walls in response                
              to vascular injury; they are also major constituents of the                    
              life-threatening blood clots associated with vascular disease and              
              with the use of cardiovascular prostheses.  Microscopic-scale                  
              models of aggregation, which involve interactions among the                    
              blood's fluid dynamics and the mechanics and chemistry of the                  
              platelets, are appropriate for studying aggregation in the small               
              vessels of the microcirculation.  The project will explore                     
              changes in the models to attain more realistic aggregate                       
              growth rates, and improvements in the associated numerical                     
              methods to extend simulations to three dimensions and to                       
              substantially longer time periods.  These changes will complement              
              recent advances in experimental technique to allow the first                   
              detailed comparison of simulations with experiments.  To                       
              facilitate these comparisons, the investigator has                             
              established collaborations with leading experimental scientists.               
              The investigator will also continue computational and analytical               
              exploration of a new class of continuum models he has formulated               
              for studying aggregation in larger vessels such as the coronary                
              arteries.  Of particular interest is the chemically-induced                    
              liquid-to-solid phase transition exhibited by these models.  The               
              project will characterize its dependence on flow and chemical                  
              parameters.                                                                    
                   The mathematical analysis and simulations to be carried                   
              out in this project complement traditional                                     
              laboratory experimentation.  They provide detailed information,                
              of a type which is generally not attainable in the laboratory,                 
              about the dynamic interactions among the components of the                     
              aggregation response.  This additional information will increase               
              insight into the physical and chemical controls on the                         
              aggregation process.  These studies will also lay the foundations              
              for further development of models of aggregation and for their                 
              application to clinically interesting questions such as how flow               
              and vessel geometry interact to influence aggregation within                   
              natural vessels, such as the coronary arteries, or prosthetic                  
              devices, such as vascular grafts or artificial hearts.
