Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9104526

Award Number: 9104526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna C. Ellison  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Mangroves, a taxonomically diverse group of tree species that grow        
              in the upper intertidal zone of sheltered shores in the tropics, are           
              characterized by adaptations such as aerial roots and salt regulation          
              strategies for this stressful environment. Their close relationship with       
              sea-level position renders mangrove swamps particularly vulnerable to          
              disruption by sea-level rise.  This doctoral dissertation project will         
              study Hungry Bay, the largest mangrove swamp in Bermuda.  Hungry Bay is        
              a key site in mangrove research because it has the longest continuous          
              mangrove peat sequence in the world and because it has provided the            
              first documented evidence of significant retreat cause by contemporary         
              sea-level rise.  In order to increase understandings of the dynamic            
              impacts of sustained sea-level rise on mangroves, paleoecological and          
              isotopic techniques will be used to examine the record of the swamp            
              during sea-level rises of the last 5,000 years.  Analyses of sediment          
              budgets, water chemistry, and productivity also will be used to monitor        
              the water flow in creeks.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   This project will provide valuable information about the ecosystem        
              dynamics of mangrove swamps, and it will increase understandings of how        
              to manage such ecosystems during predicted periods of increased rates of       
              sea-level rise.  This project also will provide an excellent opportunity       
              for a promising young scholar to continue to develop independent               
              research skills.
