Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theory and AutomorphicForms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1993     
File        : a9104117

Award Number: 9104117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Birgit Speh speh@cartan.msi.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Barbasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Speh will continue her research with J. Rohlfs                  
              concerning Lefschetz numbers of automorphisms of arithmetic groups.            
              She plans to find a stabilization (in the sense of Langlands) of               
              the Lefschetz numbers and then use this to find an expression for              
              the Lefschetz number using the Arthur-Selberg trace formulas.                  
              Professor Barbasch will continue his work on unipotent                         
              representations of real reductive groups, their character theory,              
              and their role in the classification of the unitary dual.  He will             
              be involved in several projects: (i) with J. Adams he will study               
              the dual reductive pair correspondence for the case of unipotent               
              representations, (ii) with A. Moy he will study the unitary dual               
              for unramified representations, and (iii) with S. Evens he will                
              study relations between the geometry of orbits, similar Shubert                
              varieties, and multiplicities in finite dimensional                            
              representations.                                                               
                   Group theory is basically the theory of symmetry.  To take a              
              simple example, when the system in question is invariant under a               
              change in the position of the origin of space, the group of                    
              translations naturally arises.  While groups are abstract objects,             
              particular situations demand concrete realizations or                          
              "representations" of the symmetry group. The projects of Professors            
              Speh and Barbasch will contribute to our understanding of group                
              representations.
