Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1991      
File        : a9104753

Award Number: 9104753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7325               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline T. Scallan  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Univ System of Md
	      3300 Metzerott Rd
	      Adelphi, MD  20783    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The relationship between paleotopography and modern morphology is         
              necessary to understanding the formation of barrier islands and lagoons,       
              two of the most critical environments along the U.S. coastline.  This          
              doctoral dissertation project will study the processes of barrier island       
              lagoonal development on the southern Delmarva Pennisula of the eastern         
              shore of Virginia.  It will examine the implications of those processes        
              for barrier coastline development.  Pollen, grain size, microfossil, and       
              x-ray radiography analyses will be used to develop a clear picture of          
              the nature of the topography before the spread of the sea over the area        
              and of the timing of the inundation of the surface.                            
                                                                                             
                   This project will generate valuable information about barrier             
              island evolution by increasing our understanding of the position of            
              present coastal morphology in the continuum of Holocene coastal change.        
              By adding to our knowledge of this evolution, this project will                
              contribute to our ability to deal with the potential increase in the           
              complexity of the management of these coastal environments should the          
              sea-level change.  This project also will provide an excellent                 
              opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop               
              independent research skills.
