Title       : NMR Studies of Alpha-Bungarotoxin-Acetylcholine Receptor Peptide Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9104794

Award Number: 9104794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir J. Basus basus@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is found at neuromuscular                 
              junctions, where its function is to depolarize muscle cells at                 
              the postsynaptic membrane, triggering muscle contraction.                      
              Depolarization occurs by channel opening, induced by the binding               
              of acetylcholine, to allow the passage of small cations.                       
              Neurotoxins inhibit the binding of acetylcholine, by binding a                 
              large portion of the acetylcholine receptor  -subunit, blocking                
              at least part of the acetylcholine binding site.  The best                     
              structure for the receptor is at the low resolution level of 22                
              A, using a combination of electron microscopy and x-ray                        
              diffraction data.  NMR spectroscopy for this large membrane bound              
              complex is clearly beyond current technological capabilities.                  
              However, peptides corresponding to the portion of the receptor                 
              near the acetylcholine binding site have been found to bind   -                
              bungarotoxin with about the same affinity as the entire   -                    
              subunit binds this neurotoxin.  It is proposed here to determine               
              the structure of these peptides bound to  -bungarotoxin, using                 
              two and three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy, including                          
              heteronuclear techniques with selective isotopic labeling.  This               
              will allow for the first time the details of the interactions                  
              between a portion of the acetylcholine receptor containing the                 
              major determinant of the neurotoxin binding site, and at least                 
              part of the acetylcholine binding site to be determined.  By                   
              studying complexes formed with different peptides the relative                 
              importance of specific binding interactions between   -                        
              bungarotoxin and the acetylcholine receptor, will be clarified.                
              This will contribute to the general knowledge of non-covalent                  
              interactions between proteins.
