Title       : Laboratory Studies of Tropospheric Sulfur Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1994    
File        : a9104807

Award Number: 9104807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Wine pw7@prism.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Hynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GTRI
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30332    /   -

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The atmospheric sulfur cycle has been a subject of intense                
              interest to environmental scientists for many years because of                 
              the need to assess the contributions of biogenic and                           
              anthropogenic sulfur to such problems as acid rain, visibility                 
              reduction, and climate modification.  In heavily industrialized                
              regions such as the eastern United States and much of Europe,                  
              anthropogenic sulfur emissions exceed natural emissions by about               
              an order of magnitude.  On a global scale, however, biogenic                   
              sulfur emissions are thought to approximately equal those from                 
              anthropogenic sources.  An understanding of the biogenic sulfur                
              cycle is thus required in order to establish a baseline against                
              which anthropogenic perturbations can be compared.                             
                                                                                             
                   This research program is three years in duration and                      
              involves continued laboratory studies aimed at elucidating the                 
              kinetics and reaction mechanisms which control the atmospheric                 
              oxidation of reduced sulfur compounds.  Direct observation of                  
              reactive intermediates and relatively stable products in "real                 
              time" is emphasized because only through such observations can                 
              results with a unique interpretation be obtained.  The                         
              experimental methods to be employed involve coupling laser flash               
              photolysis production of unstable reactions with time-resolved                 
              detection of intermediates and end products by laser induced                   
              fluorescence, atomic resonance fluorescence, long path UV-visible              
              absorption, or tunable diode laser (infrared) absorption.                      
              Whenever possible, experiments will be carried out under                       
              atmospheric conditions of temperature, pressure, and gas                       
              composition.
