Title       : Robotic Photometry of Magnetically Active Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9104484

Award Number: 9104484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel A. Eaton eaton@donne.tsuniv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael r. Busby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1214,9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed program consists of two research efforts:  An                     
              investigation of luminosity changes and magnetic activity in                   
              solar-type stars; and an investigation of the systematic                       
              effects of spots in chromospherically active stars.  As                        
              participants in the former project, an astronomer and an                       
              engineer and several minority students at Tennessee State                      
              University will construct and operate a 0.8-m robotic                          
              telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory near Pasadena,                           
              California.  The objective is to gain insight into the short                   
              and long-term behavior of solar activity, especially how the                   
              magnetism and luminosity of the Sun change over intervals of                   
              decades to centuries, by studying an ensemble of solar-type                    
              stars over a much shorter time interval of a few years.                        
              Additional insight into the evolution of magnetic activity                     
              and luminosity over the Sun's entire main-sequence lifetime                    
              may be gained by studying other lower main-sequence stars                      
              with a variety of masses and ages.  This detailed study of                     
              magnetic and luminosity variations of stars will have far-                     
              reaching consequences for an understanding of the physical                     
              principles of the solar-stellar connection and for assessing                   
              the uncertainties and true importance of the Sun's potential                   
              influence in mean global temperature change models, which                      
              have so far based their predictions of global warming on the                   
              assumption of a constant Sun.                                                  
                                                                                             
              By combining spectra with the photometry, the structure of                     
              spots (namely whether they consist of a single large dark                      
              area, as suspected, or several smaller dark areas close                        
              together) will be determined by another group of astronomers                   
              and minority students at the university.                                       
                                                                                             
              This is made possible by the fact that information about dark                  
              spots on chromospherically active solar-type stars is poised                   
              to undergo a revolution as the result of the extensive                         
              observations now piling up from automatic telescopes.  These                   
              data will allow many individual spots to be identified and                     
              studied from their emergence to their demise.  As a result of                  
              the project and related ones, scientists will finally be able                  
              to know just how properties of these spots compare with those                  
              of sunspots, to find how chromospherically active stars                        
              respond to having 10-30% of their surfaces blocked by dark                     
              areas, to assess just what effect-if any-magnetic faculae                      
              have on these stars' luminosities, and to determine whether                    
              such very active stars really do have cycles of activity like                  
              the solar cycle.
