Title       : CCD-Based Curriculum in Astronomical Observing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1994   
File        : a9151510

Award Number: 9151510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16350              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Laird laird@tycho.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to incorporate state-of-the-art                    
              observing into all levels of the astronomy curriculum, from                    
              introductory courses to advanced senior research projects.  A                  
              strong foundation is already in place--an extensive curriculum,                
              a modern planetarium, dedicated teachers, and a relatively                     
              large (0.5-meter), new telescope--and this project builds on                   
              it.  observing opportunities for students are being greatly                    
              expanded through the use of a CCD camera for the 0.5m                          
              telescope.  In introductory classes the project enables the                    
              capture of  student interest with images and observing projects                
              possible only with the sensitivity and immediate output of the                 
              CCD.  The best projects and labs are those that invite students                
              to make their own observations, and a CCD camera makes that                    
              possible.  Basic projects are made available to all students,                  
              and a new introductory lab section provides more extensive                     
              hands-on experience for the best students.For more advanced                    
              students a new lab course on modern CCD detectors and observing                
              techniques is being created.  Hands-on experience is a                         
              necessary and vital part of this course.  For the most advanced                
              and serious students among our physics majors and astronomy                    
              minors, independent study offers more extended access to the                   
              telescope, and the opportunity to gain additional observing                    
              experience and to pursue serious research.
