Title       : Computerized Equipment for Introductory Biology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9151339

Award Number: 9151339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann P. McNeal  (Principal Investigator current)
              Merle S. Bruno mbruno@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Hampshire College, although a relatively new institution, has                  
              a reputation for excellence in the teaching of science.                        
              Introductory courses for both science majors and nonmajors                     
              focus on inquiry methods and often involve students in                         
              independent projects in the laboratory. These relatively                       
              sophisticated student projects for beginners have become the                   
              hallmark of Hampshire's innovative science education. Modern                   
              research laboratories often incorporate networked computers and                
              analytical instruments which allow distributed data                            
              acquisition, analysis and control. To allow our students to                    
              develop skills needed for working in up-to-date research labs,                 
              the department proposes to update and expand our equipment for                 
              computerized data acquisition. The unit will provide enough                    
              work stations to make teaching of introductory courses feasible                
              and expand our use of graphics and statistical analysis                        
              software to encourage students to acquire better quantitative                  
              skills. Specific courses affected will be "How People Move" and                
              "Cardiovascular Fitness and Disease." Our goal is to increase                  
              the quantitative and analytical skills of our students through                 
              direct contact with modern computer-based experimental methods,                
              design and analysis.
