Title       : Advanced Computational Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1991      
File        : a9151234

Award Number: 9151234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. McLarnan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray M. Hively  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. Hanes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earlham College
	      National Road West
	      Richmond, IN  47374    317/962-6561

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              An Advanced Computational Laboratory is being developed through                
              this project, and allows upper-level students and faculty in                   
              Computer Science, Mathematics and Physics to study object-                     
              oriented languages and develop new courses in Operating Systems                
              and Networks.  The Laboratory also enables faculty to use                      
              existing simulations and 3D graphical animations on a wider                    
              scale, to develop new applications with the Mathematica                        
              package, to employ Maple and Mathematica on complex problem                    
              sets, and to make full use of instructional programs already                   
              developed.  Six NeXT workstations and six Mac II si machines                   
              are being integrated together in a network with 1 NeXT server                  
              which will be linked to the local departmental network and the                 
              campus wide LAN.  Building on inter-departmental cooperation                   
              already present, this Lab is acting as a natural center for                    
              upper-level student academic activities and catalysing                         
              innovative work which will inevitably transcend disciplinary                   
              boundaries.  This Lab is providing a powerful extension of the                 
              proven usefulness of the existing Maple/Mac Lab (previously                    
              funded by NSF) for introductory courses.NSF grant funds are                    
              being matched by funds from non-Federal sources.
