Title       : Analytical Instrumentation for Improving the Environmental Studies Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1991      
File        : a9151756

Award Number: 9151756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Niemitz niemitz@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Candie C. Wilderman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Funds from the NSF-ILI Program are being used for the purchase                 
              of an Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer and the upgrading of                 
              a Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer with a Headspace Sampler.                
              These additions allow significant science curricular                           
              enhancement to a rapidly expanding Environmental Studies                       
              program which now interacts formally with all physical and life                
              sciences at Dickinson College.  These enhancements benefit non-                
              science majors in introductory courses in Environmental                        
              Science, Geology, and Chemistry; Geology and Chemistry majors                  
              and Environmental Studies certificate participants in                          
              intermediate-level, required and elective courses; and many                    
              students in these disciplines engaged in independent research                  
              and internships.  Focus of the project is on a more in-depth                   
              examination of the chemical aspects of environmental issues of                 
              increasingly great concern to students  and                                    
              society.Specifically, this project is incorporating this                       
              analytical component into the broader environmental curriculum                 
              at three levels:  A) Introducing a broader range of chemical                   
              data into the introductory level courses.  Heretofore, it has                  
              been impossible to deepen the discussion and questioning about                 
              prevailing chemical paradigms involving toxic metals and                       
              organic pollutants associated with local environmental                         
              degradation, the basis for most laboratory/field work at this                  
              level of inquiry.  B) Introducing theory, operation, and                       
              limitations of instrumentation at the intermediate level in                    
              innovative ways.  Small, well controlled, course-based                         
              environmental research projects are teaching the process of                    
              formulating a research project with the application of                         
              instrumentation to important real-life scientific problems.  C)                
              Using instrumentation as tools for independent research and                    
              internships to solve more difficult, self-conceived                            
              problems.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from non-                
              Federal sources.
