Title       : A Microcomputer Assisted Interactive Approach to Physics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1991        
File        : a9151747

Award Number: 9151747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9420               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Greeney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Maryville College
	      
	      Maryville, TN  37801    615/982-6412

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              In order to create an environment conducive to inquiry and                     
              exploration, a microcomputer assisted laboratory-classroom                     
              setting is being established.  Learning physical concepts,                     
              principles, and methods of scientific inquiry is enhanced                      
              through integration of laboratory activities, discussions, and                 
              lectures in an atmosphere of guided, interactive inquiry.  This                
              innovative approach is greatly facilitated with the assistance                 
              of microcomputer interfaced instrumentation, which allows rapid                
              collection, display, and analysis of data.  Spreadsheet and                    
              graphics applications are learned and used frequently.  As                     
              methods and tools of investigation become more familiar,                       
              student initiated inquiry and student designed experiments                     
              should arise naturally.  Computer simulations and tutorials are                
              used where appropriate.  This microcomputer-based, workshop-                   
              style course will impact introductory physics courses at three                 
              levels, affecting students ranging in backgrounds from science                 
              and engineering to arts and humanities.  Increased                             
              understanding and appreciation of the process of scientific                    
              investigation, improved attitudes towards learning physics, and                
              greater interest in pursuing careers in science, engineering,                  
              and science education should result from this project.
