Title       : Incorporation of Plasma Etching Experiments in UndergraduateMicroelectronics
               Fabrication Laboratory at University of New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9151962

Award Number: 9151962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Fleddermann cbf@chtm.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don L. Kendall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth C. Jungling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Plasma etching has become an invaluable tool in the fabrication                
              of modern microelectronic integrated circuits, making possible                 
              the high packing density of electronic components that has                     
              become standard in modern circuitry.  Many colleges and                        
              universities offer laboratory courses designed to give                         
              undergraduate students "hands-on" experience with fabricating                  
              microelectronic components.  However, these courses ignore                     
              plasma etching in favor of the easier, but no longer                           
              industrially useful, wet-chemical etch methods, leaving the                    
              graduating engineer with limited knowledge and no practical                    
              experience in plasma processing of semiconductors. This project                
              incorporates experimental work in the undergraduate                            
              microelectronics laboratory designed to give students a                        
              knowledge of basic plasma processing equipment, to teach                       
              students techniques for etching semiconductor materials, and to                
              facilitate the students' understanding of fundamental plasma                   
              processes and diagnostic techniques.  Diagnostic tools suitable                
              for use in an undergraduate laboratory allow the student to                    
              understand the processes taking place in the plasma, as well as                
              to evaluate the results of plasma etching of materials.  Using                 
              this equipment, students perform a series of experiments                       
              learning the characteristics of rf plasma systems, perform some                
              easy diagnostic studies, and evaluate the results of etching of                
              various semiconductor materials. A relatively modest capital                   
              expenditure provides the student with an in-depth knowledge of                 
              plasma etching, and its implementation in the semiconductor                    
              industry.
