Title       : Improvement in Instrumentation and Equipment for Teaching Cellular and Molecular
               Biology at Saddleback College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1991      
File        : a9151283

Award Number: 9151283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth A. Wrightsman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. McCullough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saddleback College
	      28000 Marguerite Parkway
	      Mission Viejo, CA  926923635    714/831-4500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary: The modern biology curriculum should acquaint                 
              students with concepts and methodologies derived from cellular                 
              and molecular biology. Currently at Saddleback College,                        
              students have the opportunity to explore prokaryotic and                       
              eukaryotic cell structure using standard compound and                          
              dissecting microscopes, as well as viewing cell structures                     
              using scanning and transmission electron microscopes. We would                 
              like to augment the teaching of cell structure and function                    
              through the fractionation and analysis of cells using                          
              centrifugation, protein gel electrophoresis, nucleic acid gel                  
              electrophoresis, and ultraviolet spectroscopy. This equipment                  
              will allow us to isolate cellular organelles and macromolecules                
              in our cell biology, microbiology and introductory biology                     
              laboratory courses, and to perform simple exercises in                         
              recombinant DNA technology. With the purchase of a refrigerated                
              high speed centrifuge, tabletop mini-centrifuges, protein and                  
              nucleic acid electrophoresis gel boxes, electrophoresis power                  
              supplies, and ultraviolet spectrophotometer attachments, we                    
              feel that we will strengthen and update our laboratory                         
              curriculum in cell biology and microbiology. Since many of the                 
              students in cell biology and microbiology courses transfer to                  
              four year colleges and universities to complete their                          
              baccalaureate degrees, their exposure to the techniques of                     
              modern cellular and molecular biology will enhance their future                
              for academic success, particularly for those students who                      
              transfer to research-oriented universities. Furthermore, we                    
              plan to introduce some aspects of these techniques to                          
              introductory general biology courses and non-majors biology                    
              courses in an effort to increase the scientific literacy of                    
              these students in the areas of modern molecular biology.
