Title       : Rediscovering Botany in the Undergraduate Curriculum ThroughPlant Growth
               Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9151092

Award Number: 9151092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28435              (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Luken luken@nku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Thieret  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Giesmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Kentucky Univ
	      University Drive
	      Highland Heights, KY  41099    859/572-5100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will upgrade the teaching of basic botanical                      
              science in the following courses: General Botany, Plant                        
              Ecology, Plant Physiology, and Independent Research. The                       
              endeavor is contingent upon equipping an undergraduate                         
              research laboratory where students can gather to plan                          
              research, carryout research, and then analyze data.                            
              Nine laboratory exercises are planned around the                               
              general theme of environment/plant-growth interaction.                         
              Three lighted environmental growth chambers, two                               
              incubators, and two laminar flow hoods are requested                           
              so students can grow plants, culture tissue, and                               
              germinate seeds under controlled conditions.  This                             
              collection of environmental control equipment will                             
              challenge students to design simple experiments,                               
              identify and control important variables, and then                             
              take meaningful measurements of photo-thesis. A drying                         
              oven and a digital balance are required for tissue                             
              processing.  A computer system is requested for data                           
              analysis and dissemination of research results. As a                           
              result of laboratory research using this equipment,                            
              hopefully more of our students will pursue botany,                             
              agronomy, or forestry at the graduate level.
