Title       : Constructing a Supranational Constitution: The Reception and Enforcement of
               European Community Law by National Courts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9412531

Award Number: 9412531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alec Stone astone@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412531  STONE  This project seeks to describe and explain the dynamics and 
              mechanics of European legal integration, the process by which the  European
              Community (EC) is constructing a legitimized and effective  supranational
              constitution.  This kind of legal integration  provides a model for the
              development of democratic  constitutionalism in regimes such as post-colonial
              states and newly  unified territories.  A hallmark of such regimes is legal 
              pluralism, which poses serious problems related to the integration  of laws
              across legal cultures, the enforcement of cross-cultural  legal codes, and the
              legitimation of new legal institutions.  This  research will provide the
              empirical basis for understanding these  processes in the European Community
              and for formulating explanatory  theoretical models.     The project focuses on
              litigation because it is through private  claims that the critical doctrines
              will evolve and be enforced.   There is already evidence that the doctrines of
              supremacy and  direct effect, enunciated by the European Court of Justice, are 
              being applied by the national courts in litigation.  It is this  process, often
              dominated by private actors such as interest groups  rather than by public
              authorities, that will bring about legal  integration across the members of the
              European Union.  Enforcement  of rulings, in the event of non-compliance, does
              rely on public  authorities.  Therefore, the key actors include private
              litigants,  national judges, and governmental officials.     Data will be
              collected first from the national court decisions on  EC law in which the
              doctrines of constitutionalism and direct  effect are at issue, and from
              scholarly commentaries pertaining to  them.  The PI will then interview judges
              and other legal actors  involved in important litigation at each of the
              national courts.   Finally, the PI will gather data on the policy impact of
              legal  integration and constitutionalism in three crucial areas:  
              environmental policy, free movement of goods, and gend er equality.   The data
              collection will include tracing litigation involving  claims against public
              authorities for violating EC norms in these  three policy areas, and
              interviewing the participating governmental  officials, judges and interest
              group litigants.  ***
