Title       : An Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Turbulent Variable Fluid Property
               Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow in Enhanced Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9412596

Award Number: 9412596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Jensen jensen@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The proposed research will investigate both experimentally and numerically
              turbulent heat transfer and pressure drop in internally-finned tubes when there
              are large variable fluid property effects. The internally-finned tube geometry
              is ideal to test modeling capabilities because they are industrially relevant,
              have much surface area, have complex hydrodynamics due to the geometry, are
              amenable to numerical modeling, and are experimentally testable in a lab over a
              wide range of geometric and operating conditions.  Ten internally-finned tubes
              are available for testing the experimental investigation; these tubes cover a
              wide range of geometric parameters. The tube will be tested in both heating and
              cooling over a range of wall-to-bulk temperature differences. The working
              fluids will be water, ethylene glycol, and mineral oil. In the numerical
              modeling, primary emphasis will be placed on development of appropriate
              near-wall modeling and accommodation of variable fluid properties. A newly
              developed anisotropic turbulence model, called the vorticity flux model, will
              be extended for use in this project and applied to both axially and spirally
              finned tubes where anisotropic turbulence is important. The numerical model
              will be validated by comparison against detailed local and overall data from
              the literature, and new overall data from this investigation. The validated
              model will fully describe the governing mechanisms for heat transfer and
              pressure drop in this geometry (particularly the effects of fin geometry and
              helix angle). It also will provide guidance on the incorporation of variable
              fluid properties in numerical models and with enhanced heat transfer techniques
              and  suggest appropriate methods for the development of physically-based
              correlations for Nusselt numbers and friction factors.
