Title       : U.S.-Poland Cooperative Science: Design and Chemistry of Modified Nucleosides
               for Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9412828

Award Number: 9412828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Agris agris@bchserver.bch.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412482  Agris    This US-Poland Research project between Dr. Paul F. Agris of 
              North Carolina State University, and Dr. Andrzej Malkiewicz of  the Technical
              University of Lodz, is on "Design and Chemistry of  Modified Nucleosides for
              Nucleic Acid Synthesis."  How modified  nucleoside chemistry, structure and
              dynamics relate to function  of RNAs, but also DNA, is not understood.  Once
              understood, even  for a small number of base modified nucleosides, this varied 
              collection of chemistries and structures can be applied to the  design and
              engineering of molecules important to biology and  medicine.  The evolution of
              the more than 80 modified nucleosides  in RNAs and DNA is connected with their
              site-selected positioning  and altering of nucleic acid chemistry and
              structure; the  potential to accomplish this is as varied as are the
              chemistries  and structures of the modifications.  The cooperating 
              investigators will develop new technologies and methods for  studying the
              site-selected incorporation of both native and non-  native modified and
              stable-isotope labeled nucleosides in RNA and  DNA, applicable, initially, to
              fundamental nucleic acid  biochemistry (molecular evolution, nucleic acid
              structure).  The  mutual benefit from the cooperative project derives from the 
              perfect complementary experiences of the two investigators.  Dr.  Malkiewicz is
              broadly experienced in the organic chemical  syntheses, chemistry and analyses
              of modified nucleosides and  small oligomers containing modified nucleosides;
              whereas Dr.  Agris is broadly experienced in the biosynthesis and analyses of 
              both the structures and functions of modified nucleosides in RNA.    This
              project in biochemistry fulfills the program objective of  advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in  Poland and the United States to
              combine complementary talents and  pool resources in areas of strong mutual
              interest and competence.  ***
