Title       : Regional Settlement in South Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9412537

Award Number: 9412537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn E. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret F. Glass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. McCartney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9198,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Jochim    With national Science Foundation support, Drs. Michael Jochim and 
              Margaret Glass will continue their archaeological study of an  area of Southern
              Germany which runs from the Swabian Alb, across  the Danube River to the Alps.
              It thus includes a variety of  environmental zones. Archaeological evidence
              indicates that human  prehistoric occupation was extensive and ranged across
              time to  include Paleolithic hunters and gatherers, specialist Mesolithic 
              collectors and Neolithic agriculturalists. Drs. Jochim and Glass  want to
              understand how humans adapted to this region under the  different climatic
              conditions which include both the terminal Ice  Age and warmer postglacial
              times. To accomplish this, they will  compile a data base which contains both
              environmental and  cultural information and will integrate these materials
              through  use of a geographic information system (GIS). Known sites will be 
              recorded and overlain on an environmental base. Both surface and  subsurface
              survey will then be employed to locate additional  archaeological occurrences.
              The GIS will permit the team to  relate behavior to environment and to
              determine how behavior  changed in different subregions, in different climatic
              regimes,  and at different levels of technological development.    This
              research is important because it will provide insight into  how humans adapt to
              and interact with their environment. This  process is dynamic, not static and
              archaeological data, which  covers long periods of time provide unique insight
              into this  issue. The project will also produce data of interest to many 
              archaeologists and will assist in the training of graduate  students.
