Title       : Dissertation Research: Experimental Science in Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9412575

Award Number: 9412575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Westman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mr. Marcus Hellyer, working under the direction of Professor Robert Westman, is
              undertaking his doctoral dissertation research on a topic which remains of
              great importance in contemporary science:  the relationship of science and the
              institutions of religion.  There is a belief that certain religions are
              essentially reactionary with respect to scientific revolutions.  One group that
              has been considered especially reactionary in the history of science has been
              the Catholic Church.  Yet within an organization as large and complex as the
              Catholic Church, it is not at all surprising that there should be parts which
              are in fact extremely reactionary as well as parts that participate in and
              foster science and scientific change.  Mr. Hellyer is examining one segment of
              this organization to show how it has been a major contributor to the advance of
              science.    Specifically, Mr. Hellyer is examining the role of German Jesuits
              in propagating experimental science in Germany.  He is studying a paradigmatic
              example of the experimental method, the air-pump, and trace its path through
              Germany, from its invention by Otto von Guericke to the first printed account
              of it by a Jesuit, Gaspar Schott, a professor of mathematics at the University
              of W rzburg.   The main problem the dissertation will attempt to solve is why a
              Jesuit would support a physics which, on the surface, appears so radically
              different to that commonly considered to be taught at universities in the early
              modern period.      To do this, he is examining Jesuit science and its relation
              to the Jesuit university curriculum to determine what was actually taught at W
              rzburg.   He is examining the culture of the Society of Jesus to determine how
              much freedom of opinion on scientific issues was permitted and to assess the
              role of Jesuit correspondence in the propagation of experimental knowledge and
              practice.  In order to study these questions, Mr. Hellyer is making extensive
              use of archives in Rome and in Germany.
