Title       : FASEB Conference on Calcium and Cell Function; July 2-7, 1994; Saxtons River,
               Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1994      
File        : a9412731

Award Number: 9412731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Schulman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara E. Ehrlich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the conference is to bring together a  diverse group of
              scientists working on all phases of calcium  and its role in cell function.  In
              addition to its role as  an essential mineral for bone growth, regulation of
              calcium  levels inside cells and the action of calcium on  intracellular
              targets impinges on virtually every primary  biological activity in cells from
              both prokaryotes and  eukaryotes.  The action of calcium in cells is critical
              for  regulation of cardiac and skeletal muscle function, neuronal 
              communication in the brain, the response of immune cells to  infection and in
              most other critical cellular functions. The  field provides the intersection of
              well established  physiology and pathophysiology with new findings at the 
              molecular level that provide insights into calcium and cell  function.  In
              addition to the formal sessions, informal  workshops will be arranged during
              the meeting to discuss  current questions in calcium research.  Poster sessions
              will  be held to allow all attendees to exchange new information  and
              participate in the conference.  Speakers will be from  various fields including
              physiology, cell biology,  biochemistry, pharmacology, molecular biology and
              genetics.  This meeting is an important mechanism by which scientists  funded
              by government grants exchange information that  reduces redundancy in research
              and increases the speed by  which new discoveries are incorporated by other
              scientists  across the calcium field.    The topics to be covered are: 
              Structure and function of  calcium-binding proteins--these are the calcium
              sensors that  indicate to cells when they have been stimulated; Molecular 
              properties of calcium channels--these proteins regulate  entry of calcium into
              cells that trigger cell excitation;  Calcium signaling in the cell and the
              nucleus--how changes  in calcium levels in cells is used to provide information
               within the cell and how this information is transmitted  throughout the cell
              to regulate cell division and the  produc tion of protein products from
              specific genes; Calcium  in human diseases--findings from the studies on cell
              biology  above have enabled muscular dystrophy, stroke, Alzheimer's  and other
              diseases to be better understood at a molecular  and cellular level and allows
              for design of new therapeutics  which will be discussed.
