Title       : The National Forum on Science and Technology Goals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9412417

Award Number: 9412417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49608              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jurgen Schmandt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Hadden  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9412417  Hadden  This project will examine ways to expand participation in the 
              selection and ranking of national goals for national science and  technology
              policy.  It will organize and sponsor a one year process  to initiate and
              institutionalize a national forum on science and  technology goals, with
              participation from a broad cross-section of  the United States population and
              representation from groups not  traditionally part of science and technology
              policymaking,  including nonexpert citizens.  This project will develop a
              mission  statement, governing structure, and set of procedures for making 
              decisions, including how decisions will be made about who will be  asked to
              participate.  In order to identify, develop and sponsor  specific programs, the
              national forum must have a structure, a set  of procedures that allow for
              orderly and fair decisionmaking and a  clear sense of how participants will be
              chosen and recruited.   Answers to these questions entail critical choices
              about values  that will be reflected in the national forum's character and 
              mission.  There are three phases of work in this year.  The first  phase will
              set up three committees corresponding to the three  questions to be answered: 
              mission, structure, and participation.   These committees will be made up of
              people from an "interim  governing council," twenty members of which have
              already committed  to the project.  The committees will each develop proposals
              that  will be delivered to all participants.  The complete interim  council
              will meet for three days in Austin, Texas, to come to  conclusions about the
              committee proposals.  The last phase will be  dissemination of results to
              professional, scientific, technical,  business, trade union, academic, and
              public interest groups,  government officials, and the scientific and technical
              press.  At  the end of this process, the national forum should be ready to 
              start one or more trial programs.  ***
