Title       : Joseph Black on Lime: A Model of Experimental Proof?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1994    
File        : a9412128

Award Number: 9412128
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Maher p-maher@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is not at all unusual--on the contrary, it is very common--for two (or more)
              scientific theories to compete as the "best" explanation of a set of empirical
              evidence.  Within the past 30 years, for example, plate tectonics competed with
              traditional theories about the explanation for the current configuration of the
              continents.  With results of NSF sponsored deep-sea drilling along fault lines,
              so-called "irrefutable" evidence "convinced" scientists of the 'validity" of
              plate tectonics.  Unfortunately, such "critical experiments" cannot operate in
              a vacuum.  Even if a theory explains some set of "facts" better than another,
              it does not explain "all" the evidence that a previous one did.  Scientists
              must weigh--in some probabilistic way--the likelihood that a new theory will
              account for a whole range of evidence better than another.  One way that
              scientists can do this is through a so-called "subjective" or Bayesian
              probability theory.  Dr. Maher is examining the value of using such a
              subjective approach on a famous historical case in order to determine if in
              fact subjective theory can contribute to resolution of scientific disputes.   
              Quicklime is produced by strongly heating substances such as limestone.  In
              1756, Joseph Black published a new theory of this transformation, according to
              which it consists in the release of a type of "air."  Black's experimental
              support for his theory has been cited ever since as a model of cogent
              experimental proof.  However, Black's work was not widely accepted for several
              decades after it was published, and  for some years, a very different theory,
              published by Johann Meyer in 1764, was widely accepted in continental Europe. 
              Meyer's theory was a variation on the traditional view that the properties of
              quicklime are due to matter added from fire.  Under this grant, Dr. Maher is
              comparing the degree to which Black's evidence, and other information at the
              time, favored Black's theory as against Meyer's.   Dr. Maher is using
              subjective probability theory as the  framework that enables judgments about
              the many different pieces of evidence to be combined into an overall judgment.
              This study is designed to provide a model for how the strength of evidence for
              disputed scientific claims may be evaluated--a model equally applicable to
              contemporary and historical debates.
