Title       : Enantioselective Binding on Chiral Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9412512

Award Number: 9412512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Lipkowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kenny B. Lipkowitz at Indiana University-Purdue University in   Indianapolis is
              supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry Program to
              perform theoretical studies related to the binding   of optical isomers to
              polymers with a particular chiral orientation.The   different binding of the
              isomers to the polymers is described as   enantioselective binding of analytes
              to chiral stationary phases, CSP's,   of the polymers. The systems which will
              be studied are relevant to   chromatography. In addition to the theoretical
              work, the project will   also carry out complementary experimental studies. In
              particular, atomic   force microscopy, AFM, measurements will be made on the
              chiral surfaces   of polymer crystals; the AFM tips will be fabricated using
              materials   close to those involved in actual chromatographic processes. A
              principle   objective of the work in this project is to obtain understandings
              of the   elementary chemical interactions of the analytes with the chiral  
              polymers. The theoretical treatments to be made will be based on Monte   Carlo,
              MC, and Molecular Dynamics, MD, methods. Several force fields will   be used to
              insure that the MC and MD simulations are reliable and are not   artifacts. The
              results of the calculations will be compared with   experimental separability
              factors found with chromatographic   measurements.  Chromatography is a
              standard chemical technique for the analysis of the   composition of mixtures;
              it is also used to separate mixtures into their   individual components. The
              use of chiral polymers for enantioselective   separations of such mixtures is
              an important current topic in organic   chemistry. This project addresses the
              theoretical underpinnings of the   mechanisms responsible for enantioselective
              binding. The project has the   potential of providing the foundations needed in
              order to develop more   efficient chromatographic analyses.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
