Title       : Thermal and Dynamic Properties of Density Waves in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9412612

Award Number: 9412612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart E. Brown brown@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9412612  Brown    This is an experimental program to investigate the properties
              of  correlated electrons systems.  The program focuses on organic and 
              inorganic conductors with incommensurate charge-density-wave and 
              spin-density-wave instabilities.  The objective is to discover the  correlation
              between the fascinating transport and thermodynamic  behavior with the
              elementary microscopic excitations.  The program  includes samples preparations
              and characterizations, and  experiments conducted at the home institution and
              national user  facilities such as the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
              and  the National Synchrotron Light Source.  The present capabilities of  the
              laboratory will be expanded.  The materials preparation  facility will be
              improved.  Higher accuracy will be sought in  transport and thermodynamic
              experiments under high pressure and in  magnetic fields.  Nuclear magnetic
              resonance experiments under high  pressure will be performed.    % % % %    A
              large number of materials have high electrical conductivity like  metals but
              only along specific crystallographic directions.  Such  materials are referred
              to as quasi-one-dimensional.  They have  specific physical properties different
              than the conventional  metals.  Electrons interacting with each other and with
              the lattice  in such restricted dimensionality, are likely to form states of 
              matter known as density waves (charge or spin) distinct from metals  but with
              fascinating electrical and magnetic properties.  This  program is designed to
              investigate the correlation between the  underlying microscopic interactions
              and the macroscopic properties  such as electrical conductivity.  The Principal
              Investigator will  synthesize the materials and perform experiments in the
              department  of physics at University of California at Los Angeles as well as at
               two national facilities, National High Magnetic field Laboratory  and the
              National Synchrotron Light Source.  ***
