Title       : Semantics of Parallel Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9412980

Award Number: 9412980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Brookes brookes+@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This project seeks to develop denotational semantics for a  variety of
              programming languages, tailored to support  compositional reasoning  about
              various important forms of  program behavior. It studies a typical  functional
              programming  language, and two typical parallel imperative languages:  a 
              language for shared-variable parallelism, and a language of  communicating 
              processes related to Hoare's CSP and Milner's  CCS. Notions of behavior 
              considered for the parallel languages  include safety and liveness properties, 
              and partial and total  correctness, assuming various forms of fairness 
              properties  that correspond to natural assumptions about the runtime  execution
               of concurrent processes. This should permit  reasoning about parallel programs
               to be carried out without  knowledge of or reference to details concerning 
              scheduling.  There also is a research focus on intensional properties 
              concerning runtime and efficient use of resources.  Technically, the project 
              aims to develop fully abstract  semantics, with respect to a variety of 
              important notions of  program behavior. A semantics is fully abstract if it 
              gives  the same meaning to two program phrases precisely when they  induce 
              identical behavior in all program contexts. This  provides a rigorous criterion
               for judging the utility of a  semantics in supporting compositional or modular
               reasoning  about program behavior. The long term goal is the development  of a
               unifying framework suitable for establishing and  exploiting relationships 
              between languages, models, and proof  methods for reasoning about programs. In 
              particular, the  research seeks to establish a mathematically tractable theory 
              and use it to develop practical techniques for modular design  and analysis of 
              parallel programs.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
