Title       : The Genesis of an Environmental Risk Over Estrogenic Chemicals: The Interplay
               Between Science, Ethics and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1994      
File        : a9412973

Award Number: 9412973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Krimsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger P. Wrubel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9178,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9412973  Krimsky  This research project will examine scientific and ethical and 
              social factors in the evolution of and policy responses to a  controversial
              hypothesis linking environmental estrogenic chemicals  to a variety of animal
              and human disorders and pathologies.  The  Environmental Estrogen Hypothesis
              (EEH) postulates that a sizeable  class of chemicals including antioxidants,
              plasticizers,  detergents, and pesticides mimic the action of endogenous 
              biological estrogens, hormones that play a central role in sexual  maturation
              and reproduction, thereby making these chemicals suspect  in male sexual
              abnormalities and reduced fertility rates in humans  and wildlife, metabolic
              disorders in birds, fish and mammals, and  cancer in humans.  The research
              involves collection and analysis of  relevant scientific and popular literature
              and interviews of  scientists, regulators, policymakers, and representatives of
              non-  governmental organizations.  The investigators will study the  factors
              that determine whether the estrogen hypothesis emerges as  a major public
              policy issue, remains dormant in the public agenda,  or is dismissed for lack
              of evidentiary support.  The scope of the  study includes an analysis of how
              the environmental estrogen issues  are being framed, how the hypothesis is
              presented and communicated  to the public by scientists, the sources of
              controversy among  scientists, and the impact of the hypothesis on public
              policy.  The  value dimensions to be examined include:  moral and ethical 
              judgments by scientists and their articulation of social  responsibility with
              respect to the hypothesis; implicit values and  norms in the selections of
              scientific methodologies of those  advocating or criticizing the hypothesis;
              and the ethical and value  dimensions associated with the implications of the
              hypothesis for  sexuality, masculinity and femininity, and species extinction
              in  the social mind.  The results of this study will contribute to the 
              theoretical discussion on risk selection and  communication by  tracking and
              examining a potentially high-profile risk event.  They  will advance our
              knowledge of the roles of scientists in shaping  public policy and their
              conceptions of social responsibility.  They  will provide insights into
              conceptions of various social groups  about ethical and value implications of
              particular kinds of risks,  and about the normative factors involved in
              scientific  contributions to risk assessment.  The investigators will produce 
              articles reporting on these results, and make presentations at  relevant
              conferences and meetings.  ***
