Title       : Modes of Dynamic Attending
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9412656

Award Number: 9412656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mari R. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal examines a new approach to the fundamental construct of attending
              which rests on the assumption that attending is an inherently temporal
              activity: people respond to dynamic changes in their environment by relying on
              internal attending rhythms that are capable of entrainments. Two modes of
              dynamic attending are proposed: Analytic attending, which takes place over
              relatively small time spans of events, and Future-Oriented attending, which
              takes place over longer event time periods. The theoretical framework advanced
              presumes that the structure of environmental events offers a basis of
              attentional control (viz entrainment) for each attending mode. Of special
              interest is a specific oscillator model underlying Future-Oriented attending. 
              A number of explicit hypotheses that test predictions of the oscillator model
              are presented. These pertain to the role of rhythmic factors that are predicted
              to facilitate or retard attentional entrainments.   This research is important
              because no current psychological model of attention explains how people attend
              to dynamic aspects of the environment, that is, to events such as speech,
              visual action patterns, music etc.. Instead, most current theories address
              attending to static visual objects (e.g., two-dimensional pictures or letter
              sequences). But much of our everyday world consists of changing, dynamic,
              events. Because our environment is primarily dynamic and because many
              attentional dysfunctions (e.g. aphasia) are evident largely when people
              interact with dynamic events, it is important to develop and test models that
              recognize these facts.
