Title       : Improvement of Facilities at the Palo Verde Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1996   
File        : a9412961

Award Number: 9412961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Stone  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) has three biological field stations
              in Costa Rica that are used by a broad spectrum of the international scientific
              community.  Both La Selva (wet lowland rainforest) and Las Cruces (wet
              mid-elevation site) are developed and well along the way to achieving their
              respective training and research potential.  Palo Verde (seasonally dry
              lowlands), on the other hand, is a diamond in the rough with primitive
              facilities that have been stressed beyond capabilities to service the demand.  
               This project is designed to meet the need for improved facilities that can
              accommodate the many researchers who wish to investigate dry forest ecosystems
              and their derivative landscapes, with direct implications for the management of
              the vast zone centered on the Tempisque Conservation Area and Moracia
              irrigation project will expand and remodel the station to: (1) ameliorate
              overcrowding and accommodate a broader range of research projects; and (2)
              provide access to communications, databases, and utilities to support long term
              research.    Palo Verde was originally singled out in 1969 for use in
              comparative ecosystem studies because of the stark contrast between its
              seasonally dry forest and the tropical wet forest of La Selva that is at the
              same latitude but has more than twice the rainfall.  The site is appreciated as
              much now for the diverse mosaic of forests and wetlands in pristine, disturbed
              and regenerating states that interface with farms and fisheries.  With the
              extension of the long-term agreement with the Costa Rican Park Service and the
              recent inauguration of a Ph.D.-level station director position, and a husband
              and wife team in place, OTS is now ready to move Palo Verde into the mainstream
              of international tropical science.    In addition, the project will include
              support for the establishment of full Internet connectivity in a configuration
              appropriate to conditions in Costa Rica.
