Title       : Acquisition of Housing Facility for Visiting Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9412897

Award Number: 9412897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie J. Paul vpaul@uog9.uog.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Richmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                            9412897  Paul, V.  The University of Guam Marine Laboratory will
              build a  housing facility for accommodating visiting researchers  including
              visiting graduate students.  The 2000 sq ft  building will contain three
              bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, a  kitchen, and a living area for dormitory style 
              accommodations and a separate suite with two bedrooms, one  bath, and a kitchen
              for an apartment style unit.  Earlier  support allowed the university to
              complete the architectural  and engineering plans for this building.  Such a
              facility is  considered extremely important because 1) the institution is  in
              an isolated academic environment and visiting  investigators are a valuable
              resource for interactions and  new ideas, and 2) skyrocketing rents and a
              serious housing  shortage combine to make it difficult to impossible to find 
              adequate lodging for visitors staying less than 6 months.    The University of
              Guam Laboratory supports the research of 8  full-time faculty, numerous
              graduate and undergraduate  students, as well as visiting investigators.  The
              research  demands on facility have increased due to the addition of  new
              faculty at the laboratory, the recent establishment of  collaborative programs
              between the Marine Laboratory and the  University of Hawaii and the University
              of the Ryukyus  (Okinawa, Japan), and the awareness of the Marine Laboratory 
              as a resource for coral reef research by over 550 scientists  who attended the
              7th International Coral Reef Symposium on  Guam in June 1992.  The new building
              will allow the support  of increasing numbers of visiting scientists that wish
              to  conduct research at the laboratory , which will in turn  enhance the
              research environment.
