Title       : Video Interviews as Technical Manpower Recruiting Tools for Small Technology
               Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9412067

Award Number: 9412067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Morris mdmorris@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project, jointly supported by the Chemistry Division and the Small  
              Business Program of NSF, pioneers the development of an experimental   approach
              to bringing the talents and capabilities of PhD chemistry   graduates of the
              University of Michigan to the attention of small   chemically related
              businesses.  In an exploratory venture termed the   Michigan Demonstration
              Project, Professor Michael Morris of the   Department of Chemistry will
              coordinate the professional videotaping of   interviews with some twenty to
              twenty-five newly minted chemistry PhDs   for subsequent distribution, upon
              request, to small businesses who seek   new employees with expertise in those
              areas of chemistry represented by   the graduates.  The intent of this exercise
              is to facilitate awareness on   the part of small businesses, which do not have
              extensive recruiting   infrastructure, of the capabilities for technological
              innovation offered   by these new chemistry PhDs.      During the past eighteen
              months to two years, the majority of new jobs   for PhD chemists have been in
              small businesses rather than in large   chemical corporations.  Recognizing
              this trend and the difficulties   attendant to small businesses recruiting the
              nation's most outstanding   talent among the ranks of new PhDs, the University
              of Michigan chemistry   department has developed a plan to use videotaped
              interviews of their new   PhD graduates as a means of displaying the talents of
              these young   scientists to potential small business employers.  The success of
              this   project could impact markedly on how prospective employers seek out and 
               identify promising young scientists for recruiting.
