Title       : Frustrated Translational and Rotational Modes of Molecularly Chemisorbed Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1996   
File        : a9412915

Award Number: 9412915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Hinch jhinch@rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1762,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A detailed understanding of the bond between an adsorbed molecule and a solid
              substrate can  be obtained by spectroscopic characterization of the adsorbed
              molecule.  Very little has been  learned about the low energy modes of this
              adsorbate-substrate complex, due to the lack of  spectroscopic probes relevant
              to this energy regime.  This research project, supported by the  Analytical and
              Surface Chemistry Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State 
              Chemistry and Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research, is
              directed toward  obtaining this low energy information.  Helium atom scattering
              has been developed as a method  which can address this question, and Professor
              B.J. Hinch and her students at Rutgers University  will take advantage of this
              method to probe the low energy frustrated rotations and translations  of model
              molecules adsorbed on well characterized surfaces.  This information will
              provide a  stringent test of our present understanding of chemisorption and the
              surface chemical bond.  This  information is crucial to a number of
              technologies, ranging from catalysis to electronic device  fabrication.   
              Spectroscopic characterization of the low energy vibrations of adsorbed
              molecules is the focus  of this research project.  Scattering of helium atoms
              from adsorbed molecular species will be  used to obtain this spectroscopic
              information.  This heretofore unavailable data will be compared  with current
              theories of adsorption, with the goal of increasing our understanding of this 
              technologically important phenomenon.
