Title       : Understanding Attachment in Family Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1994   
File        : a9412164

Award Number: 9412164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116573             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cook  9412164                                 ABSTRACT         A fundamental
              issue for theories of interpersonal relationships  is the relative importance
              of (a)characteristics a person brings to  the relationship (actor effects),
              (b)characteristics the person's  partner elicits (partner effects), or (c) the
              unique cognitive,  behavioral, or emotional adjustment of the person to the
              particular  partner (relationship effects).  This issue is addressed in the 
              present research in the context of adult attachment theory.   Self-report
              attachment style data will be collected on each of the  relationships in 200
              two-parent two-child families according to a  round-robin design.  These data
              will be analyzed using the Social  Relations Model, which provides information
              on the contributions of  actors, partners, and unique interpersonal
              relationships in explaining  interpersonal data.  This analysis will evaluate
              the widespread, but  unproven, assumption that adult attachment styles reflect
              'actor  effects'.  A longitudinal component of the study uses information 
              about the sources of variance (actor, partner, and relationship  effects)
              contributing to perceptions of interpersonal control as a  framework for a
              model predicting change in security of attachment in  family relationships. 
              Elaborating adult attachment theory, this model  holds that two types of
              control beliefs (i.e., effectance and fate)  mediate the relationship between
              two types of partner responsiveness  (i.e., positive and negative reciprocity)
              in determining change in  family members' security of attachment over a
              one-year period.  The  role of perceived control in the development of adult
              attachments has  not been previously studied, even though it is believed to be 
              fundamental to a sense of security.  June 15, 1994       According to Bowlby
              (1973), the 'glue' that holds family  relationships together is the degree of
              security a person finds in  their relationships with other family members and
              romantic partners.   Variations in this s ecurity give rise to "attachment
              styles."  People  with 'insecure' attachment styles expect rejection or
              inconsistent  responses from others and view themselves as having less control
              over  their lives and as being less worthy of emotional support than do  people
              with 'secure' attachment styles.  People with secure attachment  styles are
              more likely to maintain their close relationships, reaching  out to others for
              comfort in times of distress.  This research will  investigate the determinants
              of attachment style at one point in time  as well as the determinants of change
              in style over time. Part 1 of  the research will assess whether a secure
              attachment to another family  member at one point in time is due to (a) the
              characteristics that the  person brings to the relationship, (b) the
              characteristics of the  other family member, or (c) the unique cognitive,
              behavioral, or  emotional adjustment of the person to that particular family
              member.   Part 2 will test the hypothesis that a family member's responsiveness
               influences people's beliefs concerning their degree of control over 
              interpersonal relationships which in turn affects the security of  their
              attachment style. By elucidating the factors that contribute to  a secure
              attachment, this research will foster the development of  interventions that
              can optimize people's interpersonal functioning.    ***
