Title       : Research Equipment Grant: Diagnostics of Hot Capillary Discharge Plasmas for
               Efficient Soft X-Ray Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9412106

Award Number: 9412106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Virginia M. Ayres                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge J. Rocca rocca@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412106  Rocca  The Department of Electrical Engineering at Colorado State
              University proposed the construction of an x-ray streak camera/stigmatic
              spectrograph combination to be utilized as a powerful diagnostics tool in the
              development of efficient new sources of x-ray radiation based on fast capillary
              discharges.  Important technological and scientifiv applications require the
              development of efficient and compact sources of x-ray radiation.  Results of
              recent experiments conducted at Colorado State University show that very fast
              discharge excitation of capillary channels with risetimes of the order of 10ns
              can generate dense plasma columns with electron temperatures of a few hundred
              eV utilizing currents that are more than an order of magnitude smaller than
              those utilized to generate hot plasmas in Terawatt pulse power machines. Such
              capability for efficiently generating plasma columns of small diameter (=200um)
              by direct discharge excitation could provide a new route towards compact and
              efficient soft x-ray lasers.  Also, the direct transfer of electrically stored
              energy into reproducible hot capillary plasmas of small diameters could result
              in a compact and efficient source of incoherent x-rays.  The proposed
              instrument will image into a flat field with high spatial and spectral
              resolution the soft x-ray radiation emitted by the capillary discharge.  An
              x-ray camera, placed in the focal plane of the stigmatic spectrograph will
              provide for temporal resolution necessary to map the evolution of the soft
              x-ray radiation in a single shot. This combination will constitute a powerful
              instrument to identify line amplification as well to characterize the dynamics
              of these promising plasmas which are presently significantly less understood
              than laser created plasmas. The novel design of the proposed instrument will
              also for rapidly reconfiguring it into two additional complementary modes of
              operation to generate: a) sets of simultaneously acquired spatially resolved
              spectra and b) electronically reco rded pinhole images of the plasma.     ***
