Title       : Physical Electronics of Nonvolatile Multi-dielectric Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9412466

Award Number: 9412466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin H. White mhw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alastair D. McAulay  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9412466  White  This research is concerned with the basic physical, electronic
              and material properties of multi-dielectric nanostructures which use quantum
              mechanical tunneling of carriers into deep-level storage traps.  In some
              instances these traps are beneficial, such as in nonvolatile semiconductor
              memory devices; however, in other instances the traps are detrimental to
              solid-state device behavior and result in instabilities, such as in the shift
              of threshold voltages in MOS Transistors.  In this research we examine the
              beneficial use of these traps in a new 'scaled' multi-dielectric,
              buried-channel, nanostructure which consists of polySilicon gate-blocking
              Oxide-silicon Nitride-tunnel Oxide-Silicon (SONOS).  The traps are located in
              the silicon nitride and this research explores the physical mechanisms by which
              charge injection, transport and storage is accomplished in 'scaled' SONOS
              nanostructures.  The origin and control of these traps is an important
              objective in this program as well as the understanding of electron and hole
              transport across interfacial boundaries.  We will explore the spatial and
              energetic distribution of such traps with a new method (developed in our
              laboratory) based on low-frequency charge pumping.  In addition, we will use
              recent advancements in atomic force microscopy (AFM) to provide visual images
              of the nanotopography of the multidielectric films used in the 'scaled' SONOS
              nanostructure.  The SONOS nanostructure shows considerable promise for low
              voltage, low-power, high-density, non-volatile semiconductor memory
              applications, such as in portable semiconductor disks, application specific
              integrated circuits, wafer scale integration and electronic neural networks. 
              ***
