Title       : Connections to NetIllinois - Phase V
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1995       
File        : a9412928

Award Number: 9412928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel L. Hartman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9412928   Hartman  Bradley University with participation and support from major 
              educational institutions and industry, and a strong working  partnership with
              CICNet, the state of Illinois Central Management  Services (CMS), and with
              considerable networking experience  within its member shop, has developed a
              communications network  known as netIllinois.    NetIllinois request support to
              provide Internet connection to  seventeen (17) Illinois colleges and
              universities (Belleville  Area College, Richard J. Daley College, Kennedy-King
              College,  Malcolm X College, Olive-Harvey College, Harry S. Truman College, 
              Harold Washington College, Wilbur Wright College, Elgin Com.  college,
              Greenville College, Kankakee Com. College, Lake Land  College, Lincoln Land
              Com. College, McHenry County College,  Richland Com. College, State Com.
              College, and Waubonsee Com.  College (all are community colleges except
              Greenville).    The requested connections will support connectivity to 
              netIllinois, CICNET, NSFNET, and the greater Internet.  It will  also provide
              access to state, regional, and national computing  resources and databases; and
              foster communication and  collaboration among teachers, students, scholars, and
              researchers  at these institutions and their peers within the worldwide 
              education and research community.    The network will provide a consistent
              statewide architecture for  NSFNET access for a broad variety of entities
              engaged in  education and research.  This cooperative network will provide 
              gateways to regional, national, and international networks and  will be
              consistent with their standards.  It will further the  institutions' work in
              enhancing the state's economic development  through a well-educated workforce,
              accessible training  opportunities, and research and development partnerships. 
               Another goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative  projects and
              sharing of resources between institutions, including  those outside the state.
