Title       : Research in High-Frequency Analog Electronic Circuits for Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9412940

Award Number: 9412940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Gray pgray@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The field of electronic telecommunications has experienced  explosive growth in
              the past ten years, both in terms of its  commercial importance and in terms of
              the research effort devoted  to it in academic and industrial laboratories.  It
              appears likely  that radio-based digital communications will play a much larger
               role than might have been anticipated, complementing data  communications on
              wire pairs with fiber media coming into increased  use for data communications
              backbones.    As in the past, the utilization of VLSI technology to reduce the 
              cost of electronics associated with such systems will be critical.   This
              research is directed at exploring new ways to use silicon  integrated circuit
              technology to improve the performance, reduce  the power dissipation, and
              reduce the cost of components for  communication systems of various kinds, with
              primary emphasis on  data communications and Personal Communications Systems
              (PCS) using  radio and free-space optical media.  Particular emphasis is placed
               on circuit techniques applicable to implementation of RF, IF and  baseband
              mixed signal communications circuits with low power and  low operating voltage.
                 The primary goal of this research is to discover, optimize, and  demonstrate
              new circuit approaches which allow the implementation  of such systems with
              levels of power dissipation and performance  which more closely approach the
              fundamental limits imposed by the  basic technology being used than current
              approaches.  The general  area of interest if RF transceivers for RF LANs ald
              personal  communications devices, and transceivers for fiber-optic systems  and
              wire-based systems.  Specific topics for investigation are  limits-to-phase
              noise performance in power-optimized monolithic  voltage-controlled
              oscillators, investigation of new parallel-  architecture sampling
              demodulators, limits-to-distortion  performance in MOS sampling demodulators,
              the use of passive-  sampling FIR switched capacitor filters for low-power,
              high-  frequency filte ring and CDMA despreading, optimization of the 
              sensitivity in fiber optic communication receivers, the application  of BiCMOS
              technology for the particular needs of high-speed  communications, and modeling
              of active and passive IC components  for RF design.
