Title       : Intraband Processes and New Device Concepts in SemiconductorHomo and Hetero
               Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9412248

Award Number: 9412248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Unil A. G. Perera uperera@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. H. Francombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412248  Perera  Research on novel semiconductor device concepts and intraband
              processes leading to potential applications primarily in high-performance
              infrared imaging and emitter systems will be performed in which the unique
              dimensional and compositional control capability offered by recently emerging
              MBE growth technology will be revised to evolve special types of novel junction
              and multi-quantum well (MQW) formats.  In one such format, developed under a
              previous NSF program, the interfacial work function in p-i-n homojunctions is
              controlled at low values (corresponding to optical energies in the VLWIR to FIR
              range) by heavy doping of the implanted or MBE-grown photo-emitter region. 
              Analytical and experimental approaches aimed at understanding the influence of
              critical doping and dimensional parameters, and of bias conditions, on detector
              and array performance be employed to suggest MBE-grown multi-junction
              structures with the potential for higher performance at more elevated cryogenic
              temperatures.  The main significance of this work is in establishing a
              technology base for the evolution of large area, uniform detector arrays with a
              multi-special capability for greatly improved NE T responsivity.    Recent
              successes with VLWIR MQW (A1, Ga, As) detectors will be exploited by extending
              the cutoff for both photoconductive and photovoltaic (miniband) structures to
              wavelengths beyond 16 um, and examining transient operation modes as a means of
              improving response and detectivity.  Working in conjunction with MBE experts at
              Cornell, NRC, UCLA and JPL the feasibility of improved quality of (A1,Ga)As
              barrier growth, as a means of lowering dark current at longer wavelengths will
              also be studied.  As is the case for Si homojunctions, the inherent uniformity,
              and their low power requirements, should enable them to out perform HgCdTe
              detector arrays at longer wavelengths.    Encouraging results for MQW IR
              emitter structures will provide an excellent basis for further modeling efforts
              and experimental d evices incorporating three-level and triple-barrier features
              as a means to improve efficiency of population inversion.  Other material
              systems (e.g. InGaAs/InA1As) will also be examined for the potential of high IR
              emission in the MWIR range.  The MQW emitter technology should lead to stable,
              integratable, large area IR sources at wavelengths extending from MWIR to FIR,
              for applications currently being addressed by small-area chemically unstable
              HgCdTe and PbSnTe laser diodes.  ***
