Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Ecology, Growth Coalitions, and Local
               State Autonomy--The Case of Enterprise Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9412762

Award Number: 9412762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2172               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barrett A. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Program.  It is a study of enterprise zones with an emphasis on human
              ecology, growth coalitions and local state autonomy.  Enterprise zones are
              economically and socially depressed areas that have been designated by a
              government agency for revitalization.  Special incentives, such as tax cuts,
              are offered to businesses that wish to invest in the zones.  In this research,
              multiple comparisons using census and telephone survey data will measure zone
              effectiveness net of various ecological factors.  Examination of the zone
              designation and promotion process in five study sites will provide information
              on the agents involved in the zone, who lobbied for establishment of the zone,
              and who is responsible for its success or failure.  Because there is a noted
              difference between rural and urban places in how they develop, comparisons
              between zones found in these two contexts will be made.  %%%   This research
              will contribute to the subdisciplines of economic sociology, political
              sociology, and community sociology, and it will provide information to help
              guide policy makers considering the enterprise zone mechanism as a means for
              promoting economic growth in depressed areas.  In addition to the scientific
              gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially assist a
              highly promising student in completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation. 
              Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the nation and the
              thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.
