Title       : LMER: Trophic Transfers in Larger Estuarine Ecosystems: Pulsed Inputs, Physical
               Features and Biological Patchiness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9412113

Award Number: 9412113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999965            (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter R. Boynton boynton@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Houde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Boicourt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1316,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9412113  Boynton    This is a project to investigate mechanisms by which
              production at higher trophic levels in influenced by inputs from adjacent
              watershed, ocean and atmosphere, using Chesapeake Bay as a study site.  The
              proposed research builds on previous LMER studies (PROTEUS), which focused on
              how inputs from adjacent systems affect primary projection and recycling
              processes, to examine the consequences of those processes for fish and other
              secondary producers in this estuary.  The investigators hypothesize that the
              relatively high rates of secondary production characterizing estuarine
              ecosystems are attributable, in part, to the pulsing nature of materials and
              energy inputs and the resulting physical structures and biological patchiness,
              which act as sites of greatly enhanced activity.    The researchers will
              conduct an ambitious field program which has been designed to examine: 1) how
              fine-scale distributions (as well as regionally integrated values) of physical
              and biological properties and processes respond to interannual variations in
              inputs from terrestrial and oceanic margins; and 2) how physical structures and
              biological patches influence production and trophic structure of the estuarine
              ecosystem.  A suite of numerical models and comparative analyses will be
              executed to; (1) integrate field observations; (2) contrast differences between
              processes measured at coarse and fine scales; and (3) investigate factors
              regulating trophic structure and secondary production at specific sites.  To
              accomplish these goals the investigators will utilize several new technologies
              (e.g. rapidly towed CTD, fluorescence, acoustic and optic sensors, aerial
              remote sensing, real-time in-situ moorings) which have emerged that enable
              reliable estimates of secondary production and insights into the details of
              interactions between planktonic assemblages and physical structures.    Over
              the past decade, research attention has focused on the question of how changes
              in the inputs of nutrients to estuaries creat e regional and interannual
              variations in primary production, algal biomass, and nutrient recycling.  The
              understanding of these connections in Chesapeake Bay is at a state where
              researchers can now focus on the next obvious puzzle in estuarine ecology: what
              makes estuaries so efficient in the transfer form primary to secondary
              production and how is  secondary production related to energy and material
              inputs from the land, air and ocean.
