Title       : Catalytic Partial Oxidation of Lower Alkanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1997  
File        : a9412544

Award Number: 9412544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umit S. Ozkan ozkan.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9412544  Umit Ozkan    This is a fundamental study of the
              catalytic phenomena involved in the activation and partial oxidation of methane
              and ethane.  The objectives include investigation of the natures of the active
              sites responsible for alkane activation and oxygen insertion on supported and
              unsupported vanadia and molybdena catalysts, control of selectivity on these
              sites by modifiers (both promoters and inhibitors) such as alkali metals,
              phosphorus, and halides, the roles of coreactants and additives on the reaction
              schemes, and the reaction networks responsible for partial oxidation of methane
              and ethane.  Catalysts are characterized both before and after reaction using
              BET surface-area measurements, pore size distribution, X-ray diffraction, X-ray
              fluorescence, laser Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Auger
              electron spectroscopy, secondary-ion mass spectroscopy, and thermal analysis
              techniques.  In - situ laser Raman characterization is combined with isotopic
              labelling to identify oxygen insertion sites.  Steady- state and transient
              kinetic studies and isotopic labelling are used as mechanistic probes to
              examine the catalytic routes to partial and complete oxidation.    Methane and
              ethane are readily available inexpensive feedstocks, and the conversion of
              methane to formaldehyde or methanol and ethane to ethylene or acetaldehyde has
              been a major objective of catalytic technology.  These conversions are easy to
              achieve, but the fine control needed to isolate these products has been
              elusive; most processes produce mainly carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide which
              are formed both from competitive reaction pathways and from further oxidation
              of the indended products.  Better understanding of the operative mechanisms
              will permit new control strategies to solve this classical problem.
