Title       : Chemical Mediation of Shell-related Behaviors in Hermit Crabs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9412679

Award Number: 9412679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46047              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Brooks wbrooks@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1228,9138,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412679  Brooks    Hermit crabs possess a soft, coiled abdomen which allows the 
              occupancy of vacated snail shells. Because of crab growth and  shell
              degradation by fouling organisms, locating new, larger  shells is a critical
              component in the natural history of these  crustaceans. Hermit crabs can
              procure new shells in different  ways. One mechanisms involves intra- and
              inter-specific shell  exchanges between hermit crabs, which can result in a
              better  shell fit for one or both participants. Another mechanism  involves
              location of injured conspecifics. Specifically, several  species of crab
              respond to factors in the blood or hemolymph of  their respective conspecifics.
              Hemolymph from congeneric and  other hermit crabs or brachyurans fails to
              elicit strong  attraction responses. The attractant molecules in hermit crab 
              hemolymph have only been investigated in one species, Clibanarius  vittatus;
              they are less than 1000 D in size and likely peptides.  Otherwise, very little
              is known about the specific chemical  nature of the hemolymph attractant or the
              ubiquity of this  response i hermit crab species. A third mechanism for  hermit
               crabs obtaining new shells is by locating snails that are being  consumed by
              predators. Proteolytic enzymes produced by  predators  of snails trigger the
              release of signal peptides from the flesh.  Hermit crabs respond to these
              peptides by moving towards the  source and waiting for the predator to remove
              the flesh from the  shell ( or directly remove remaining flesh left behind by
              the  predator). It is unclear whether these attractant molecules are  similar
              to those involved in crab responses to hemolymph.  Previous studies have also
              shown that some hermit crab species  respond preferentially to certain snail
              odors. How crabs  discriminate between these peptide signals is unknown. In all
               three mechanisms of shell procurement, the size and fit of the  crab's present
              shell can influence its behavior and response.  Perhaps other variables such as
              presence of symbionts als o  influence hermit crab responses. In this proposal,
              the following  topics will be investigated: (1) specificity of responses by 
              hermit crabs to hemoplymph; (2) discrimination of chemical  signals by hermit
              crabs; (3) whether snail cues and hemolymph  from crabs are chemically similar
              molecules; and (4) the role of  shell fit, sex, and presence of symbionts in
              mediating responses  to shell availability cues. The results of this study will
              be  significant because peptide-mediated responses involving  perireceptors are
              uncommon. Investigation of this novel system  will provide important knowledge
              to chemical ecologists, as well  as behavioral and evolutionary biologists. 
              ***
