Title       : Restructuring Local Democracy: Political Activism Under Economic Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9412302

Award Number: 9412302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Staeheli lynner@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412302  STAEHELI       This research project will examine the ways that
              political  activism has been affected by the increase in flexible employment 
              that has accompanied economic restructuring in the United States.  The initial
              premise is that flexible employment (i.e., part-time  work, off-shift work,
              temporary contracts, self-employment, and  work undertaken at one's home) and
              the concomitant changes in  wage levels, job security, and time availability
              lead to re-  evaluations of the potential for political activism.  The 
              household and the broad range of financial and interpersonal  resources it
              encompasses is the context in which decisions about  activism are made.  The
              local political structure and perceptions  about the local political structure
              are crucial intervening  factors that also affect decisions regarding political
              activism.  Trends in employment and activism therefore will be examined in 
              four different cities using a two-stage research strategy.  The  first stage
              will involve the construction of narratives that set  the structural context of
              economic restructuring.  The second  stage will involve extensive telephone
              surveys in which household  members reconstruct their employment and political
              histories.  This stage also will involve intensive in-person interviews with 
              political activists.  The telephone surveys will provide baseline  information
              regarding the nature of employment restructuring,  political activities, and
              household adjustment strategies, while  the intensive interviews will focus on
              the ways that work,  politics, household, and local context are interconnected.
                    Political activism is a crucial element for maintaining and 
              strengthening democratic institutions.  This research project  will add to
              theories related to restructuring, the state, and  citizenship, and it will
              provide valuable new insights about the  ways that economic change affects the
              form and character of local  democracy.  The results of the study therefore
              will have  significant theoretic al and practical implications for 
              understanding and improving democratization processes.
