Title       : Regional Organization of Chiefdoms in the Alto Magdalena, Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9412141

Award Number: 9412141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9412141  Drennan    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Drennan
              and  his colleagues will conduct four seasons of archaeological  reconnaissance
              and excavation in the Alto Magdalena region of  Colombia. This area has long
              attracted the attention of  archaeologists because of its striking stone
              statuary and  elaborate burial mounds. With previous NSF support, Dr. Drennan 
              has documented aspects of the regional social, political and  economic
              organization of the prehispanic inhabitants of one part  of the Alto Magdalena.
              The results indicate the emergence of  small scale regional chiefdoms beginning
              about 1 A.D. Dr. Drennan  will now expand his work to include a larger portion
              of the Alto  Magdalena. In conjunction with his colleagues, he will first 
              conduct a broad scale regional survey. On the basis of the  results, several
              localities will be examined in more detail and  select excavations will be
              carried out.     Archaeologists have observed that in many parts of the world 
              simple agricultural societies were transformed into more complex  entities
              which incorporated large numbers of people and exhibited  clear cut social
              stratification. In the earlier stages such  entities are termed "chiefdoms" and
              archaeologists wish to  understand the processes which led to their rise. The
              Alto  Magdalena region is unusual in this regard because it appears  that
              status differentiation, when it emerged, was not accompanied  by great
              variations in individual wealth. Usually the opposite is  true. Through his
              expansion in areal coverage Dr. Drennan and his  colleagues wish to understand
              the process in more detail.    This research is important for several reasons.
              It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new
              light  on the emergence of complex societies and assist in the training  of
              graduate students.
