Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Equipment for Pore Structure Characterization of
               Solids in Chemical Reaction Engineering Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9412018

Award Number: 9412018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34777              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Varma avarma@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Varma - 9412018    This equipment grant is to provide funds for the
              purchase of an automated system for the characterization of the internal
              structure of solid materials involved in a wide variety of chemical reactions. 
              These materials include adsorbents, catalysts and catalyst supports, and
              advanced materials such as ceramic oxides and nitrides, and intermetallic
              compounds.  The equipment is an Autosorb-1 unit, a volumetric gas sorption
              measurement system with krypton and micropore options (Kr/MP), and required
              accessories consisting primarily of a Macintosh computer and printer.  The unit
              is manufactured by Quantachrome Corporation and features one analysis station
              and two degassing stations.  Any non-corrosive gas can be used as the
              adsorbate, nitrogen being a typical choice.  The use of krypton, rather than
              nitrogen, for samples having low surface area, and the characterization of
              microporous samples, require a turbomolecular pump which is available as part
              of the Kr/MP accessory.    The Principal Investigator is conducting research in
              catalysis and reaction engineering, synthesis of advanced materials, and
              pollution abatement.  Research projects in each of these areas involve studies
              of samples with different porous and particulate microstructures.  The pore
              structure is one important characteristic in determining the performance of
              materials, and therefore it is essential to characterize this property, in some
              cases for a large number of samples.  In several of the projects, the surface
              area is one of the few parameters which can be measured in order to quantify
              the effect of system variables.  In certain cases, measuments of surface area
              and pore size distribution are required in order to monitor the evolution of
              the pore structure with increasing extent of reaction.  These measurements are
              also important in confirming model hypotheses regarding alternative reaction
              pathways, e.g., during materials synthesis, or during catalytic reactions.  The
              equipment has been chosen specif ically to accommodate the wide range of
              materials being studied in the projects.
