Title       : Science and Religion: A Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9412522

Award Number: 9412522
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Just before World War II, Robert Merton wrote in his doctoral  thesis that the
              scientific revolution in England was accepted  because of the rise of the
              Puritan ethic.  Merton noted that  Puritanism itself was neither a sufficient
              nor a strictly necessary  condition for the rise of the new science since
              "other functionally  equivalent ideological movements could have served to
              provide the  emerging science with widely acknowledged claims to legitimacy."  
              This "Merton thesis" has been widely debated since he first  presented it.  By
              implication, the thesis argues that the  acceptance of the new science was
              dependant upon the rise of  protestantism.  This thesis gains weight in light
              of the  condemnation of Galileo after he published his Dialogue between the 
              Two Chief World Systems.  A number of scholars have examined the  acceptance of
              the new science among Protestants.  Few have examined  its acceptance among
              Catholics.    Dr. Harris, under this grant, is completing a study of another 
              group which was, he argues, a "functionally equivalent ideological  movement"
              to Puritanism.  This group was the Society of Jesus, i.e.  the Jesuits of the
              Catholic Church.  He has found remarkable  parallels between teachings and
              research by Jesuit and Protestant  scientists during the period of the triumph
              of the new science.   These results lead to several questions:  why and how
              were these  developments in the Catholic Church ignored?  Was the religious 
              situation during the Scientific Revolution much more complex than  the Merton
              thesis allows?  Rather than focusing on the theological  or ecclesiastical
              differences that distinguish and separate  Protestant from Catholic, should we
              not look to the deep  institutional parallels and common methods that religious
              leaders  of various movements used in their struggle to instill a "Christian 
              way of life" in their followers?  By answering these questions,  this study
              promises to make significant new contributions to our  understanding of the
              historical relationshi p of science and  religion.
