Title       : The Molecularization of Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9412338

Award Number: 9412338
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65611              (Estimated)
Investigator: C K. Waters ckwaters@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9123,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Developments in genetics since World War II are leading us to  revise our
              understanding of the processes of scientific change.   These developments
              include the "molecularization" of genetics;  i.e., the apparent reformulation
              of classical genetics in terms of  DNA and the subsequent advances in our
              explanatory and  investigative practices.  Dr. Waters is examining the new kind
              of  changes taking place in genetics, its underlying strategy, and how  this
              new strategy works  to bring about progressive developments in  explanatory and
              investigative practices in science.    The relationship between classical
              Mendelian genetics and molecular  biology is viewed by philosophers of science
              as a paradigm of non-  reduction, i.e. , as an example of scientific progress
              where the  molecular-level account answers new questions, but does not 
              reformulate the classical theory or provide better answers to the  previously
              answered questions.  The genetics example plays a  prominent role in debates
              about the prospects of reduction in other  sciences, the nature of explanation,
              and the metaphysical  organization of the world.  The appearance of the
              Mendelian example  alongside the usual ones in physics marks a turning point.  
              Philosophers now look to biology for insights into the nature of  scientific
              knowledge.  Dr. Waters, however, believes these current  views are mistaken and
              have prevented a proper understanding of the  changes that have taken place in
              genetics.    In this study, Dr. Waters is examining in parallel the central 
              concepts, explanatory models and investigative practices of both  classical
              genetics and molecular biology.  He hopes to show how  molecular biology has
              deepened the understanding of heredity first  provided by classical genetics
              and then how theoretical connections  between classical genetics and molecular
              biology have led to a  fruitful interplay between investigative practices of
              genetics,  molecular biology, and biochemistry.  From this, he draws a new 
              model of antireductionism fo r all of the Science and Technology  Studies
              disciplines.
