Title       : Photoproduction of Vector Mesons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9874653

Award Number: 9874653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Cole cole@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9874653
Cole
The research component of this five-year Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) Program Award will yield insights into the underlying
              symmetry of the quark degrees of freedom in the nucleon, the nature of the
              parity exchange between the incident photon and target nucleon, and will touch
              upon the strangeness content of the nucleon, as well as other OZI-evading
              processes.  With his collaborators, the Principal Investigator (PI) will
              measure the photoproduction of vector mesons by using a beam of
              linearly-polarized photons from both the CEBAF Large Acceptance Spectrometer
              (CLAS) in Hall B of Jefferson Lab and the GRAAL detector at the European
              Synchrotron Radiation Facility.  The PI is a cospokesperson on three approved
              experiments, E94-109, E98-109, and E99-013, which will take place in Hall B of
              Jefferson Lab.  With the high-quality beam of linearly-polarized photons
              provided, and the 4-pi detectors at these two facilities, we shall increase the
              world's data by a factor of approximately three orders of magnitude.  This rich
              pool of data will allow us to accurately measure the evolution of the angular
              distributions of the daughter spin-0 mesons resulting from the decay of the
              parent vector mesons as functions of c.m. energy, and polar and azimuthal
              scattering angles with unprecented high precision by extracting the spin
              density matrix elements in a model-independent way.  At his home institution,
              the PI has been actively engaged in developing the science component to an
              algebra-based pre-engineering science course in the effort to elevate awareness
              of physics and chemistry with the objective of increasing the retention rate of
              entering students.  The PI is promoting physics within his department in the
              capacity of the faculty advisor to the Society of Physics Students (SPS). 
              Within the wider context of the El Paso community, he is promoting physics by
              combining the SPS and the Physics Circus; the PI and several undergraduate
              students carry out a set of exciting and interactive physics demonstrations for
              audiences at UTEP and at area schools.  In that El Paso is the gateway to Latin
              America, and that the student population of the primarily undergraduate
              University of Texas at El Paso is 66% Hispanic, establishing a high-caliber
              research program in experimental nuclear physics will provide unique research
              opportunities for Hispanic students, who traditionally have been
              underrepresented in physics.  The funding for this CAREER grant is a crucial
              step towards establishing and carrying out a high-caliber medium-energy nuclear
              physics program at the University of Texas at El Paso.  Furthermore, this
              research program will provide a meaningful and state-of-the-art undergraduate
              and master's student research experience in keeping with the mission of the NSF
              Model Institutions 
for Excellence agenda.


