Title       : Regulation and Function of Low Molecular Weight Tropomyosins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a9874492

Award Number: 9874492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559727             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Helfman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this work is to understand the role of tropomyosin (TM) isoform
              diversity in actin filament organization and function. In nonmuscle cells,
              actin filaments play important roles in cell movement, membrane ruffling,
              filopodium formation, cell division, intracellular transport, regulation of
              cell shape, adhesion and adhesion-mediated signaling. TMs are a family of
              actin-binding proteins that bind to both grooves of filamentous actin. Although
              they are expressed in all eukaryotic cells, different forms are characteristic
              of specific cell types. In fibroblasts TMs exist as high molecular weight
              isoforms (HMW) containing 284 acids (TM-1, TM-2 and TM-3) or low molecular
              weight isoforms (LMW), containing 248 acids (TM-4, TM-5(NM-1), TM-5a, and
              TM-5b). The multiple TMs found in fibroblasts are an integral part of the
              microfilament system, although how the different isoforms contribute to actin
              filament assembly and function is poorly understood.

In fibroblasts, HMW TMs
              exist as homodimers whereas LMW TMs can exist as heterodimers. How these
              coiled-coil interactions affect the interaction of TMs with actin filaments and
              their subsequent cellular function will be determined. Using purified
              components, fundamental properties of isoform function will be studied, such as
              how the coiled-coil structure (homodimers versus heterodimers) affects their
              affinity for F-actin and cooperativity with other TMs. In addition, how the
              binding of TMs to F-actin is affected by caldesmon will be studied. These
              studies will also provide the foundation for further experiments to determine
              how the composition of TMs along actin filaments affect the function of myosin
              I and myosin II.

The dynamic localization of each isoform in living
              fibroblasts will be analyzed with GFP-TM fusion proteins, to determine if
              specific TMs bind to spatially distinct subsets of actin filaments including
              the contractile ring, filopodia, lamellipodia, and stress fibers.

The
              involvement of specific TMs in motile processes will be studied by disrupting
              their function by expression of mutant TM and introduction of inhibitory
              antisense oligodeoxynucleotides or RNAs. These experiments will determine
              whether a mutation or decrease in a specific isoform will lead to changes in
              cell function, such as loss of microfilament bundles and filopodia or defects
              in cytokinesis.

Collectively, these studies will provide important new
              insights into how the association of specific TM isoforms contribute to the
              assembly and regulation of distinct actin filament structures, and will provide
              the foundation for future studies. Furthermore, these studies will provide
              mechanistic insights into how specific TMs associate with different actin
              assemblies including stress fibers, contractile ring and filopodia.


