Title       : Mississippi EPSCoR Infrastructure Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9874669

Award Number: 9874669
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4995482            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Altenkirch altenkirch@research.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth J. Hawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mississippi EPSCoR Program is a major initiative of the Mississippi Research
              Consortium (MRC). The Mississippi Research Consortium is a coalition of the
              state's four research institutions -Jackson State University, Mississippi State
              University, The University of Mississippi, and The University of Southern
              Mississippi - whose chief research officers make up the Board.  The four EPSCoR
              infrastructure improvement goals are:  (1) to develop research groups in Gene
              Regulation, Electrically Conducting Materials, Neuro-Endocrine-Immune
              Interactions, and Computational Chemistry into self-supporting nationally
              competitive units; (2) to strengthen university research capability in chemical
              sciences; material sciences; biological sciences; social, behavioral, and
              economic sciences; and computational sciences, including high-capacity
              networking; (3) to strengthen program development at the research institutions
              and the medical center through campus-based focused activities; and (4) to
              increase the role of university faculty in technology transfer/economic
              development activities.  The four research groups: will build laboratories and
              programs around their research foci to enable them to pursue funding to replace
              EPSCoR funds.  Their plans include graduate and undergraduate program
              development, curriculum development/enhancement, establishment of partnerships,
              purchase of equipment, faculty recruitment, and development of post-doctoral
              strength.  The EPSCoR Committee will continue internal program monitoring and
              evaluation using established performance measures. 

 
