Title       : Career: Radio Resource Management for Wireless Data Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9874976

Award Number: 9874976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayan Mandayam narayan@winlab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The cellular telephone success story has prompted the wireless communications
              community to turn its attention to other information services, many of them in
              the category of "wireless data" communica5ions.  One lesson of cellular
              telephone network operation is that effective radio resource management (power
              control, channel assignment and handoffs) is essential to promote the quality
              and efficiency of a system.  Radio resource management will be equally, if not
              more, critical in systems that include high-speed data signals.  This research
              focuses on developing a new framework for radio resource management in wireless
              data networks.  The new approach considered here relies on using microeconomic
              theories that take into account notions utility (level of satisfaction of a
              user) and pricing (cost charged to a user) in developing distributed radio
              resource management algorithms for wireless data services.  This research will
              make fundamental contributions that impact knowledge and technology in the
              currently evolving third generation of wireless systems.  

A model for the
              utility of a data user is developed that is based on the number of useful bits
              that a wireless terminal can transfer over the lifetime of its battery.  Based
              on such a model for the utility wireless data user derives from using the
              system, distributed power control algorithms that maximize utility are
              considered.  Formulating these algorithms as noncooperative games, conditions
              for feasibility of such power control as well as existence and uniqueness of
              the Nash equilibrium achieved by the non-cooperative game are investigated. 
              The resulting equilibria are shown to be Pareto inefficient, thereby motivating
              the introduction of pricing to achieve Pareto improvements in efficiency.  The
              goals of this research are to investigate utility and pricing functions that
              will drive distributed resource management schemes (optimization algorithms) to
              Pareto efficient operating points.  Specific issues to be considered include
              noncooperative games based on power and rate optimization, utility maximization
              under delay constraints, information theoretic notions of utility and
              corresponding games, and dynamic pricing under energy-constrained transmission.
               The educational objectives of the investigator include: (i) a
              multidisciplinary course in wireless communications with graduate students from
              electrical engineering, computer science and mass communications; (ii) a
              wireless communications technology course discussing theoretical aspects of
              wireless and its relations to practical standards; (iii) special undergraduate
              research initiatives focusing on the wireless internet and applications.

