Title       : Signal Transduction in Root Gravitropism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9874445

Award Number: 9874445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Gilroy sxg12@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gravity is a fundamental signal that regulates plant growth and form. Despite
              its importance to plant success, the cellular and molecular events whereby
              higher plants sense and respond to the gravity signal are essentially unknown.
              Roots offer an almost unique advantage for studying these events in that
              sensing and response occur in well defined, spatially distinct regions. It is
              thought that in the root gravity is perceived in the columella cells of the
              root cap. These cells then generate a signal that is translocated to the growth
              zone. This signal then elicits asymmetrical growth through a mechanism that may
              involve redistributions of auxin, H+ and Ca2+. The events in the columella
              cells that lead to gravity perception remain poorly understood. In a widely
              accepted model for the initial process of gravity sensing (the starch statolith
              hypothesis), the settling of amyloplasts in the columella cells initiates the
              signaling systems that lead to gravity perception. However, the molecular
              components of the gravity perception machinery in the cap cells remain
              essentially unknown. This signaling system must translate sedimentation of
              statoliths to a cellular signal encoding the direction of gravity. Changes in
              cytoplasmic pH and columella cell wall Ca2+ and pH have been shown to occur
              rapidly after gravistimulation of the root of Arabidopsis thaliana. This rapid
              induction of ion fluxes suggests activation of ion transporters that are
              closely associated with the initial gravity sensing events. Inhibition of these
              changes in Ca2+ or pH also inhibits the graviresponse of the root, suggesting
              they are required for the gravitropic signaling processes of the root cap to
              proceed. The goal of this research is therefore to define how these ion fluxes
              are activated in the gravity sensing cells of the root cap using Arabidopsis
              thaliana as a model system. Understanding how gravity leads to the activation
              of the ion transporters responsible for these fluxes should provide insight
              into some of the initial molecular changes that encode the gravity signal in
              the columella cells of the root cap.
Several approaches to this problem will
              be investigated:
(1) H+, Ca2+ and K+ fluxes will be monitored in the
              cytoplasm, cell walls and medium around columella cells in the intact
              gravistimulated root cap. These ionic changes will be monitored in living,
              graviresponding roots using a range of novel, fluorescent, ion imaging
              probes.
(2) The activities of cytoplasmic regulators of signaling or ion
              transport activities, such as second messengers and the actin and tubulin
              cytoskeleton, will be altered by application of inhibitors and activators to
              the columella cells. The effect of these factors on inhibiting or mimicking the
              gravitational regulation of H+ and Ca2+ fluxes will then be assessed.
(3) As
              there is extensive evidence for a role of calmodulin in ion transporter
              regulation as well as in the graviresponse, calmodulin activity will be
              manipulated and its effect on the gravistimulated ion fluxes monitored. In
              addition, a novel green fluorescent protein-based indicator of calmodulin
              activity will be used to image potential gravity-induced calmodulin activation
              domains within the columella cell cytoplasm.
(4) In order to test the starch
              statolith model of gravity perception, laser tweezers will be used to displace
              amyloplasts in the columella cells in non-gravity stimulated roots.
              Gravity-like effects on the regulation of H+ and Ca2+ fluxes will then be
              assessed. Induction of a gravity-like activation of columella cell ion
              transport by amyloplast displacement would strongly support the starch
              statolith model for gravity perception in the Arabidopsis root cap.
Results
              from this research will extend the understanding of the gravity sensing
              machinery used by plants. In particular, these investigations will help
              identify molecular candidates for the initial elements of the plant gravity
              sensing system of the root.

