Title       : Structure and Function of Vitamin b6 Containing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9874458

Award Number: 9874458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Petsko petsko@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar Ringe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall aim of this project is to use the techniques of structural and
              molecular biology to understand how an enzyme active site can control the
              chemistry of a bound cofactor, specifically, pyridoxal phosphate (PLP; vitamin
              b6).  Many enzymes use organic cofactors as partners to assist them in
              catalyzing chemical reactions;  the dietary requirement for vitamins comes
              about because these cofactors are derived from vitamins and are essential for
              the reactions of the enzymes that use them.  PLP is an extraordinarily
              versatile cofactor: in solution it produces several very different products
              when it reacts with other molecules.  However, when PLP is bound in the active
              site of an enzyme its chemistry is directed along one path and only one product
              is produced.  Somehow, the unique environment provided by the enzyme is able to
              control the chemistry of PLP.  If we could understand how this control is
              exerted, we would be closer to one of the central aims  in all studies of
              catalysis: how to get the right product from a reaction.  
We have selected
              several PLP utilizing enzymes for study.  They react with the same or very
              similar substrates, but produce completely different products in each case.  To
              understand the mechanisms by which this occurs, we will determine the
              three-dimensional structures of these enzymes by high resolution x-ray
              diffraction.  Then we will determine structures for complexes of these enzymes
              with substrate analogs.  From these studies we will formulate hypotheses for
              the roles of protein residues in the active site that interact with cofactor
              (PLP) or substrates.  These hypotheses can be tested by using the techniques of
              molecular biology to change these residues into others; the properties of the
              mutant proteins produced in this way will help us refine our hypotheses. 
              Finally, we hope to be able to change one type of PLP enzyme into another,
              thereby showing that we really have learned the rules for the control of
              cofactor chemistry.


