Title       : Control of mRNA Translation During Spermatogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9874491

Award Number: 9874491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Kleene kenneth.kleene@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kleene

Meiotic and haploid spermatogenic cells in mammals provide an
              extraordinary example of translational regulation, which is characterized by a
              widespread block to translation initiation of virtually all mRNAs, and
              mRNA-specific changes in the rate of translation during development. Little is
              known about the cis-acting sequences that regulate the timing of mRNA
              translation in vivo. This research focuses on the mechanisms that regulate
              translation of the mRNA encoding the sperm mitochondria-associated
              cysteine-rich protein (SMCP), a cysteine- and proline-rich protein in the
              keratinous outer mitochondrial membranes of spermatozoa. The Smcp mRNA is one
              of a very small number of mRNAs that have been rigorously demonstrated to
              undergo developmental changes in translation rate. The expression of fusions
              between the 5' and 3' non-translated regions of the Smcp mRNA and the green
              fluorescent protein reporter gene will be studied in transgenic mice to
              determine whether the cis-acting sequences that regulate the timing of Smcp
              mRNA translation are located in the 5' and/or 3' non-translated regions.
              Another series of experiments will utilize RNA mobility shift assays to
              identify proteins that bind to specific sequences in the 3' and 5'
              non-translated region of the Smcp mRNA. A third objective will use non-isotopic
              in situ hybridization to resolve a controversy concerning whether two mRNAs
              that are translationally repressed in early haploid cells, the transition
              protein 1 and Smcp mRNAs, are strongly localized in the cytoplasm. 

The
              sequence of bases in messenger RNAs is decoded into amino acid sequence in
              proteins by a process known as translation. The vast majority of messenger RNAs
              in mammalian cells are translated efficiently to make proteins. In contrast,
              developing sperm cells in the testes of mammals are unusual, because a large
              but variable portion of virtually all messenger RNA species is inactive in
              directing protein synthesis. The mechanisms that control the efficiency of
              translation of specific messenger RNAs in developing sperm cells are poorly
              understood. The goal of this research is to investigate the hypothesis that
              proteins that bind to specific sequences of bases in messenger RNAs prevent
              their translation in developing sperm cells. This research is also relevant to
              understanding the mechanisms that regulate the synthesis of proteins during
              embryonic development and the rapid responses of cells to their environment. 

