Title       : Analysis of the Expansin Superfamily in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9874432

Award Number: 9874432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Cosgrove fsl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1132,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Expansins are plant cell wall-loosening proteins with the unique ability to
              catalyze the relaxation and extension of plant cell walls in a pH-dependent
              manner.  These proteins were originally discovered in the course of a
              biochemical dissection of the mechanism of wall growth (extension) in cucumber
              hypocotyl walls.  In the interim, expansins have been identified in many plant
              species and are believed to function in cell enlargement and perhaps in other
              processes where cell wall loosening may be important, e. g. cell separation and
              cell wall dissolution.  Work published last year identified a second family of
              expansins with different substrate specificity and our analysis of data from
              the Arabidopsis genome project indicates that expansins comprise a large
              multigene superfamily.  This proposal outlines an ambitious research plan aimed
              at two broad questions: (A) what is the molecular mechanism by which expansins
              increase wall extensibility, and (B) what are the specific developmental
              functions of the individual members of this superfamily of genes.  To answer
              question (A), we will make use of recombinant expansins expressed in the
              Baculovirus/insect cell culture system.  These will be used in biochemical
              assays designed to identify the specific substrate that expansins work on and
              the specific biochemical nature of their wall loosening action. Site-directed
              mutagensis will be used to modify specific amino acid residues hypothesized to
              form the catalytic site of the protein.  The PI will also use epitope tagging
              to examine the mobility of expansins within the wall - potentially an important
              issue for cell-specific control of cell enlargement and for the interpretation
              of experiments requiring extraction of expansins to assay their activity.   To
              answer question (B),  the PI  will take advantage of the wealth of sequence
              information and other tools generated from the Arabidopsis genome project.  By
              a combination of methods we plan to identify expression patterns for all the
              members of the expansin superfamily and to identify and characterize expansin
              null mutants from the growing collection of T-DNA and transposon insertional
              mutants.  Experiments to test for regulation of specific expansins by hormones,
              light and other growth stimuli are also outlined.  These experiments should
              shed light on the involvement of expansins in the control of plant cell wall
              rheology, growth and other morphogenetic processes.
