Title       : Multilevel Social Organization in Plains Zebra: from Mating Systems to Social
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9874523

Award Number: 9874523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel I. Rubenstein dir@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program

Non-technical Abstract



Title:  	Multilevel
              social organization in plains zebra: from mating systems to social
              systems

PI: 		Daniel  I. Rubenstein

Proposal #: 	9874523 

The core of
              many animal societies is the mating system, which is built upon the amicable
              and aggressive relationships that develop between reproductive males and
              females.  But reproductive units are themselves often organized into larger
              social groups thus creating layers in animal societies.  Dr. Rubenstein will
              examine these issues in the multilevel society of plains zebras (Equus
              burchelli), a grazing mammal of the East African savanna ecosystem. The mating
              system of plains zebras consists of year-round harems in which females and
              their young offspring live with one dominant male.  These reproductive groups
              often associate with other similar groups or with subadult males.   Therefore,
              the plains zebra is an ideal species to examine the structure and function of
              societies with multiple levels of organization.  Dr. Rubenstein will determine
              why higher level associations form and persist; and he will determine how they
              act as coordinated units.  Long-term movements and associations of individually
              recognizable zebras will be monitored in relation to underlying variation in
              environmental factors such as vegetation quality and predator risk. Leadership
              and following decisions of individuals within core groups, and resolution of
              conflicts among individuals with differing interests will elucidate the
              trade-offs involved in this social system.

The overall result of the study
              will be a better understanding of the dynamics of complex societies that are
              often hierarchically structured--but much less visibly than those of zebras
              where membership in a core group restricts total freedom of movement within a
              society at large.  In addition to elucidating these general 'rules' of social
              organization data on zebra abundances, distributions and patterns of
              recruitment in relation to ecology and social organization will have important
              applications for managing wildlife in sustainable ways. 



