Title       : Calcium-Independent Steps in Guard Cell Regulation by Abscisic Acid: The Kinase
               Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9874438

Award Number: 9874438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Assmann sma3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The epidermes of aerial plant organs contain microscopic pores called stomata
              through which gas exchange with the environment occurs.  Stomatal apertures are
              regulated by pairs of guard cells that border and define the stomatal pores. 
              Guard cells regulate stomatal apertures by osmotic swelling and shrinking,
              driven in large part by uptake or loss of potassium ions and anions.  The plant
              hormone abscisic acid (ABA) inhibits stomatal opening and promotes closure when
              plants experience drought or are otherwise stressed.  ABA effects on guard-cell
              ion-transport pathways include inhibition of potassium uptake channels and
              activation of channels mediating potassium and anion efflux.  One pathway of
              ABA action appears to utilize elevation of cytosolic calcium levels as a
              signaling step, and experimental elevation of cytosolic calcium concentration
              can mimic ABA inhibition of potassium uptake channels and activation of anion
              channels.  However, other data point to calcium independent modes of ABA action
              as well, which forms the focus of this research.  Utilizing simultaneous
              whole-cell patch clamp analysis of potassium currents and confocal ratiometric
              cytosolic calcium imaging with Indo-1 dye under conditions where ABA does not
              evoke an increase in cytosolic calcium levels, it has been observed that ABA
              still inhibits the potassium uptake channels.  Electrophysiological and imaging
              experiments are designed to test whether alterations in cytosolic pH play a
              signaling role in this pathway, and whether this pathway is linked to an
              intracellular ABA receptor.  In addition, the role of
              phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in the pathway will be evaluated, because of 
              evidence recently obtained for an ABA-activated, calcium independent kinase
              (ABA-activated protein kinase; AAPK) in guard cells of Vicia faba.  This
              serine/threonine kinase is activated within one minute by physiological levels
              of ABA, and is detected in guard cells, but not epidermal or mesophyll cells. 
              Utilizing probes based on AAPK peptide sequence recently obtained, AAPK cDNA
              and genomic clones will be identified in Vicia faba and Arabidopsis thaliana.
              Immunolocalization will be utilized to pinpoint the subcellular localization of
              AAPK.  T-DNA insertion lines will be evaluated for "knockouts" in AAPK; in
              addition, transgenic Arabidopsis plants over- or under-expressing AAPK will be
              produced.  These plants will be evaluated under a battery of different growth
              conditions for phenotype effects of altered AAPK levels.  In addition, guard
              cells from these plants will be subjected to a detailed patch clamp analysis to
              determine whether ABA regulation of channel activity is altered.
  Guard cells
              are a vital control point in the regulation of photosynthetic carbon dioxide
              uptake and transpirational water loss, and, accordingly, represent potential
              targets for biotechnological manipulations to alter plant water use efficiency.
               It has been known for some time that alteration of other genes in the
              ABA-response pathways of guard cells, namely ABI1 and ABI2 in Arabidopsis
              (which encodes phosphatases), results in wilty plants, but these genes are also
              involved in developmental pathways in other cell types.  The results of this
              research should allow the specific manipulation of a guard-cell ABA-response
              gene (namely AAPK), with potentially useful effects on plant function.  For
              example, one could hypothesize that overexpression of AAPK would result in more
              drought-tolerant plants.  Such hypotheses are testable.

