Title       : CAREER: Reducing Drought Hazards by Improving Drought Plans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9874391

Award Number: 9874391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Steinemann anne.steinemann@arch.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This career project deals with drought, one of the most complex and costly of
              all natural disasters.  However, recent research found that drought plans often
              suffer from deficiencies that limit their value in actual droughts.  Drought
              plans may fail to incorporate valuable expertise and experience from previous
              droughts.  In addition, agencies lack readily accessible methods to test and
              improve their plans.  Because agencies' plans may be inadequate, metropolitan
              regions may unwittingly be susceptible to disasters.

This research project
              addresses two key needs for development of drought plans:  to improve drought
              plans before a drought occurs, and to tap existing expertise on drought water
              management.  The research will generate new knowledge and methods for the
              development and evaluation of drought plans, using a knowledge-based
              engineering approach.  This approach applies artificial intelligence techniques
              to acquire, formalize, and disseminate expert heuristics within an integrated
              decision-support system.

The research objectives are to: (1) investigate the
              factors that reduce drought hazards; (2) design a framework for developing and
              evaluating drought contingency plans, using knowledge-based engineering
              methods; (3) test drought plans, using expert heuristics and drought scenarios;
              and (4) develop an integrated knowledge-based system to help agencies prepare
              and improve their drought plans.  

This integrated CAREER plan will also
              address deficiencies in water resources education.

The educational
              objectives are to: (1) provide students experience with real-world water
              resources problems in which they work directly with agencies and stakeholders;
              (2) develop and implement problem-based learning exercises that enable students
              to develop reasoning skills for active, lifelong learning; (3) use information
              technologies, including knowledge-based systems, in educational and
              professional settings; and (4) provide students opportunities to contribute
              both to the advancement of research and to the solution of problems in their
              community.  An interdisciplinary degree program will be developed to establish
              internships with industries and agencies, and engage students in research and
              K-12 outreach programs that link scientists and educators from over 5,000
              schools in 65 countries.  This educational plan will help to meet the growing
              need for engineers and water resources professionals who can work and
              communicate effectively when faced with complex, multidisciplinary problems
              that affect both the public and private sectors.

