Title       : The Plant Exosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a9874580

Award Number: 9874580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitry A. Belostotsky dab@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Belostotsky

Eukaryotic 3'->5' exonucleolytic activities are essential for
              ribosomal RNA and snoRNA maturation, mRNA turnover, and other RNA processing
              events. The multiple 3'->5' exonucleases in eukaryotes exist as a large
              complex, termed the exosome. Enzymatic activities responsible for various RNA
              processing events in plant cells remain virtually unknown. This proposal seeks
              to provide insights into properties and substrates of the exosome in
              Arabidopsis thaliana. The investigator has  cloned and characterized AtRRP41,
              an Arabidopsis thaliana homologue of an essential subunit of the yeast exosome.
              Purified recombinant AtRRP41 protein exhibits a highly processive 3'->5'
              exonucleolytic activity in vitro towards an oligo(A) substrate or
              polyadenylated mRNA. Exonucleolytic activity of the AtRRP41 protein is strongly
              inhibited by binding of the poly(A) binding protein to the poly(A) tail of the
              mRNA substrate. AtRRP41 complements the yeast rrp41/ski6 null mutation.
              Intriguingly, we find that the AtRRP41 is a hydrolytic exonuclease, whereas its
              yeast homologue is a phosphorolytic enzyme. These results suggest that it is
              the role of AtRRP41 in exosome assembly, rather than its enzymatic properties
              as an uncomplexed protein, that has been conserved over more than a billion
              years of evolutionary time and is responsible for rescuing the lethality of the
              yeast rrp41/ski6 null mutation. Consistent with these findings is the fact that
              AtRRP41 is predominantly found in the cell in a large complex. The long term
              goal of this project is to elucidate the composition, protein-protein
              interactions, substrates, regulation and ultimately all cellular functions of
              the exosome in plants. Specific aims of the project are: 1) to identify the
              components of the Arabidopsis exosome; 2) to begin dissecting protein-protein
              interactions of the Arabidopsis exosome subunits; and 3) to identify some of
              the RNA substrates processed by the Arabidopsis exosome.

This study of the
              Arabidopsis (thale cress) exosome complex of ribonucleases (enzymes that
              degrade RNA) is aimed towards a better understanding of plant gene expression
              at the RNA level, and as such will have broad relevance, ultimately adding to
              the knowledge base required to optimize the performance of crop plants. 

