Title       : CAREER: Seismic Behavior and Design of Non-Emulative Precast Concrete Buildings
               with Supplemental Passive Energy Dissipation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9874872

Award Number: 9874872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yahya C. Kurama ykurama@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The broad objective of the research program is to investigate the use of
              supplemental passive energy dissipation in precast concrete wall and frame
              building structures.  The greatest disadvantage of precast concrete structures
              in seismic regions is an increase in lateral displacements as a result of small
              inelastic energy dissipation.  It is now possible to reduce these displacements
              by using supplemental passive energy dissipation.  

This research will
              conduct a fundamental, integrated analytical and experimental investigation on
              the use of supplemental passive energy dissipation in steel and monolithic
              cast-in-place concrete structures and assessment of these systems.

This
              project will ultimately develop seismic design and analysis guidelines and
              recommendations for precast concrete structures with supplemental passive
              energy dissipation.  

The broad objective of the education program is to
              provide a more effective environment for undergraduate and graduate level
              education in concrete structures and earthquake engineering by developing
              dynamic, interactive "virtual laboratory" modules using the World Wide Web
              (WWW).  These modules will be developed using recent advancements in the WWW,
              such as Java applets, to demonstrate fundamental information on the seismic
              behavior and design of concrete sections, members, and structures.  The modules
              will allow the students to configure the system parameters (such as geometry,
              reinforcement, concrete confinement, material properties, loading, etc.) and
              observe the effects of these changes on behavior.  These capabilities will
              allow the students to interactively configure and conduct their own examples, "
              what if" studies, and experiments on the web.  The proposed WWW modules will
              include on-line help as well as theoretical background on the subject
              matter.

The modules will be used by three courses taught by the PI and will
              be available for use by other education institutions and practicing engineers
              throughout the world, through the internet, and will be conducted in
              collaboration with professional bodies and trade association such as the
              Portland Cement Association (PCA) and the Precast/Prestressed Concrete
              Institute (PCI).

