Title       : EPSCoR - Kentucky S&T Infrastructure Enhancement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9874764

Award Number: 9874764
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W.D. Connolly connolly@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kentucky EPSCoR will enhance the academic science and technology (S&T)
              infrastructure in:  engineering, molecular biology, and information networking.
               The project will:  create research positions at the University of Kentucky and
              the University of Louisville and provide the equipment and a state-of-the-art
              environment for conducting networking research in the new multi-sector Center
              for Advanced Networking at the University of Kentucky.  In the area of
              nanoscale technology EPSCoR will provide a state-of-the-art Transmission
              Electron Microscope (TEM) facility at the University of Kentucky for
              characterizing the properties of materials and devices.  This facility will be
              part of the materials characterization facility in the Advanced Science and
              Technology Commercialization Center (ASTeCC).  At the University of Louisville
              EPSCoR will also create a new research position in electronics and will
              complete a previously initiated plan to establish a nationally competitive
              center for molecular neurobiology.  The overall emphasis of the Kentucky EPSCoR
              project will be on establishing infrastructure that is sustainable, such as new
              research positions and facilities, which are a permanent part of each
              university's long-term plans.  In addition, EPSCoR will augment the human
              resources programs of the state through a multi-aspect program for introducing
              undergraduates to research and retaining them in a scientific career including
              a state-wide fellowship program for minorities and students from
              underrepresented groups and an Infrastructure Enhancement Program to improve
              the quality of science and engineering education in the states predominantly
              undergraduate institutions. The Kentucky EPSCoR will be coordinated with the
              state Science & Technology plan through the Kentucky Science and Technology
              Council, Inc. (KSTC).

 
