Title       : Ontogeny and Plasticity of Crustacean Cardiac Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a9874534

Award Number: 9874534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl L. Reiber reiber@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The cardiovascular system is the first to become functional in embryos and is
              followed by a series of interdependent interactions that result in a functional
              adult.  As a result of the cardiovascular systems' importance in oxygen and
              carbon dioxide transport, a change in its normal development could have a
              critical impact on adult function.  The physiology of embryonic cardiovascular
              systems is quite different from those of adults because functions change as the
              embryo matures.  Despite the critical role the cardiovascular system plays in
              embryonic function, little is know about how the environment can effect its
              developmental pattern.  Crustaceans present a valuable taxonomic group useful
              for this research because of their diverse array of developmental patterns and
              morphological plasticity.  The objectives of this research by Dr. Reiber are
              three fold: First, measurements of cardiac functions during development (rates,
              pressures and flows) in embryonic and larval crayfish and shrimp will be made
              to establish a foundation on which further work can be initiated.  Second, the
              mechanisms of cardiac regulation during development will be determined.  And
              lastly, once basic developmental patterns of cardiac regulation have been
              determined, the changes in cardiac physiology associated with environmental
              stress will be investigated by exposing embryos of defined developmental stages
              to modified conditions (water oxygen and temperature).  This research will make
              significant contributions toward understanding both the fundamental patterns of
              cardiac development and the impact of early cardiac function has on
              developmental outcomes.
