Title       : Genetics of Fungal Secondary Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9874646

Award Number: 9874646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy P. Keller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Keller
MCB 9874646

A complex and fascinating aspect of fungal development is
              the production of natural products, or secondary metabolites. These compounds -
              thought to provide fitness attributes to the producing organism - have
              tremendous importance to man in that they display a broad range of useful
              antibiotic and immunosuppressant activities as well as less desirable phyto-
              and mycotoxic activities. Many refined and informative studies have elucidated
              the unique biochemistry leading to natural product formation in fungi but,
              until recently, the molecular genetics of fungal secondary metabolism has
              lagged behind the biochemistry. In the last few years, however, significant
              progress has been made in cloning and characterizing the metabolic genes of
              several fungal natural products such as the mycotoxins sterigrnatocystin and
              ariatom and the antibiotic penicillin. Examination of the results of these
              studies have shown that secondary metabolism is regulated in a growth dependent
              manner. This latter characteristic is of extreme importance as it genetically
              validates the physiological and biochemical studies which have correlated
              morphological differentiation- typically sporulation - to alterations in
              secondary metabolism in the fungi. This validation was achieved by using
              Aspergillus nidulans to elucidate intmcellular signals that regulate several
              differentiation processes in the fungus. The signals, members of a
              heterotrimeric G protein signaling pathway, are required for sporulation and
              sterigrnatocystin biosynthesis in A. nidulans. Furthermore, the same
              heterotrimeric G protein signaling pathway is required for A. parasit~'cus
              sporulation and ariatoxin production. This provides evidence for the
              mainte/uance of conserved genetic mechanisms governing fungal differentiation
              processes.                     -

The possibility of conserved regulatory
              signals for fungal development is a very exciting prospect that will be
              addressed in this project. The long term goals of this research are to
              determine if any intracellular molecules function as global regulators of
              fungal secondary metabolism. Studies will directly determine the effects of
              regulators on production of sterigrnatocystin and penicillin in A. nidulans.
              Results from this study should help in controlling of production of both
              desired secondary metabolites (like penicillin) and undesired secondary
              metabolites (like sterigmatocystin and ariatoxin).

