Title       : CAREER: A Lipid Based, Gene Delivery System for Proliferative Vascular Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2001   
File        : a9874631

Award Number: 9874631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi V. Bellamkonda rvb@cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,5345,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9874631
Bellamkonda
This CAREER proposal presents a novel combination of
              educational and research initiatives in biomedical engineering in general and
              molecular tissue engineering in particular.  The principal investigator holds a
              joint appointment in the Schools of Engineering and Medicine at Case Western
              Reserve University, and over a four year period, he proposes a program of
              teaching and research that will involve students and faculty from both the
              schools.  The unifying theme of the program is the development, application and
              dissemination of interdisciplinary expertise on adapting biomaterials
              technologies as enabling tools to facilitate molecular level tissue
              engineering.

The four educational initiatives proposed are a) application of
              modern teaching methodologies to engineering education, b) curriculum revision
              and development, c) outreach programs for area high school students focussing
              on recruitment of women into engineering, and d) mentoring of bioengineering
              majors.  All of the initiatives mentioned above are strong integrated with the
              research initiatives proposed.

The research initiatives proposed focus on
              the application of biomaterials based, drug delivery technology for the in vivo
              delivery of therapeutic genes to improve transfection efficiency and duration
              of transgene expression in vivo.  In particular, the research targets
              proliferative vascular disorders which account for 10%-15% of all fatalities in
              America today.  Proliferative vascular diseases are common after angioplasty,
              stent or graft placement or in peripheral vascular diseases.  This proposal
              outlines a novel, versatile drug delivery system for the continuous, local,
              perivascular delivery of genetic agents to the arterial wall.  Lipid based
              microcylinders can be fabricated of differing lengths and provide corresponding
              periods of slow release of genetic agents.  It is proposed to deliver genetic
              agents via non-viral means to circumvent the safety issues associated with
              adenoviral mediated gene transfer.

It is proposed to use an organ culture
              system and mathematical modeling to study and optimize the kinetics of reporter
              gene delivery using non-viral lipid- and peptide-DNA complexes to the arterial
              wall.  Efficiency of transfection and duration of transgene expression will be
              quantified in vitro in the organ culture system.  Once the kinetics of gene
              deposition in the arterial wall are optimized, endothelial nitric oxide
              synthase containing plasmids will be complexed to polylysine peptides and
              continuously delivered to an artery previously injured by a balloon catheter in
              a rodent model of peripheral restenosis. 

When complete, this project will
              shed new light on using continuous gene delivery to improve efficiency,
              duration of gene expression and the therapeutic outcome of delivering
              inhibitors of smooth muscle cell proliferation, continuously and
              perivascularly.  It will also influence recruitment and retention of women into
              engineering, and impart critical biomaterials, molecular, and gene manipulation
              skills to undergraduate and graduate students in biomedical engineering.

