Title       : CAREER: Vibrational Spectroscopic Studies of the Dynamics and Mechanism of
               Amphitrite Ornata Dehaloperoxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9874895

Award Number: 9874895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan Franzen Stefan_Franzen@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Franzen
MCB 9874895

This  is a CAREER award.  The research component
              addresses biophysical and biochemical aspects of the function and, the marine
              worm dynamics of the novel enzyme dehaloperoxidase (DHP) from the marine worm,
              A. ornata. From a biochemical point of view there is intense interest in
              understanding the ability of the DHP enzyme to dehalogenate bromo- and
              fluorophenol by an oxidative mechanism to produce quinone. From a biophysical
              point of view there is a strong structural analogy with myoglobin. The
              structural analogy will be exploited to study the significance of
              conformational substates and structural relaxations of proteins as has been
              discussed in hundreds of biophysical studies of myoglobin. Time-resolved
              vibrational and transient absorption spectroscopy will be applied to the study
              of structural relaxations of the DHP enzyme including both the motions of the
              peptide backbone and the motions sensed by the heme. Novel rapid-mixing and
              stopped-flow experiments will be combined with these spectroscopies. The
              biophysical studies will focus on a test of hypotheses concerning
              structure/function relations that have been applied to myoglobin. Biochemical
              studies will contribute spectroscopic information on the mechanism of oxygen
              activation and substrate oxidation. The educational component focuses on
              modernizing the physical laboratory to include flash photolysis and resonance
              Raman spectroscopy experiments. Classical biophysical experiments on electron
              transfer and ligand dynamics will be included in the curriculum. Computational
              chemistry will be developed as part of the undergraduate curriculum in
              statistical mechanics and spectroscopy. The research will serve as an example
              for much of this effort since there is now an extensive literature on both
              experiment and computation of myoglobin that serves as model for future studies
              of heme proteins. The impact of these studies will be felt by more than one
              hundred chemistry majors who graduate annually. The focus on DHP will provide
              an example of the utility of these studies for enzyme function. This is both an
              exciting research area for graduate students and an interesting forum for
              interaction between the research program and undergraduate education.

The
              study applies vibrational spectroscopy to the structure and dynamics of a
              recently discovered heme enzyme, dehaloperoxidase of Amphitrite ornata. The
              enzyme is capable of replacing bromine and fluorine with hydrogen or oxygen in
              a phenolic substrate. The mechanism involves binding of peroxide to the heme,
              but the details are not yet understood. One aspect of the research is to study
              mechanistic intermediates in collaboration with Dr. Dawson and Dr. Lebioda at
              the University of South Carolina. A second aspect of the studies addresses
              central issues in the interpretation of protein biophysics. The study addresses
              the importance of protein conformations for enzyme function. The goals are
 

              to understand how protein fluctuations affect catalysis and to understand
              specific structure changes that accompany binding of peroxide or the substrate
              and control by biological feedback mechanisms. Since dehaloperoxidase is
              structurally similar to myoglobin it provides a very interesting test of the
              generality of conclusions for protein biophysics based on studies of myoglobin.
              The educational component focuses on modernizing the physical laboratory using
              laser kinetics and light scattering experiments. Classical biophysical
              experiments on electron transfer and ligand dynamics will be included in the
              curriculum. The focus on DHP will provide an example of the utility of these
              studies for enzyme function. This is both an exciting research area for
              graduate students and an interesting forum for interaction between the research
              program and undergraduate education.
 

