Title       : Regulation of Expression of the Nitrogen Fixation (nif) Genes of K. pneumoniae
               and Studies of the glnK-amtB operon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9874443

Award Number: 9874443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney G. Kustu kustu@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nitrogen must be obtained from the environment by all living things in order to
              synthesize compounds like proteins and nucleic acids.  The NifA protein is
              required to activate transcription of the nitrogen fixation operons in a wide
              variety of proteobacteria. In all of them NifA activity is controlled by
              molecular oxygen (02) but the mechanism differs with the organism. In members
              of the y-subgroup, NifA activity is inhibited by a second protein, NifL. NifL
              can also inhibit NifA activity in the presence of combined nitrogen. Thus
              relief of NifL inhibition requires the absence of both 02 and combined
              nitrogen, and  how such effects are coordinated is an important regulatory
              problem. NifL carries a FAD cofactor associated with its N-terminal domain.
              Reduction of the cofactor with the powerful reductant dithionite relieves NifL
              inhibition of NifA activity in a purified transcription system in vitro. The
              working hypothesis is that an unidentified iron-containing protein may be the
              physiological reductant for the FAD cofactor of NifL in Klebsiella pneumoniae.
              There is strong evidence that the nitrogen regulatory protein GlnK, a protein
              allosteric effector of a sort recently identified in all three domains of life,
              is also required for relief of NifL inhibition. It is postulated that GlnK
              enables reduction of the FAD co-factor of NifL under anaerobic conditions only
              when combined nitrogen is also limiting, e.g. by raising the mid-point
              potential for reduction into the physiological range. To test this hypothesis a
              combination of genetic, molecular biological and biochemical methods is being
              used to determine: 1) whether GlnK makes reduction of the FAD co-factor of NifL
              easier in vitro and thereby results in relief of NifL inhibition and 2) whether
              GlnK interacts directly with NifL. Although there was no previous report of a
              growth defect associated with disruption of the amtB (ammonium-methylammonium
              transport B) gene in bacteria, which lies downstream of glnK and in an operon
              with it,  amtB mutant strains of enteric bacteria grow poorly at low
              concentrations of NH4+ at pH values below 7. Growth studies with a variety of
              mutant strains in combination with studies of transport of the NH4+ analogue
              l4Cmethylammonium are most parsimoniously interpreted to indicate that AmtB
              proteins, which are found in all three domains of life, transport the uncharged
              species NH3 rather than the charged species NH4,  and that they facilitate the
              rate of diffusion of this species rather than concentrating it in an
              energy-dependent manner. Both interpretations are at odds with previous views
              from a number of other laboratories. To test them further,  aim  3) is to study
              the role of the AmtB protein of enteric bacteria in acquisition of NH3 at pH
              7.0, which must be done in continuous culture;  aim 4)is to determine whether
              AmtB mediates loss of NH3 to the medium when strains are grown on poor nitrogen
              sources that generate it--i.e. whether diffusion is bi-directional; and aim 5)
              is to determine whether apparent concentrative uptake of 14Cmethylammonium by
              S. cerevisiae is due to "acid trapping" in yeast vacuoles. These studies are of
              interest with respect to understanding the coordination of transcriptional
              regulatory responses to different environmental signals, that is, in
              understanding how environmental signals are coordinated to control decoding of
              particular portions of an organism's DNA. They also bear on the functions of
              the enteric GlnK protein, part of a sophisticated "two-tiered" regulatory
              system for sensing nitrogen availability, and on those of AmtB, which is
              essential for acquisition of ammonia at low concentrations.
