Title       : Structure-Function Studies of DEAD-Box RNA Chaperones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9874528

Award Number: 9874528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. McKay Dave.McKay@Stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              David McKay
MCB-98-74528

1. Technical

The "DEAD-box" RNA helicase domain
              is a conserved ~400 residue protein
module that has an essential role in a
              broad spectrum of activities in RNA
metabolism, including ribosome assembly,
              initiation of polypeptide
translation, mRNA splicing, RNA degradation, and
              others.  The helicase
domain is thought to facilitate rearrangments of
              specific RNA structures in
precisely controlled, ATP-dependent reactions.
              Different representatives of
the DEAD-box domain family function as individual
              "stand alone" proteins,
as subdomains in the context of larger, multidomain
              polypeptides up to
~1300 residues in length, and also as subunits of
              multiprotein complexes.
The overall goal of this study is to determine the
              structures and RNA
binding specificities of DEAD-box proteins.  First, the
              x-ray
crystallographic structure of a representative DEAD-box protein,
              the
elongation factor eIF4a from yeast. will be solved.  This will provide a
              
prototype structure of the helicase module.  Incorporating the structure     
                 
into the design of subsequent experiments, (i) several eubacterial
              
DEAD-box proteins which differ significantly in biological function will
be
              expressed and purified, and (ii) their RNA binding specificities will
              be
determined using in vitro selection methods.  Using the consensus RNA
              target
sequences that emerge from the selection experiments, defined RNA
              
oligonucleotides will be synthesized and their interaction with their cognate
              
DEAD-box proteins will be measured directly.  Additionally,
crystallization
              of RNA-protein complexes will be attempted with the goal of
solving their
              structure.

2. Non-technical

RNA metabolism is a required function for
              cell viability.  A diverse set of
proteins participate in activities such as
              splicing and degradation of
messenger RNA, initiation of polypeptide
              translation through specific
interactions with messenger RNA, and assembly of
              the RNA-protein
complexes in the ribosome.  Although each of these activities
              utilizes a
unique set of proteins, they share a common "RNA chaperone"
              function
that is carried out by a highly conserved RNA helicase domain. 
              This
domain, which is about 400 amino acids in size, must carry out
              a
biochemical activity that is essential to the entire spectrum of
              the
biological activities in which these proteins participate.  The goal
              of
this work is to understand the participation of this protein module in
              the
biochemical mechanisms of RNA metabolism.  The method for
              accomplishing
this will be to first solve the three-dimensional structure of
              this RNA
chaperone domain, and then to determine the basis of its specificity
              in
different biological functions.  The first goal will be accomplished
              using
the technique of x-ray crystallography, and the second will use both
              in
vitro selection techniques to determine specific RNA sequences to which
              the
proteins bind, and crystallography to solve the structures of
              protein-RNA
complexes.

