Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear, Aeroelastic Rotating Disk Modeling and Mechanics for High
               Capacity, Removable Data Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9874965

Award Number: 9874965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony A. Renshaw ar177@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI: Anthony Renshaw, Columbia University
Proposal Number: CMS-9874965
Proposal
              Title: CAREER: Nonlinear, Aeroelastic Rotating Disk Modeling and Mechanics For
              High Capacity, Removable Data Storage Project Abstract:
This Career Proposal
              combines a research program on the fundamental mechanics and aerodynamic
              coupling of flexible, high-speed rotating disks and a series of curriculum
              development activities in design and multimedia education. The proposed
              research focuses on three fundamental, unsolved problems that are crucial to
              removable data storage design: nonlinear rotating disk dynamics,
              aerodynamically induced instability, and floppy disk mechanics.  Each problem
              will be attacked theoretically and experimentally in order to fully
              characterize of the nonlinear mechanisms and aerodynamic excitation forces
              controlling these systems.  Singular perturbation theory will be exploited to
              simplify the underlying equations while capturing the essential physics with
              minimal complexity.  The results of this research will provide analytical and
              numerical guidance for the design of the next generation of 100+ MB removable
              data storage, a hotly contested market that was sharply brought into focus with
              the introduction of the Zip drive.  Because most existing research on
              nonlinear, aeroelastic, rotating disk mechanics present only negative results
              (e.g., results where analytical predictions contradict experimental findings),
              current designs are conservative and are based primarily on cut-and-try
              results.  The proposed research will help eliminate ad-hoc design practices and
              produce more reliable, higher capacity designs.
The educational activities
              extend three existing projects: a CAD/rapid prototyping course to enable
              undergraduates to develop potential solutions to on-going faculty research;
              further development of an on-line module in design for injection molding; and a
              seminar course in toy design. In addition, a project in on-line toy design for
              first year students that focuses on Tomagotchi/"virtual" toys and an
              upper-class elective in technology driven toy design are proposed.  These
              efforts will help acquaint students with the process of design and the role
              engineering insight and analysis plays in real world design.


