Title       : Structural Biology of Bacterial Copper Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9874408

Award Number: 9874408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy C. Rosenzweig amyr@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Rosenzweig
9874408


1.  Technical

The long term goal of this project
              is to understand in atomic detail the molecular mechanisms of copper
              homeostasis in bacteria. A number of bacterial resistance systems for various
              toxic metal ions have been identified genetically, but it is not known how the
              specific gene products combine on the molecular level to provide resistance.
              The proposed research focuses on the Escherichia coli plasmid-borne copper
              resistance system pco, which encodes 7 different proteins, including the
              periplasmic proteins PcoA, PcoC, and PcoE. PcoA, PcoC, and PcoE all contain
              unusual methionine and/or histidine rich sequence motifs which do not resemble
              any known copper binding motifs. The research plan involves a combination of
              X-ray crystallographic, biochemical, and biophysical approaches. The specific
              aims are 1) to solve the high resolution X-ray structures of the Cu(II), Cu(I),
              and apo forms of PcoC, 2) to solve the high resolution X-ray structures of the
              copper and apo forms of PcoE, 3) to crystallize and solve the structure of
              PcoA, and 4) to study interactions between PcoA and PcoC. The resultant
              structural information is expected to reveal novel copper binding sites and to
              expand existing knowledge of copper centers in biology.

2. 
              Non-technical

Copper is an essential element in microorganisms, but is also
              potentially harmful. Because large quantities of copper are toxic, a number of
              plant diseases caused by bacteria are treated with copper containing
              bacteriocides. Some bacteria have evolved systems to resist copper, however. In
              order to treat crop afflictions caused by these resistant bacteria, an
              understanding of the mechanism of copper resistance is required. A number of
              proteins involved in resistance systems have been identified, but exactly how
              these proteins interact with copper is not understood. The projects described
              in this proposal focus on discovering how one such family of proteins binds and
              transports copper. The information gained is expected to have important
              practical applications for agriculture. Furthermore, the proposed work will
              expand fundamental knowledge of copper chemistry.

