Title       : Evolving Urban Dynamics: Ecology, Modeling, and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a9874888

Award Number: 9874888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499921             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Varkki George varkki@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Orland  (Principal Investigator former)
              Brian Deal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce M. Hannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1349,9189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9874888 
Orland

Although current literature calls' I for ecological
              sustainability in the built human community, the planning professions have
              often focused their attention on technological solutions to environmental
              problems.  Other, more viable, solutions may have been overlooked through the
              lack of tools enabling planners to project and comprehend the complex
              ecological and social interactions of the urban-suburban environment.

New
              theory, tools and methods of research in ecological systems promise to improve
              our understanding of the dynamics of change in urban environments. 
              Specifically, we now have access to a variety of sophisticated computational
              and theoretical tools for characterizing urban systems at a conceptual level,
              and for visualizing and understanding these characterizations.  An integrated
              ecological, engineering and social science approach, using dynamic geographic
              computer modeling techniques and interface systems, would allow researchers and
              professionals to address urban dynamics in greater detail at a greater variety
              of scales and interfaces.

This project begins with a multi-disciplinary
              analysis of current ecological thought within the context of the planning
              culture to develop a coherent understanding of the term sustainability.  Our
              investigation will integrate two separate bodies of work.  Task One will apply
              recent advances in dynamic ecological modeling techniques to urban systems. 
              There is a history of support for such means of characterizing urban systems. 
              Task Two will present models via different visualization interfaces intended to
              help policy-makers and citizens better understand and utilize information about
              predicted outcomes.  Our ongoing work suggests that different interfaces best
              support different types of decisions.

Attention will be focused on key urban
              sub-systems (e.g. population, employment, economic criteria), land-use
              regulation, capital investment decisions and geographic constraints as well as
              individual property decisions (buy/sell, improve/neglect, and change in
              intensity and type of use) to model changing urban growth patterns.  The model
              will be used to grow a city, most likely East St. Louis, Illinois (part of a
              University-community partnership, the East St. Louis Action Research Project.)
              We will explore "exocentric" views such as maps and aerial views as well as
              "egocentric" interactive, navigable 3-dimensional representations.  Using the
              different interfaces to present policy issues in these cities to citizens and
              policy-makers, we will study how visualization interfaces communicate complex
              issues and affect decisions.

