Title       : Automatic Reference Librarians for the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9874759

Award Number: 9874759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oren Etzioni etzioni@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel S. Weld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 6857      SPECIAL PROJECTS (IIS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1086,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              By all accounts, the Web is humanity's largest and fastest growing repository of
              digital information.  Many collections of information are Internet-accessible,
              and most will provide a searchable Web interface. While some collections have a
              broad array of materials, trends show an explosion in the number of
              specialized
collections with narrow but very deep content. Thus a principle
              challenge facing users will be the selection of Web information sources capable
              of answering their query. In a physical library, users rely on a reference
              librarian to help point them at the correct resource, but while human
              librarians are becoming increasingly
sophisticated in their use of the Web,
              they are only part of the solution.  We need more powerful automatic reference
              tools to help people efficiently retrieve high quality information from the
              Web. Typically, reference librarians are not specialists in the topic of 
              inquiry (e.g., computational fluid dynamics) but they  are expert at 
              identifying relevant resources (e.g., The International Journal of Fluid
              Dynamics) and at  appropriate strategies for obtaining the necessary
              information.  The central objective of this proposal is to create software
              agents that posses  reference intelligence --- a limited understanding of
              complex technical topics, but a very sophisticated understanding of how and
              where to find high-quality information on the World Wide Web.


