Title       : Linkage of Protein Folding and Assembly to DNA Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9874613

Award Number: 9874613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Mossing mmossing@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice R. Eftink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Mossing
MCB 9874613

1. Technical

Protein folding, assembly and
              conformational change are coupled to
operator recognition by the Cro repressor
              of bacteriophage lambda.  Cro
is among the simplest and most studied DNA
              binding proteins.  A dimer of
66 residue subunits is the functional repressor.
               Recent work from the
PI's laboratory indicates that the relevant free species
              is not a dimer,
but a folded monomer.  Protein assembly is therefore an
              integral step in
operator binding.  Dimer interface residues undergo
              substantial
rearrangement in formation of either the monomer or the
              Cro-operator
complex.  The overall goal of this proposal is to quantify
              the
contributions of linked folding, assembly and conformational processes
to
              operator binding. The Cro monomer predominates at the nanomolar
concentrations
              relevant for the DNA binding reaction, but becomes a
minority species at the
              micromolar to millimolar concentrations that are
convenient for spectroscopy. 
              Thermodynamic and mutant studies have lead to
the hypothesis that it resembles
              an engineered Cro variant in which
dimerization has been blocked by an
              insertion.  If this hypothesis is
correct, the natural assembly mechanism of
              the Cro dimer involves the
exchange of equivalent intramolecular contacts for
              intermolecular
contacts, a "domain swap".  Recent data on single-chain
              dimers
expressed from fused tandem Cro genes suggests that dimer assembly is
              a
limiting step in the formation of Cro-operator complexes. Objective 1 is
              to
characterize the monomeric Cro species.  a) Assays for the
              monomeric
species will be developed. Monomeric variants will be identified in
              genetic
and affinity chromatography screens of combinatorial protein
              expression
libraries.  Dimer dissociation will be monitored by fluorescence
              and
sedimentation equilibrium.  b) Protein sequences and solution
              conditions
will be identified to populate the native monomer at equilibrium
              and as
kinetic intermediates.  c) The structure and dynamics of the
              monomeric
species will be characterized by spectroscopy.  The thermodynamic
              and
genetic stability profiles of the Cro monomer and engineered monomers
              will
be compared.  Objective 2 is to determine the mechanism of assembly of
              Cro
dimers.  Stopped-flow fluorescence and circular dichroism will be used
              to
study protein folding and assembly reactions.  The kinetics of DNA
              binding
will be determined by spectroscopic and electrophoretic mobility
              shift
assays. Objective 3 is to determine the energetic consequences of
              linkage.
Isothermal titration calorimetry will be used to compare the
              energetics of
DNA recognition by engineered monomers, covalent dimers and wild
              type Cro
proteins.  The contributions of linked folding and assembly
              equilibria and
systematic variations in the physical linkage between subunits
              will be
assessed.

2. General

Proteins assemble at specific sites on DNA
              to initiate the readout of
genetic information.  To complete the expression of
              genetic information,
polypeptide chains must fold and assemble into functional
              proteins.
Mechanistic and thermodynamic descriptions of these
              fundamental
processes will advance our understanding of living systems. 
              This
proposal describes studies of linked folding, assembly and
              DNA
recognition processes in a simple model system.  At low
              concentrations,
the Cro repressor of bacteriophage lambda exists as isolated
              inactive
subunits.  The unfavorable assembly of pairs of subunits to form
              the
functional dimer limits operator DNA binding.  The coupling of
              protein
folding and assembly to DNA binding appears to be a key factor in
              the
regulation of viral development.  Three objectives are proposed: a)
              to
characterize the folded monomeric intermediate, b) to determine
              the
mechanism of dimer assembly and c) to compare the energetics of
              DNA
recognition by wild type Cro and artificially engineered variants
              that
are fixed in either the monomeric or dimeric states.  Techniques to
              be
used include directed and combinatorial mutagenesis, production
              and
characterization of recombinant protein variants, fluorescence,
              circular
dichroism and NMR spectroscopy, rapid mixing techniques for
              kinetic
analysis and isothermal titration calorimetry.


