Title       : Hollow-glass, infrared bundles for coherent imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9874115

Award Number: 9874115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Harrington jaharrin@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9874115
Harrington
The overall objective of the proposed work is to develop
              the hollow waveguide technology necessary to fabricate low-loss, coherent image
              bundles for broadband infrared imaging. The approach to be taken is to
              fabricate hollow-glass, coherent bundles which then can be coated for broadband
              infrared transmission. The image bundles will be fabricated using both mandrel
              wrap and leach bundle technologies. The advantage of using hollow oxide glass
              tubing to form the bundles is that conventional coherent bundling methods used
              for solid-core glass fibers can be used here. Once the coherent hollow guide
              bundles have been made, the inside walls of the glass tubing will be coated
              using two technologies developed at Rutgers University. The first is
              liquid-phase chemistry and the second is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). These
              methods have proven very successful in making single waveguides with losses as
              low as 0.1 dB/m and lengths up to 13 m. The challenge in this program is to
              extend the current technology used to coat single hollow guides with bore sizes
              as small as 250 um to the approximately 5O-~m-bore size guides which will make
              up the IR image bundle.

The significance of this research lies in the
              anticipated reduction in loss for hollow glass guides by a factor of 10 or more
              through the deposition of multilayer dielectric coatings. The development of an
              efficient, coherent IR bundle for imaging beyond 2 ~m would mark the first time
              that such a high resolution, broadband bundle has been fabricated and, it is
              believed, this technology will have a major impact on thermal imaging systems
              used for recognition and process control. If we are successful in reducing the
              loss of the hollow guides by a factor of ten over current losses we will not
              only have a fiber well suited for thermal imaging but also a waveguide with
              significant potential in delivering laser power for surgical and other medical
              applications. In addition, our hollow bundle could be used in a transmit mode
              as well as in the receive mode. That is, it is possible to transniit laser
              energy for local heating and then to interrogate the resulting thermal energy
              via the same fiber bundle. Finally, it should be possible to make the ultimate
              smart fiber optic involving thermal imaging, power delivery, and chemical
              sensing all via the same hollow guide bundle.
***

