Title       : CAREER: Superwinds, Galactic Fountains, and Gaseous Halos in Disk Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9874973

Award Number: 9874973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvain Veilleux veilleux@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

AST 98-74973
Veilleux 

The research to be carried out is a
              comprehensive study of the warm ionized medium on the outskirts of nearby disk
              galaxies. The knowledge of the physical state, distribution, and velocity
              structure of this material is relevant for understanding large-scale galactic
              winds ("superwinds") and fountains in active and normal galaxies, quasar
              absorption-line systems, the baryonic content of the universe, the formation
              and evolution of galaxies, and measuring the mass and distribution of dark
              matter in galaxies.  A complete sample of nearby galaxies will be mapped down
              to unprecedented flux levels using state-of-the-art optical Fabry-Perot
              interferometers.  These data will provide new quantitative constraints on the
              gaseous cross-sections of galaxies.  The morphology and kinematics of the
              ionized gas derived from these observations will help determine whether this
              material is an extension of the neutral Hydrogen gas (HI) disks,
              remnant-accreting gas from galaxy formation, tidal debris from recent galaxy
              interactions, or gas associated with galactic fountains or superwinds. Data on
              the rotation curves of galaxies will allow a better determination of the dark
              matter distribution.  The results from the data on the emission-line properties
              of the warm gas will be compared with the observational data on the disk
              interstellar medium (ISM) and with predictions from shock models.  Graduate
              students and undergraduate astronomy majors will be involved in this research
              effort.


The educational component of the project involves developing
              innovative ways to introduce more observing experiences into the curriculum of
              non-science university students and to provide K-12 students from local schools
              with some flavor of what goes on in modern ground-based astronomy.  Astronomy
              activities attract students of all ages. Activities for the University of
              Maryland campus observatory will be designed and developed. An inquiry based
              learning approach is to be used as a means of educating the students. The
              existing laboratory astronomy course for undergraduate non-science majors will
              be revamped to take advantage of the added versatility of the campus
              observatory.  New emphasis will be put on having undergraduate students
              directly involved in the course material and the learning process.  The
              telescopes and computers will be used to provide some basic research activities
              into the curriculum of non-science majors.  These hands-on activities will help
              the students develop a framework for understanding the scientific method that
              will facilitate learning throughout their lives. 


