Title       : CAREER: The Faint Interstellar Medium and Stardial
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9874670

Award Number: 9874670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. McCullough pmcc@astro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
A four-year plan to enhance astronomical research and teaching at the
              University of Illinois and throughout the world will be carried out.  The
              research capitalizes on obtaining new astronomical data optimized for detection
              of low surface brightness emissions from the Milky Way Galaxy.  The research
              and the teaching activities will take advantage of the new technologies that
              are available by using robotic telescopes and the World Wide Web (WWW, "the
              Web").

The focus of the research activity is on the faint interstellar
              medium of the Milky Way. A definitive atlas of the entire sky, observed at the
              Hydrogen alpha (H-alpha) emission line, will be produced that will be 30 times
              more sensitive than previous surveys in this area.  This new sky atlas will
              reveal hundreds of new objects, which may then be studied further.  Numerous
              sources of ionization in the interstellar medium of the Milky Way will be
              identified and specific ones will be studied in depth with spectroscopy.  
              Because of the direct physical relationship of the H-alpha emission and the
              free-free emission in the Milky Way, the H-alpha emission is a sensitive tracer
              of free-free emission in the Milky Way.  The H-alpha data will permit the
              removal of contamination of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) data by the
              Milky Way emissions.  The data Milky Way observations will be used to improve
              the analysis of the data from the MAP and PLANCK satellite missions to observe
              the CMB.   The decontamination will improve the credibility and the sensitivity
              of the satellite CMB results by allowing spurious signals to be eliminated from
              the data.  The combination of the availability of the H-alpha data and CMB
              microwave data will allow the measurement of the electron temperature of the
              warm ionized medium over the entire sky.  The results of the data analysis will
              be used to test new theories for microwave emissions from spinning, charged
              dust grains that are in the interstellar medium.

The research activities
              will be integrated into education activities by using the "Stardial".  The
              Stardial is an autonomous robotic astronomical camera system that produces
              images of the night sky.  The system was invented specifically to be used for
              teaching astronomy via the Web.  The Stardial supplies small telescope
              observational capabilities to anyone with access to a "WWW" browser.  One
              objective of this award is to expand the Stardial project to other universities
              and high schools and to extend the technique so that it may be used on other
              telescopes.   The Stardial program has already been involved in carrying out
              two years of continuous monitoring of the night sky, and at least three
              universities and one high school have used it.  The use of the Stardial project
              will be extended by linking it to existing robotic telescopes via the Web.  
              Software for the Web-interface will be written and collaborators with hardware
              will be solicited, i.e. those with robotic telescopes, to be involved in the
              Stardial activity.  The Web-based interface will provide simple, reliable, and
              cost-effective access to robotic telescopes to obtain data that may be used for
              both teaching and research.  There will be a software program that will
              simulate the operation of the each telescope to allow the user to practice
              prior to using the actual telescope.   The interface also will allow the
              inclusion of human-operated telescopes.   Successful teaching activities
              related to variable stars and asteroids have been developed and these
              activities will be extended and distributed on the Web.
***

