Title       : The Behavioral Mechanisms of Hierarchy Formation and the Neurochemical
               Correlates of Aggression and Dominance in Crayfish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9874608

Award Number: 9874608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Huber lobsterman@caspar.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1191,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  9874608
PI: 
              Huber, Robert
Title:  The behavioral mechanisms of hierarchy formation and the
              neurochemical correlates of aggression and dominance in
              crayfish


Hierarchical social structures are a widespread phenomenon in
              species ranging from anemones to humans and yet the behavioral processes that
              produce them remain poorly understood.  This comprehensive study of dominance
              relationships will use crayfish to explore how animals modify their behavior in
              the context of aggressive interactions.  This work will first characterize how
              previous fighting success modifies an organism's subsequent behavior in paired
              encounters.  Since it is not intuitively obvious how relationships between such
              pairs develop into a complex social web in larger groups of animals, computer
              simulations of 'virtual' crayfish will explore more complex social structures.
              Predictions arising from these models will then be tested using real
              crayfish.
	
Results from this project should provide considerable insight
              into the complex associations that exist between different levels of
              organization, including sensory processes, dispositions for aggression,
              dominance status, and brain chemistry. Given the theoretical significance,
              evolutionary importance, and broad taxonomic spread of aggression, elucidating
              the mechanisms of formation and maintenance of dominance in
these 'lower'
              animals will lead to a better understanding of the laws which govern social
              behavior. Results from this research may also have implications for the
              development of pharmaceuticals for the control of affective states, and for
              psychologists investigating the role of past experience in aggressive
              behavior.

