Title       : Structural Basis of Molecular Discrimination through Directed Evolution.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9874548

Award Number: 9874548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alec E. Hodel ahodel@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Hodel
MCB 9874548

1. Technical

The broad objective of this study is to
              combine methods of structural biology with genetic methods of directed
              evolution to further the understanding of protein mediated molecular
              recognition. The elements of a protein structure necessary to discriminate
              between two related ligands will be determined by evolving a protein specific
              for one ligand into a variant with specific affinity for the second ligand. The
              protein mediated discrimination between the nucleotide guanosine (G) and its
              alkylated derivative N 7 -methylguanosine (m 7 G) shall be examined through
              this strategy. These nucleotides are nearly identical in their shape and
              hydrogen bonding patterns; however, they differ dramatically in their
              electronic structure. Methylation of the N 7 nitrogen introduces a positive
              charge that is delocalized throughout the heterocyclic p-ring system of the
              guanosine base. Eukaryotic cells utilize this alkylated derivative of guanosine
              as a tag for the 5' end of messenger RNAs suggesting that this moiety provides
              a unique recognition element. Four model protein systems are under
              consideration; two cap-binding proteins and two G-binding proteins. These
              protein systems have been chosen in order to facilitate the subsequent
              determination of the three-dimensional structures of any variants generated.
              Two methods of directed protein evolution, phage display coupled with affinity
              chromatography and bacterial display coupled with fluorescence-activated cell
              sorting, will be assessed for their ability to generate proteins with contrary
              ligand specificities within the same protein context. Both the primary and
              three-dimensional structures of the variant protein are then determined and
              compared to those of the wild-type protein. Comparing the structures of two
              ligand-binding sites with different specificities in the same protein context
              will clearly delineate the essential features of the binding site which are
              necessary for discrimination between the two related ligands. The general aim
              of this work is to provide a foundation for the design of macromolecules with
              high specificity. This approach will reveal whether different, but related,
              ligand specificities can be evolved into a single protein scaffold. By evolving
              multiple protein models to recognize the same ligands, the compatibility of
              different protein scaffolds in accommodating designed ligand specificities will
              be determined. Two different methods of directed protein evolution, phage
              display and bacterial display, will be compared for their utility in the design
              of specific ligand binding sites. Also, a general method for defining the
              structural elements essential to ligand discrimination will be tested. Finally,
              insight into the mechanism by which a protein may discriminate between an
              uncharged heterocylic base (guanosine) and a charged, alkylated base
              (7-methylguanosine) will be gained. The study of guanosine and
              7-methylguanosine discrimination may elucidate the unique properties of m 7 G
              recognition that led to its use as a 5' mRNA tag by eukaryotic cells.
 
 2.
              Non-technical

With the compartmentalization of genetic material within a
              nuclear envelope, eukaryotic cells have by necessity evolved unique mechanisms
              for chaperoning the transfer of genetic information from the nucleus to the
              cytoplasm. The genetic instructions encoded in messenger RNA must be carried by
              protein 'couriers' from the information center of the nucleus to the workshop
              of the cytoplasm. To facilitate this transfer of genetic information, the
              messenger RNA of eukaryotes is tagged at both ends to provide 'handles' for the
              protein couriers to recognize. At the mRNA 5' end, 7-methylguanosine (m 7 G) is
              attached to the transcript forming a cap structure. A number of proteins can
              specifically discriminate between the relatively rare m 7 G cap structure that
              identifies the 5'-end of the RNA and the common unmethylated guanosine (G)
              nucleotide that is used throughout the RNA message. In this study, the
              structural basis for the recognition of the 5' m 7 G cap will be elucidated by
              utilizing 'directed evolution' methods. Through recombinant methods, this study
              is designed to direct the evolution of a mRNA cap binding protein into a
              protein that recognizes unmethylated guanosine. In turn, a protein that
              specifically recognizes unmethylated guanosine will be evolved into a
              cap-binding protein. These new 'evolved' proteins will be compared to their
              parent versions to determine what elements of the parent structure were
              important in the discrimination between the mRNA cap and unmodified
              guanosine.

