Title       : The Neurospora Genome Project at UNM: Expressed Sequence Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9874488

Award Number: 9874488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Anne Nelson manelson@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Neurospora Genome Project at UNM: Expressed Sequence
              Analyses

Neurospora crassa has been an important research organism for
              the
past half century, and the field of biochemical genetics was
              initiated
using Neurospora. Over one thousand genes have been identified by
              mutation
and mapped, making N. crassa the best-studied filamentous fungus.
              Now, with
the identification and characterization of large numbers of
              expressed
genes, the goal of connecting the genes of Neurospora to their
              biochemical
functions is becoming reality.
The Neurospora Genome Project
              (NGP) at UNM involves the new science
of functional genomics (analysis of the
              complete set of genes of an
organism). The long-term goal of the NGP is the
              characterization of the
majority of the genes of Neurospora and the
              association of those genes with
biological function. In previous analyses, the
              NGP showed that the majority
of the genes being studied are novel (not yet
              identified in any other
organism). It is predicted that the project will
              provide novel information
in the areas of genetics, metabolism, biochemistry,
              and evolution. Based on
the history of development of new technologies, the
              research will likely
lead to industrial applications, as well as advances in
              pharmaceutical,
environmental and basic research.
 The genetic complement of
              N. crassa will be investigated using an
expressed sequence tag (EST) approach,
              whereby partial complementary DNA
(cDNA) sequences are obtained and used to
              identify distinct genes and in
many cases predict their function (when a
              homologous gene has been
characterized). The genetic complement of N. crassa
              will be investigated in
the context of how its expression relates to the
              developmental decisions
made by the organism. ESTs from four cDNA libraries,
              corresponding to the
genes expressed in germinating conidial, advanced-growth
              mycelial,
unfertilized sexual and perithecial (sexual) tissues will be
              analyzed.
Also, a concerted in silico analysis will be directed to
              the
characterization of those cDNAs apparently lacking homologs in
              other
organisms.
 Transcriptional profiling, or cDNA microarray analysis,
              will be
used to determine the relative levels of expression of thousands of
              genes
simultaneously, and the role these changes play in development will
              be
examined. The microarray analysis will focus on changing patterns of
              gene
expression as the organism switches from vegetative growth to formation
              of
the female sexual structure, and then progresses through sexual
              development
to form the sexual progeny. The genes controlled by the products
              of the
mating type loci and the white collar genes, all thought to
              be
transcriptional regulators, will also be determined.
 The Neurospora
              Genome Project includes an important educational
component. As an integrated
              part of the research, undergraduates and
graduate students are trained in
              molecular genetics and computational
biology (functional genomics). The
              students benefit greatly by working
together toward a common goal, and the
              program had the additional advantage
of exposing each student to diverse
              concepts and techniques. The students
are involved in problem-solving and
              decision-making at all levels.  In collaboration with the Albuquerque High
              Performance Computing Center (AHPCC) at UNM, the NGP will continue to provide
              open access to a server for web-based BLAST and FASTA searches of the NGP EST
              database and specialized databases containing all published Neurospora
              nucleotide and
protein sequences. In addition, all of the Neurospora ESTs with
              significant
identity to genes that have been sequenced in other organisms will
              be
classified by function; updates of this proteome analysis can be
              accessed
from the NGP web page [http://biology.unm.edu/~ngp/home.html].
 The
              abundance of genes already identified by mutation and mapped in
N. crassa will
              facilitate the association of sequenced cDNAs with genes of
known function.
              The correlation of the genetic and physical maps will
become ever more
              refined, simplifying the association. The enormous amount
of effort devoted to
              the genetic characterization of Neurospora over the
last sixty years will
              yield enormous dividends, in the form of identified
genes, rational and rapid
              development of testable hypotheses, and
stimulation of many areas of fungal
              research.


