Title       : Molecular Genetic Control of Nitrate Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9874504

Award Number: 9874504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rogene Schnell rschnell@comp.uark.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nitrate assimilation by plants, green algae, and some fungi and bacteria, is a
              complex, energy-consuming process which provides most of the organic nitrogen
              in the biosphere. The genes required for nitrate uptake and its reduction are
              tightly regulated, and respond to a variety of environmental and physiological
              signals. The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand how the
              expression of genes involved in nitrate assimilation is regulated in
              photosynthetic organism. This study uses the unicellular green alga,
              Chlamydomonas, as a model experimental organism to identify and characterize
              genes that mediate control of nitrate assimilation. Initially, attention will
              be focused on understanding how ammonium, the product of nitrate assimilation,
              represses the expression of nitrate assimilation genes. Six genes involved in
              nitrate assimilation are clustered within a single region of the chromosome.
              Expression of these genes is coordinately blocked when ammonium is present,
              derepressed upon removal of ammonium, and induced to a high level by nitrate.
              Both derepression and induction of these genes requires the NIT2 gene product.
              The NIT2 gene appears to play a key role in mediating both positive and
              negative control of the pathway, since the NIT2 gene itself is repressed by
              ammonium. The ability to isolate mutants in Chlamydomonas that disrupt this
              regulation provides a powerful tool for identifying the cellular components
              required for perceiving and transducing the ammonium signal into a change in
              the pattern of gene expression. Mutants that express nitrate assimilation genes
              constitutively in the presence of ammonium have so far identified two negative
              regulatory genes, FARI and FAR2. Both genes are required for repression of the
              N1T2 gene by ammonium. The first specific aim of this proposal is to saturate
              the genome with mutations that define trans-acting factors required for
              negative control of nitrate assimilation. Mutants that disrupt this regulation
              will be informative for resolving whether repression occurs at one or more
              stages of gene expression and by one or more pathways. The second specific aim
              is to characterize the cloned FARI gene, and to use the collection of mutants
              to isolate and characterize the FAR2 gene and any additional genes identified
              in this study by transposon tagging.
