Title       : CAREER: Mechanisms Regulating the Activity of the Pax-5 Transcription Factor
               During B-cell Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9874795

Award Number: 9874795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patty Zwollo pxzwol@facstaff.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Zwollo, P 
	The transcription factor Pax-5  is expressed during the early
              stages of B-cell development and influences the expression of several B
              cell-specific genes, most of which are involved in cell development and
              proliferation. Over the past grant period,  the existence of alternatively
              spliced isoforms of the murine Pax-5 gene was investigated.  In addition to the
              existing isoform (Pax-5a), three new isoforms, Pax-5b, 5d, and 5e, were
              isolated. In isoforms Pax-5b and Pax-5e, exon 2 has been spliced out, resulting
              in proteins with an incomplete DNA-binding domain.  In Pax-5d and Pax-5e, the
              3' region which encodes the transactivating domain, is deleted and replaced by
              a novel sequence with unknown function.  Recent studies revealed that both
              Pax-5d and Pax-5a protein levels are high in normal B-cells, in contrast to
              cell lines of the B-cell lineage, where Pax-5d levels are very low.  When
              normal B cells were activated by the B-cell mitogen lipopolysaccharide, the
              protein level of Pax-5d, but not 5a, decreased rapidly.  The high protein
              levels of Pax-5d in resting B-cells, as well as its low levels in proliferating
              B-cells, would be in agreement with it functioning as a dominant negative
              regulator of proliferation or growth.   Pax-5b protein, on the other hand, is
              only present during the later stages of B-cell development, including the
              mature B and plasma cell stages.  The presence of Pax-5b so late in development
              was unexpected and is interesting in light of its possible regulatory roles
              during the terminal stages of B-cell development. In this project, the
              transcriptional activities of Pax-5 isoforms 5a, 5b, and 5d will be
              investigated. These studies are expected to lead to an increased understanding
              of specific mechanisms that regulate activity of the transcription factor Pax-5
              during B-cell differentiation.  Such mechanisms may include both the functional
              activities of its alternative isoforms as well as the differential regulation
              of their protein stability.  

	The protein Pax-5a has been shown to play
              important roles during the development of antibody-producing cells. Pax-5 is a
              "regulator" protein that affects the amount of antibodies that are made in this
              cell type.  Pax-5 also plays a role in cell proliferation, thus regulating the
              amount of "proliferation" determining proteins in the cells, but this process
              is not well understood.  In this project, the main question will be: what is
              the role of Pax-5a, as well as two other Pax-5 like proteins (named Pax-5b and
              Pax-5d) in the development and activation of antibody producing cells.   This
              research will provide insight into possible mechanisms that Pax-5a, 5b, and 5d
              use to make sure that cells produce antibodies at the right time and in the
              right place.  


