Title       : CAREER: Synthetic Genes to Elucidate Glycopeptide Module Function in Extensins
               and Arabinogalactan-Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a9874744

Award Number: 9874744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia J. Kieliszewski mkielisze1@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Kieliszewski

Hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGPS), ubiquitous
              structural components (up to 10-20% dw) of growing cell walls, are implicated
              in all aspects of plant growth and development including responses to stress.
              Three major groups of HRGPs represent a continuum of glycosylation and
              polypeptide periodicity ranging from the lightly glycosylated repetitive
              proline-rich proteins (RPRPs), through the highly arabinosylated crosslinked
              extensins, to the arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) that are the most highly
              glycosylated and least periodic. Repetitive units are generally small 4-6
              residue glycosylated motifs viewed hypothetically as functional modules.
              However, HRGP function remains largely unexplored at the molecular level. This
              research will define their roles through functional analysis of single
              glycopeptide modules expressed as repetitive glycopolypeptides in tobacco and
              tomato cultures. These include the (Ser-Hyp4)n, (Ser-Hyp3)n, (Ser-Hyp2)n,
              (Ser-Hyp)n, (Ala-Hyp)n, and related motifs of extensins and AGPs, as well as
              the 19-residue consensus sequence of another glycoprotein (GAGP). This involves
              construction of synthetic gene cassettes based on ligating sets of overlapping
              oligonucleotide complementary internal repeat pairs and complementary external
              3'- and 5'-linker pairs to form long duplex DNA encoding a given number of
              module repeats. Insertion of these synthetic genes into a modified pBIl2l plant
              transformation vector containing an extensin signal sequence and the enhanced
              green fluorescent protein (EGFP) reporter gene will be used to transform cell
              cultures of tobacco and tomato that contain the plant prolyl hydroxylases and
              glycosyltransferases required for module posttranslational modifications.
              Expression and isolation of these modules will permit tests of the following
              general and specific hypotheses for glycosylation and glycomodule
              function:
1.	Glycosylation codes predicted by the Hyp-contiguity Hypothesis
              specify precise saccharide addition to specific HRGP Hyp residues, namely:
              tetraarabinose to the most highly contiguous residues, arabinosylation
              decreasing with decreasing Hyp-contiguity; and arabinogalactan polysaccharide
              addition to repetitive noncontiguous Hyp residues that typify AGPs including
              GAGP.
2.	Carbohydrate-mediated alignment of extensin monomers is necessary for
              their orderly assembly and crosslinking roles in cell wall self-assembly.
              

As analogs of highly periodic glycoproteins, "designer extensins" and
              "designer gums" will help relate site-specific glycosylation to essential
              molecular functions like crosslinking, self-association and cell wall
              self-assembly. These analogs also provide a unique approach to the design of
              novel genetically engineered gums and glycoprotein polymers of controlled
              structure and properties for enhancing plant disease resistance, and potential
              use in the agricultural, food and nanotechnology industries. Finally, this
              research will give students access to a wide range of tools and concepts in
              molecular biology, ranging from gene manipulation, microbiology and plant
              biology, to protein, glycoprotein and carbohydrate chemistry, and an excellent
              opportunity to learn how to integrate them to make significant scientific
              contributions.


