Title       : Genetic Analysis of Methanogenesis by Methanosarcina Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9874459

Award Number: 9874459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Metcalf metcalf@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Wm. Metcalf
MCB-9874459


Methanogenesis is critically important
              as a key step in the global carbon cycle and in the production of a significant
              greenhouse gas. It is also at the center of alternative fuel strategies and is
              essential in both agriculture and the waste treatment industry. Methanosarcina
              species are believed to be among the most significant methane producers, all of
              which are members of the so-called "third form of life" known as the Archaea.
              Despite their importance, relatively little is known about these unusual
              organisms, or about the process of methane production (methanogenesis). The aim
              of the proposed research is to use genetic analysis to investigate the
              metabolic processes involved in methanogenesis by members of the genus
              Methanosarcina. Such studies have not previously been possible due to a lack of
              robust genetic methods for these unique organisms; however, recently developed
              methods now make this possible. The application of genetic methodologies to the
              study of methanogenesis is likely to reveal novel aspects of the methanogenic
              process that have not been addressed by the biochemical methods used to study
              this process to date. By using a genetic approach, our analysis will identify
              not only the main methanogenic pathways, but also the metabolic, regulatory,
              and structural components that directly and indirectly effect methanogenesis.
              The experiments to be conducted will take advantage of the metabolic diversity
              of Methanosarcina species relative to other methanogenic organisms. This
              metabolic diversity should allow isolation of mutants that are incapable of
              methanogenesis fueled by certain substrates while retaining the ability to
              utilize others. Importantly, Methanosarcina species are the only genetically
              tractable methanogenic organisms for examining this metabolic diversity. 
              Moreover, the tools we have developed should have broad application to the
              Archaea in general, and to more distantly related organisms for which methods
              of genetic analysis are lacking. The specific goals of the project are; 1)
              genetic analysis of Methanosarcina species using these recently developed, but
              proven, genetic methods, and 2) the refinement and modification of currently
              available genetic tools to simplify the execution of these experiments and to
              expand the range of the studies possible in this organism. 
This project is
              aimed at developing and utilizing genetic tools for examining the metabolic
              basis of methanogenesis in the archaeon Methanosarcina.  This is an extremely
              important process about which little is known.  The potential outcomes of this
              work are an understanding of the genetic basis of methanogenesis and the
              development of molecular genetic tools to examine other members of the
              phylogenetic domain.


