Title       : CAREER: The Diffusion of Collective Protest in the U.S., 1950-1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9874000

Award Number: 9874000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Soule soule@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of the diffusion of social protest in the United States.  Using
              news media reports, this project will attempt to gather and code data on all
              protest events in the United States between 1950 and 1996 associated with all
              social movements that took place during this critical period. Additionally, it
              will gather a number of important independent variables associated with the
              different movements in this period. The ultimate goal is to compile a data set
              which will be comparable with one that was recently completed in Germany (at
              the Wissenshaftzentrum by Friedhelm Neidhardt and colleagues) which includes
              protest event data and associated covariates for the identical time
              period.

This research is theoretically informed by general questions about
              the diffusion of social phenomena. Social movement scholars have noted that
              social movements are not bounded entities; rather, protest tactics, frames,
              organizations, ideologies, and symbols often diffuse between different social
              movements. Recent advances in the statistical modeling of diffusion in an event
              history framework allow for the testing of hypotheses about the diffusion
              between social movements in this period, both within the U.S. and between the
              U.S. and Germany.

Data collection will focus on the identification and
              coding of protest events reported in four daily newspapers. Both a coding
              mechanism and a codebook detailing coding instructions have already been
              devised and tested. Both of these are comparable to the German counterparts. In
              addition, a list of independent variables, and potential sources and techniques
              for gathering them, was compiled. 

Using advances in the collection of event
              data from newspapers and in the measurement of bias of this method, this
              research will allow for a careful examination of diffusion processes in social
              movements. Questions about within-movement, between-movement, and
              between-country diffusion will ultimately be addressed. Additionally, these
              data will allow researchers to fully exploit advances in the statistical
              modeling of diffusion in an event history framework.

This award is made
              under the Faculty Early Career Development rubric.  In addition to supporting
              scientifically meritorious research on a central sociological question, it will
              also provide innovative educational experiences for students of the social
              sciences.

