Title       : RUI: Proteins That Control Interaction of Rab GTPases and GDI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a9874626

Award Number: 9874626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarissa M. Cheney cmc04747@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to identify the molecular machinery that
              regulates vesicular transport during development, especially during
              localization of informational macromolecules and secretion during
              morphogenesis.  Vesicular transport is a fundamental cellular process needed
              for life.  While many of the molecular components of vesicular transport are
              known, there are many gaps in our knowledge.  Major controllers of vesicular
              transport are rab GTPases, which are regulated by rab GDP dissociation
              inhibitor (GDI).  GDI binds avidly to rabs, but the trigger for GDI to release
              rabs is unknown and presumably involves interaction with different proteins. 
              Recently, an inherited form of mental retardation in humans was shown to be
              caused by mutations in a gene for rab GDI, underscoring the potentially pivotal
              role that GDI could play in regulating vesicular transport.

The hypothesis
              that underlies this research is that the interaction between rab and GDI is
              regulated by proteins that interact with GDI.  The overall goal is to identify
              these proteins and their role in GDI-rab interactions, using biochemical,
              molecular genetic and genetic techniques, using mutations in Drosophila rab
              GDI.  This project has the following specific aims:

     1.  Identify
              proteins that bind directly to GDI, using co-immunoprecipitation with an
              anti-GDI antibody, binding to a GDI affinity column, and binding to GDI in a
              yeast two-hybrid system.

     2.  Identify genes encoding proteins that
              interact with GDI, by using gene interaction screens.  One screen will select
              for dominant enhancers and suppressors of the Drosophila GDI mild alleles.  The
              other screen will select for dominant enhancers of the Drosophila GDI null
              allele.

     3.  Isolation of other secretion mutants in Drosophila, using a
              pupal cuticle screen.  Analysis of the GDI mutant phenotype indicates that
              secretion of the pupal cuticle is especially sensitive to defects in vesicular
              transport.  This screen will isolate mutants with defective pupal cuticles.

