Title       : RUI: Molecular Biophysical Studies of Cysteine Residues in the CFTR Cl- Channel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9874490

Award Number: 9874490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Harrington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse College
	      830 Westview Drive S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303101427    404/681-2800

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a unique
              chloride channel found in epithelial cells throughout the body.  While
              functionally an ion channel, structurally CFTR belongs to a family of
              ATPase-dependent transporters known as ABC transporters.  CFTR, however, is the
              only known member to function primarily as an ion channel.  Because of its
              unique molecular evolution, the CFTR channel is an interesting and important
              model for biophysical studies of ion channel structure and function.  The
              experiments that comprise this project are based on preliminary studies which
              show that the gating of the channel is altered by the reduction/oxidation
              (redox) state of the protein.  The experiments use a combination of molecular
              biological and electrophysiological techniques to examine the role of
              redox-sensitive cysteine residues in modulating channel gating.  The results
              will be used to identify domain interactions within the protein that are
              important for channel function.  The major hypotheses to be tested are (1) that
              gating of the channel is influenced by the redox state of specific cysteine
              residues which if mutated change channel properties, (2) that reintroducing
              cysteines into strategic areas of mutated proteins will restore normal activity
              and will help identify regions of the protein important for channel function,
              and (3) that nitric oxide, when produced by cells, acts as an endogenous redox
              regulator of the CFTR channel.  The research will involve the direct
              participation of undergraduates, and thus will enhance both the research and
              educational environment of the Biology Department at Morehouse College


