Title       : Pulsed EPR Studies of Photosystem II Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9874541

Award Number: 9874541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. David Britt rdbritt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Britt
9874541



Technical: 

Experiments utilizing the pulsed electron
              paramagnetic resonance (EPR) methods of ESEEM and ESE-ENDOR along with
              selective isotopic labelling and mutagenesis of amino acids will be used to
              investigate the function of various radical centers in Photosystem II. The
              degree of homology between PSII and purple non-oxygen evolving bacterial
              reaction centers will be investigated at P6s0 and the QA and QB binding sites.
              Time resolved pulsed EPR spectroscopy will be utilized to probe the relative
              geometry of the PSII electron transfer cofactors and details of the coupling of
              electron and proton transfer. Pulsed EPR experiments will help define the
              differences between the protein environments of PSII tyrosine radicals Yz and
              YD, with an aim of understanding the functional differences between these two
              tyrosine centers. Other experiments will be used to better describe the
              detailed magnetic and structural interactions between the manganese cluster and
              Yz. Time resolved EPR will be used to measure the dynamics of Yz, and to search
              for direct evidence of proton/electron transfer coupling through Yz. Rapid
              freeze quench experiments will target trapping of the radical YZ. species
              immediately before 02 formation and release. Further experiments will probe the
              role of a photoxidizeable chlorophyll, Chlz, in Photosystem II
              photoprotection.

Nontechnical:

 Magnetic resonance experiments are
              planned to provide new insights into how amino acid and cofactor radical
              species of the plant Photosystem II reaction center are utilized to split
              water, reduce quinones, and inject protons into the aqueous phase enclosed by
              the photosynthetic membrane, all with high quantum yield, and driven by low
              energy visible light. The advantage that photosynthetic processes are light
              driven allows specific radical trapping and transient kinetic experiments that
              would be difficult or impossible in other biological systems employing radical
              centers. Therefore these Photosystem II experiments will provide insights into
              diverse biochemical radical mechanisms that will have impact in the broader
              scientific arena.
 

