Title       : Study of Enhancer-Promoter Specificity in Antennapedia Complex of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9874510

Award Number: 9874510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haini N. Cai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand mechanisms that regulate homeotic
              gene expression by specifying enhancer-promoter interactions, and to identify
              cis and trans factors participating in this regulation. The organization of
              homeotic genes is complex and poorly understood. For example, Antennapedia
              complex (ANT-C), a Drosophila HOM/HOX complex, contains five homeotic genes
              specifying segmental identity in the head and thoracic region, as well as six
              non-homeotic genes. These genes are controlled by arrays of enhancers located
              at varying distances. To understand how genes in such complex genetic loci are
              independently regulated, enhancer-promoter specificity will be determined for
              two neighboring genes, Scr and ftz, in ANT-C. Scr, a homeotic gene and ftz, a
              segmentation gene, are divergently transcribed and both are regulated by
              enhancers located within a 15 kb intergenic region. These enhancers
              specifically interact with their cognate promoters, directing distinct patterns
              of expression. Using a transgenic expression assay that allows monitoring of
              the activities of multiple promoters and enhancers in Drosophila embryos, it
              has been shown that promoter competition is probably an important mechanism for
              specific promoter-enhancer interaction for ftz and scr.  That and other
              experimental observations suggest that both enhancer and promoter sequences
              play critical roles in specifying interactions among them and that the genomic
              organization of HOM/HOX complexes is important for the developmental control of
              homeotic gene expression. The specific questions to be asked are: 1) How does
              the Scr promoter specifically engage its own enhancers in the presence of the
              highly competitive ftz promoter 2) Is promoter competition a general mechanism
              for transcriptional regulation in this genomic interval? 3) What are the cis
              and trans factors that control the competitiveness of promoter-enhancer
              interactions? 4) How does insulator DNA selectively modify enhancer-promoter
              interactions?

This study addresses a number of important issues of gene
              regulation in complex genetic loci and should provide insights into genetic
              regulatory strategies used in body pattern formation in animals including
              humans.

