Title       : An Investigation of Behavioral and Physiological Determinants of the Excess of
               Males in the Small Eared Bushbaby (Otolemur garnettii)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1999   
File        : a9874475

Award Number: 9874475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheree Watson swatson@ccaix.jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Hardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1228,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  9874475
PI: 
              Watson, Sheree
Title:  An investigation of behavioral and physiological
              determinants of the excess of males in the small eared bushbaby (Otolemur
              garnettii)

Bushbabies are primitive primates that have an unusual excess of
              males.  At birth, most individuals are males.  This is especially true among
              first offspring.  Physiological variables including body temperature and
              hormone fluctuations across the estrous cycle may influence the birth male to
              female ratio.  These depend on a behavioral mediator.  The male, the female, or
              both, must be more willing to mate at a point in the cycle coincident with the
              physiological parameters that influence the gender of the resulting offspring. 
              As the time between insemination and ovulation increases, the probability that
              the fetus will be male also increases.  Because female bushbabies have a 2-10
              day receptive period, there is an opportunity for variation in the time between
              insemination and ovulation.  The increased male bias in first offspring could
              result from differences in the timing of insemination.  Males may control
              mating with younger, inexperienced females but may have less influence with
              older, experienced females.  Dr. Watson's research will use evaluation of
              videotaped courtship behavior to document differences between inexperienced and
              experienced females.  This will examine the hypothesis that control of the
              timing of insemination by males and females influences the gender of the
              fetus.

The results provide information about the influence of social
              behaviors on birth male to female ratios.  This knowledge will benefit captive
              breeding programs for primitive primates.  It may add to the understanding of
              human reproduction.  This project will initiate the first nonhuman primate
              colony at a historically black university, enabling greater research
              opportunities for minority students. 

