Title       : How Reform Works: An Evaluative Study of NSF's Urban Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9874322

Award Number: 9874322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1314207            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason J. Kim jkim@systemic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rolf K. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pendred E. Noyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd I. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Systemic Research, Inc.
	      150 Kerry Place, 2nd FL
	      Norwood, MA  020624766    781/278-0300

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed study will 1) determine the impact of the USI program on student
              achievement and the learning infrastructure in urban school districts and 2)
              develop an inferential causal model that related the NSF drivers and other key
              elements to the outcomes observed.  Systemic model analyses will be conducted
              from five perspectives:
1. Across 20 USI sites - reviewing and comparing
              systemic reform progress across the 20 USI sites, identifying successful USI
              models based on student outcomes, and further exploring the key success factors
              using a statistical inference/causal model.
2. By USI cohort - measuring the
              systemic impact by duration and intensity of involvement in systemic reform
              efforts among the existing three cohorts.
3. Longitudinal per site - analyzing
              longitudinal data to measure system effectiveness before and after the
              implementation of urban systemic initiatives.
4. USI vs. Non-SI - conducting
              research on the differential impact of USI and allowing attribution of impact
              by comparing USI to non SI sites.
5. National context - reviewing the
              literature and survey data from other major reform efforts to identify
              additional significant cross-cutting variables (in addition to the drivers)
              that can inform development of an inferential model.

A range of
              dissemination activities have been proposed, including CD-ROM USI Fact Book,
              yearly evaluative research report, periodic newsletters, materials for the NSF
              website, and monographs.


