Title       : Molecular Studies on Antigen Receptor Gene Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9874615

Award Number: 9874615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato J. Aguilera renato@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major goal of this research is to determine the role of Endo-SR
              (Endonuclease implicated in Switch/Somatic Recombination) in B-cell specific
              gene recombination or other DNA processing events.  Endo-SR was initially
              discovered through its ability to preferentially cleave immunoglobulin (lg)
              switch repeat sequences commonly found at lg isotype-switch recombination
              breakpoints.  
This enzyme has been purified to homogeneity from bovine spleen
              nuclear extracts and partial peptide sequence information from the purified
              protein has been obtained.  Sequence homology searches performed with these
              peptides revealed significant similarities to the predicted amino acid
              sequences of hypothetical human and C. elegans proteins identified by the Human
              and C. elegans Genome Projects.  The identified human protein has recently been
              reported to encode an endonuclease implicated in nuclear DNA degradation
              induced during programmed cell death. Preliminary evidence indicates that the
              C. elegans protein also encodes an endonuclease implicated in apoptotic nuclear
              DNA degradation. The recent isolation of the Endo-SR gene should greatly
              facilitate a rigorous analysis of the in vivo regulation and function of this
              enzyme.  As part of this analysis,  Endo-SR mutant cell lines will be generated
              by targeted gene disruption.  Assays conducted with these Endo-SR deficient
              cells should allow definitively conclusions as to whether or not this nuclease
              activity is required for switch recombination and/or apoptosis.  This research
              should greatly enhance current understanding of the molecular and biochemical
              roles of an enzyme that has been implicated in both a lymphocyte-specific DNA
              recombination process and a general DNA degradation process induced by
              apoptosis.

