Title       : CAREER: Ecohydraulics: Simulation of Physical Processes in River Ecosystem
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9874754

Award Number: 9874754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Goodwin pgoodwin@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1472,9150,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9874754
Goodwin
This is an award to support research on a process by which all
              factors that impact on riverine enhancement can be taken into consideration
              during planning, engineering design and implementation of enhancement
              procedures.  Implementation of river enhancement plans requires an
              understanding of the complex interactions between and among factors that
              influence the decision to undertake enhancement and determine their economic
              cost and benefits.  These factors are basically determined by the basin's
              geomorphology which influences its response to conditions that cause flooding. 
              Basin responses including sediment transport and bank erosion are significantly
              influenced by changing patterns of development and land use.  The investigator
              has identified study sites in Idaho that are relatively small in scale to use
              in conduct of this research.  These include a pristine, undisturbed site in the
              Frank Church Wilderness, a logged and heavily mined site on the Red River and a
              grazed rangeland basin drained by Reynolds Creek in the Owyhee Mountains of
              southwestern Idaho.  Selected heavily urbanized drainage basins selected for
              study include Wildcat Creek in Richmond, California and San Pedro Creek in
              Pacifica, California.   The hydraulic research objective is expected to focus
              on the Willamette River between Albany and Salem in Oregon as an example of a
              large-scale river and the Napa River in California as an intermediate-scale
              river.    

The proposal leading to this award was submitted in response to
              the Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program that emphasizes combining
              discovery of new knowledge with inspired teaching and enthusiastic learning. 
              The research component of this project is expected to result in better
              procedures than are now available for relating of the costs of riverine
              restoration to benefits gained than is now possible.  The educational component
              includes an approach to interest inner-city and rural children in river
              restoration, introduce undergraduates to ecological restoration by using
              field-acquired data in undergraduate courses and establishing a project web
              page and video for the Red River site that will include computer simulations of
              floods and the geomorphological changes resulting from flooding. 

