Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental Mechanisms Underlying Diversity in
               Arthropod Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a9874624

Award Number: 9874624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Nagy lnagy@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One important feature that has enabled arthropods to become the most diverse
              extant animals is the adaptability of their limb morphology. Evolutionary
              modifications have resulted in limbs that differ radically in form and
              function, from unbranched walking legs to multibranched swimming paddles.  Drs.
              Nagy and Williams' goal is determine the developmental and genetic mechanisms
              that underlie the formation of branched versus unbranched limbs in order to
              understand how arthropod limb diversity has evolved.  Their preliminary
              experiments allow them to formulate an initial model for how a multi-branched
              limb develops in the crustacean, Triops longicaudatus.  This model predicts
              which features of the current Drosophila model of limb development are modified
              in the evolution of other arthropod limbs. They propose comparative gene
              expression studies, fate mapping, and descriptions of the cellular dynamics of
              limb growth to confirm or extend our model of Triops limb development. They
              then will experimentally test our model by observing the consequences of
              targeted cell ablations in developing limbs.  Through comparisons with
              Drosophila, they hope to explain how radically different limb morphologies can
              be produced by modifications of similar underlying genetic networks.
	Their
              studies compare both the molecular and cellular development of a multi-branched
              limb in  Triops to that of the unbranched limb in Drosophila.  These two limbs
              differ not only in number of branches but also in their fundamental structure:
              Drosophila legs are jointed and rod-shaped, Triops legs have an unjointed
              paddle-shaped limb with eight branches arising around the margin.  Thus, their
              comparison between them should reveal how very different limbs arise. Their
              results suggest that there are three critical features of the Drosophila model
              that vary between species. 1) In Drosophila, the intersection of the
              anteroposterior (A/P) and dorsoventral (D/V) patterning axes position the limb
              primordia.  Their data suggest that variation in D/V positioning in Triops
              results in the specification of a larger limb primordia, which they hypothesize
              is the first step in building a multi-branched limb.  2)  In Drosophila, the
              intersection of the secreted signaling factors, wingless (wg), decapentaplegic
              (dpp), and hedgehog (hh) specify a point of proximal/ distal (P/D) elongation
              for leg outgrowth.  Cell fates in the distal region of the leg are activated
              and maintained directly by different levels of Wg and Dpp signals;  in the
              proximal region of the leg they are activated by a different gene network,
              regulated at least in part by the extradenticle (exd) gene. Their data suggest
              that the multibranched limb of Triops does indeed have a single P/D axis,
              potentially controlled by homologues of the same signaling genes.  However, the
              patterning of the branches in Triops is not a simple iteration of the same gene
              network involved in patterning the Drosophila limb.  From their earliest
              development at least four different branch types are identifiable by
              distinctive gene expression patterns.  3) Establishment of a single point of
              P/D outgrowth in Drosophila is not directly linked to cell division patterns. 
              However, in Triops, they find a concentration of mitotically active cells in
              the region of the putative Triops limb organizer.  Their model therefore
              suggests that, unlike Drosophila, the P/D organizer in Triops may control
              specific patterns of cell division, in a manner similar to vertebrate limb
              development.

