Title       : Circadian Programming of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a9874371

Award Number: 9874371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl H. Johnson carl.h.johnson@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Organisms at all levels of biological complexity manifest circadian (daily)
              rhythms which are controlled by an endogenous biochemical oscillator. The
              biochemical nature of these biological clocks has been elusive, but one
              principle which has emerged is that their salient properties (persistence,
              temperature compensation, and entrainment) are conserved in all organisms in
              which circadian behavior has been observed, from bacteria to mammals. This
              principle has encouraged the hope that the biochemical mechanism has also been
              conserved- if not in exact homology, then at least in terms of the general
              components and composition of the clock. In this project the approach to
              unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators focuses on the least complex
              and most technically approachable organism in which a biological clock has been
              demonstrated:  the cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942. The
              technical advantages of this organism are its small genome, which is easily
              manipulated genetically, and its bioluminescent strain, which offers  a highly
              flexible and facile system of monitoring circadian gene expression..  This
              cyanobacterial system provides excellent tools for detailed molecular/genetic
              analyses and for clock investigations. The project will use this system to
              address three aspects of biological rhythmicity: (i) an assessment of the
              fitness advantage that cyanobacteria derive from their circadian oscillators,
              (ii) an analysis of the roles of clock gene products in the central clock
              mechanism, and (iii) characterization of the mechanism by which the oscillator
              controls metabolic pathways.

Many physiological and cellular processes,
              including sleep cycles, body temperature maintenance, homeostatic functions,
              gene expression, cell division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by
              biological clocks. In addition, these clocks are also the timers that measure
              the daylength in photoperiodic timing of reproductive processes in plants and
              animals. The biochemical mechanism of circadian clocks is of fundamental
              biological interest; understanding it may lead to insights which will be useful
              to society in many ways.

