Title       : CAREER: Phase Transformations in Ceramics and Semiconductors Under Contact
               Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9874955

Award Number: 9874955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Gogotsi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9874955
Gogotsi

Phase transformations occurring in materials under high
              pressures are important for a wide range of problems in materials science and
              engineering.  Most of the results in this area have been obtained using various
              sophisticated high-pressure cells. In this Faculty Early CAREER Development
              project, the solid-state phase transformations and amorphization under high
              non-hydrostatic pressures using a combination of hardness indentation tests
              with Raman spectroscopy will be studied.  Micro-Raman spectroscopy is probably
              the only method that allows the non-destructive phase analysis of materials to
              be conducted within seconds with a spatial resolution in the order of 1
              micrometer on a non-prepared surface of the material or under the surface. 
              Preliminary experiments have demonstrated metallization due to closing of the
              band gap and consequent formation of metastable phases upon decompression in Si
              and Ge.  For the first time, metastable phases were unambiguously observed in
              hardness impressions and for some of these phases Raman spectra have not been
              published before. The data obtained will be used to confirm experimentally that
              the hardness level of many brittle materials depends on the stress
              (deformation) needed to initiate the phase transformation and supply evidence
              that metallization of semiconductors is a deformation induced, not a 'pressure'
              induced phenomenon. TEM with SAD and EELS, micro-XRD and micro-FTIR will be
              used as supplementary techniques for phase analysis.

Hardness indentation
              tests combined with Raman spectroscopy will be used to analyze a variety of
              semiconductors and ceramics.  The use of this technique will allow the PI to
              demonstrate the high-pressure metallization of diamond.  This technique will
              also be used to find other new high-pressure phases in ceramics (carbides and
              nitrides) and semiconductors that have been theoretically predicted, but not
              yet obtained. The success in solving this problem is likely to catalyze rapid
              advances in high-pressure research, and make it a routine technique which is
              accessible to almost every material scientist.  In addition, the educational
              component of this CAREER project builds on the PI's multidisciplinary research
              and educational background.  The project is structured in order to ensure that
              the basic science developed in this project will lead to achievement of long
              term goals of practical significance with applications in indentation testing,
              ductile regime machining, nanopatterning of surfaces, surface quality control
              and tribology.

