Title       : Expression and Functional Analysis of Genes Regulating Appressorium Formation in
               Magnaporthe Grisea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9874430

Award Number: 9874430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Dean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed research is to elucidate the mechanisms
regulating
              the development of the appressorium, a specialized cell required
by the rice
              blast fungus Magnaporthe grisea (and other fungal pathogens)
for successful
              host infection.  Previous research focused on characterizing
and cloning genes
              from appressorium developmental mutants. These data have
been used to create a
              model of appressorium formation for further testing.
In this project,
              advantage will be taken of progress to date as well as new
resources available
              at the Clemson University Genomics Institute.  It is
now possible to analyze
              the expression of many genes under a variety of
developmental conditions.  As
              many of those genes involved in appressorium
formation as possible will be
              identified through differential hybridization
analysis.  Gene expression in
              various appressorium deficient mutants will
be exploited to identify
              potentially key genes.  The function of these
genes will be investigated by
              gene disruption.  Finally, to begin to define
the interplay of proteins
              regulating appressorium formation the interaction
of gene products will be
              evaluated. 

Objectives include:
1. Identify genes involved in the
              regulation and development of
appressorium formation.  This objective covers
              the completion of ongoing
research, specifically APP1 cloning and identifying
              genes tagged by
insertional mutagenesis.  In new research, genes involved in
              appressorium
formation will be identified by differential hybridization of
              cDNA
libraries arrayed on high-density filters.  Identified cDNAs will
              be
sequenced and deposited in public databases.
2. Evaluate role of
              appressorium genes through gene disruption.
3. Begin to define the regulatory
              networks governing appressorium formation
by exploiting the 2-hybrid
              system.

Results from this investigation have practical as well as
              conceptual
significance.  The identification of genes and pathways essential
              for
infection to occur can be exploited to create rational mechanism
              based
inhibitors.  


