Title       : CAREER: Stochastic Optimization of System Reliability With Risk-Averse Decision
               Makers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a9874716

Award Number: 9874716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Coit coit@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for
              the development of optimization algorithms with the goal of maximizing system
              reliability when critical components, which may be used in the design, have
              uncertain reliability.  The objective is to determine the most reliable system
              design by the determination of a system-level configuration and selection of
              components, given system-level constraints, e.g., cost budget, space
              requirement.  Traditional approaches have generally required explicit knowledge
              of reliability for all available components, thereby ignoring the variability
              and the risk implicit in using uncertain estimates.  This research is
              explicitly considering uncertainty and variability with component and system
              reliability estimation, and is working to produce stochastic optimization
              algorithms that can be tailored and used to recommend design solutions for
              different user risk profiles.  Analytical methods are being developed to
              propagate uncertainty to the system-level.  For the design of modern electronic
              systems (and others), this is an accurate design model because the recent
              development of many high-technology components and materials precludes
              extensive testing needed to explicitly determine component reliability. 
              Problem-specific integer programming and Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are being
              used as optimization methods to search and consider possible design
              solutions.
     The immediate benefits of this research will be theoretical
              insights into the propagation of uncertainty and the effectiveness of design
              improvement strategies.  This research will provide tools which can lead to
              safer and more robust engineering designs.  Additionally, there will likely be
              important insights concerning the use of stochastic optimization methodologies
              in a risk-averse environment.  Considering risk aversion, it may be too risky
              to maximize an expected objective function without regard to variability.  The
              immediate benefits will be directed towards the reliability engineering
              community.  However, there may likely be far-reaching implications leading to
              improved solution strategies for other problem domains, such as facility
              layout, which are characterized by stochastic objectives and risk-averse
              decision-makers.

