Title       : (Career) Characterization of Channel Morphology and Hydraulics for
               Stream-Restoration Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9874751

Award Number: 9874751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Thompson dmtho@conncoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut College
	      Route 32, North
	      New London, CT  06320    203/447-1911

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9874751	
Thompson

Research on the processes influencing channel stability
              can greatly improve the success rate of restoration and preservation efforts
              and provide exciting educational opportunities.  Channel restoration is a
              growing fleld of importance, but there are many improvements that are needed to
              insure success when applying the various techniques.  The research to improve
              this field can actively involve undergraduate students and beneflt the
              classroom.  I will develop a research program involving undergraduates to
              assess channel maintenance processes in New England channels.  The research
              will aid in rish habitat studies, channel restoration efforts and further our
              understanding on morphologic evolution of channels.  Students will assist with
              high-level research on channel-maintenance processes and perform smaller
              independent research projects on aspects of the main project.  The students
              will also plan, implement and monitor their own restoration project on the
              Connecticut College campus.  The restoration effort will involve students from
              four main courses and serve as an example for a rifth introductory course.  The
              heavy involvement of undergraduate students will help provide inspiration and
              confidence to these students.  The environmental goals of the project can also
              help generate community interest in the work conducted at Connecticut College. 
              At the completion of the project, the scientific and engineering community will
              have new approaches to stream restoration that focus on the importance of the
              pool and riffle morphology.  In addition, the college will have a
              better-educated student body and improved campus grounds.  Finally, the local
              community will see the success of the local restoration efforts and can use
              these examples to initiate their own rehabilitation plans.

