Title       : CAREER: Experimental Studies of Granular Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9874833

Award Number: 9874833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayanan Menon menon@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9874833
Menon

This CAREER project comprises an experimental investigation of
              the dynamics of granular materials. The research will seek data describing
              granular flow. This information should aid  development of models granular
              systems. At present there exists no well-established hydrodynamic description
              of the response of a granular system to external forces. Unlike the situation
              in conventional, correlations in spatial structure and dynamical quantities may
              play a significant role in granular flows.  A first step to understanding these
              correlations involves experiments to study and control the dissipative
              interaction between grains.  In parallel, homogeneously excited granular
              systems will be created via gravity-driven flow and high-amplitude,
              high-frequency oscillation.  These two components will be united to create
              well-controlled uniform dynamical systems with tunable dissipation, to be
              studied by video
microscopy, diffusing-wave spectroscopy, sound propagation
              and direct stress measurements with a view to discerning dynamical and spatial
              correlations.  The research plan is structured to build in a significant role
              for undergraduate research.  Some components of the program will
devolve into
              modules for undergraduate laboratory courses.  Proposals for course development
              are defined which build on the research interests and training of the PI to
              meet departmental goals in an ongoing restructuring of the undergraduate
              program.
%%%
This CAREER project comprises an experimental investigation of
              the dynamics of granular materials. There exists no well-established
              description of the response of a granular system to
external forces at the
              level of fluid mechanics for conventional liquids. This general question is of
              interest to a number of scientific communities including chemical and
              mechanical  engineering, geophysics, applied mathematics as well as physics.
              Unlike the case of conventional fluid flows, correlations in spatial structure
              and dynamical quantities may play a very significant role in granular flows. 
              The proposed experiments will study homogenous granular flows in which the
              energy losses are controllable, using a variety of optical techniques, sound
              propagation and force measurements with a view to discerning dynamical and
              spatial correlations. The research plan is structured to build in a significant
              role for undergraduate research with well-delineated projects for independent
              research.  Some components of the program are designed to devolve into modules
              for undergraduate laboratory courses.  Proposals for course development are
              defined which build on the research interests and training of the PI to meet
              significant departmental goals as part of an ongoing restructuring of the
              undergraduate program.
***
  

