Title       : CAREER: Processing of Bioceramic Implants Using Rapid Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a9874971

Award Number: 9874971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amit Bandyopadhyay amitband@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The research component of this CAREER project focuses on rapid prototyping
              of bioceramic implants and intends to investigate the following aspects: what
              are the effects of pore size, pore volume and pore distribution on
              biocompatibility, bioactivity and the biomechanical properties of porous
              ceramic implants?  It will examine the effectiveness of various controlled
              interconnected pore structures on different types of porous bioceramic
              implants.  This objective will be accomplished using an interdisciplinary
              approach that integrates advanced manufacturing techniques, fundamental ceramic
              processing, materials characterization, and biomedical engineering.  Net-shape
              and near net-shape bioceramic implants will be fabricated via indirect and
              direct processing routes using rapid prototyping (solid freeform fabrication)
              technique. Novel three-dimensional honeycomb structures with controlled
              interconnected porosity and desired shapes will be fabricated.  Pore size, pore
              distribution and total pore volume will be varied to study their effects on
              tissue ingrowth and biomechanical properties using in-vitro testing in
              simulated body fluids. Undergraduate and graduate students will be educated
              through hands-on research experience in advanced processing and manufacturing. 
              Local junior/senior high school students will be recruited every summer to
              participate in the project under an outreach program.  
     The project is
              expected to make significant advance of the current knowledge on rapid
              prototyping of ceramics for bioengineering applications. This knowledge will
              directly benefit selective college and high-school student through the
              project's education effort.


