Title       : CAREER: New Concepts in Long Term Structural Health Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a9874774

Award Number: 9874774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Shenton, III shenton@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Shenton Career Abstract
The focus of the proposed research is new concepts in
              long-term structural health monitoring; the education plan outlines a new
              summer enrichment program for middle and high school students and incorporating
              a new approach to teaching in engineering. Intelligent structural health
              monitoring has the potential to significantly reduce life-cycle costs, assist
              in early damage assessment and increase the longevity of the built environment.
              However, while progress has been made in this area in recent years, it is still
              not a practical reality. The research will address new ideas in this field in
              an effort to eliminate the obstacles that remain. Key concepts of the research
              are (1) a novel method for damage assessment based on strain energy
              distribution due to dead load, (2) wireless internet-based communications, and
              (3) system integration. A method is proposed for detecting gradual
              deterioration in a structure, or damage induced by rare high intensity events,
              based on the distribution of strain energy due to dead load in the structure.
              The approach lends itself well to graphical visualization of damage in a
              building frame and circumvents many of the problems associated with damage
              detection methods that are based on dynamic modal information. The monitoring
              system will make use of wireless telecommunications technologies for internet
              access that exist now, or will exist within the next five years: this includes
              wireless LANs and low-earth orbit satellite-based internet. Pilot tests of the
              structural monitoring system will be conducted using remote shake table tests
              and full-scale structures. The education component includes "Engineer It," a
              challenging but fun summer enrichment program for eighth through tenth graders
              that will expose them to the various engineering disciplines and encourage them
              to pursue academic courses that lead to careers in engineering and science. The
              program will be managed by the PI and a multi-disciplinary team of engineering
              undergraduates and will be widely accessible through a World Wide Web site.
              Finally, the PI's undergraduate Dynamics course will be converted entirely to a
              Problem-Based learning format, a creative new approach to teaching that is
              thought to be ideally suited to engineering study and is designed to engage
              students in the learning process.
