Title       : Engineering Development of a Multielectrode Array and Its Application to control
               of Foot and Ankle During Walking.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9874533

Award Number: 9874533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57512              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Normann normann@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Multiple-microelectrode arrays are being developed as engineering tools for
              sampling the physiological activity of large numbers of nerve cells at once, in
              the brain or in nerves.  Such arrays present technological challenges involving
              fabrication, interfaces to electrical connections, multiplexing by electronics,
              and computational data capture.  They promise new levels of understanding of
              how whole groups of cells in the nervous system coordinate their activity for
              appropriate sensory processing or motor behavior.  For example, the neural
              mechanisms underlying walking in tetrapod vertebrates are highly complex,
              involving sensory input and control of motor output for several different
              muscle groups rotating foot, ankle, knee and hip.  Control of walking provides
              an excellent system to simultaneously test the engineering capability of this
              electrode system, and to discover principles of how sensory input is used for
              multi-joint coordination.  This project uses a novel ceramic 100-electrode
              array chronically implanted in the sciatic nerve of the leg to study how
              sensory information is used for motor regulation of the walking gait under
              different walking speeds and loads.
    Results from this work will be
              important not only for understanding sensorimotor integration, but for further
              development of a device that will be extremely useful in analyzing brain
              activity in general, as well as having great potential for prosthetic
              engineering devices to assist walking recovery, for example, after spinal cord
              injury.  The project also will have an impact on cross-disciplinary training
              between neurobiologists and engineers.

