Title       : Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9874532

Award Number: 9874532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Guarino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy E. Shippen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Guarino

Baculoviruses are unique among eukaryotic DNA viruses in that early
              genes are transcribed by the host RNA polymerase II while late and very late
              genes are transcribed by a viral-encoded RNA polymerase. The viral RNA
              polymerase contains four equimolar subunits, LEF-4, -8, -9, and p47. LEF-8, the
              largest of the four subunits, contains a 13 amino acid motif conserved among
              beta subunits of RNA polymerases. LEF-9 contains a 7 amino acid sequence with
              homology to a highly conserved beta-prime sequence. These similarities suggest
              that LEF-8 and LEF-9 are the catalytic subunits of RNA polymerase. However,
              these regions of homology are considerably more restricted than is common among
              RNA polymerases. To examine the functional relevance of these sequences,
              alanine mutagenesis will be conducted on the conserved motifs, and the effects
              of the mutations on transcription activity will be determined. In addition, the
              individual subunits will be assayed for RNA polymerase, promoter binding, and
              NTP binding activities. Additional late transcription factors will be assayed
              for the ability to stimulate viral RNA polymerase and for DNA and RNA binding
              activities.

The viral protein VLF-1 is the best candidate for the factor
              that differentially regulates expression of late and very late genes. VLF-1
              shows strong homology to a family of proteins that function as integrases, yet
              there is no obvious role for an integrase in the life cycle of baculoviruses.
              Thus, VLF-1 probably acts on DNA in a manner analogous to integrases and binds
              to DNA in a sequence-specific manner and modifies it in some way. Purified
              VLF-1 will be characterized with respect to its activity in assays for DNA/RNA
              binding, topoisomerase activity, and stimulation of in vitro
              transcription.

This research should aid in understanding the mechanisms that
              regulate temporal expression of baculovirus genes, and have practical impacts
              on biotechnology. The baculovirus expression system is widely used for the
              production of  proteins for use as vaccines, diagnostic tools, or therapeutic
              agents. However, the baculovirus system has limitations: it is transient
              because the viral vectors kill the cells; and recombinant proteins are
              expressed late when cellular processing pathways are compromised. A knowledge
              of the mechanisms that control baculovirus polyhedrin expression may aid in the
              design of vectors that work in the absence of virus infection and thus do not
              kill the host or impair protein processing.

