Title       : CAREER: Phonon Spectroscopic Studies of Anisotropic Superconductors and Dipolar
               Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9874930

Award Number: 9874930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett Ellman bellman@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9874930
Ellman
Much of the research in this CAREER project relies on the use
              of high-frequency phonons as incisive probes of unconventional superconductor
              (e.g., heavy fermion) gap structures.   Transverse ultrasound is exceptionally
              suited to studies of symmetry-breaking in, for example, UPt3 under uniaxial
              stress, while higher frequency non-hydrodynamic phonons will be utilized in an
              attempt to directly "map the gaps" in k-space.  Even higher energy phonons
              (~200 GHz) will be used to study Ising magnets possessing a "tunable" degree of
              disorder.  Ultimately, the aim will be to spectroscopically explore the onset
              of glassy behavior in a system eminently amenable to theoretic analysis. The
              education component incorporates (a) teaching qualitative physics to
              non-scientists and (b) instilling an appreciation for science as a worthwhile
              human endeavor.  Two groups will be targeted: (1) Students enrolled in a large
              non-mathematical physical science course, which may be the only opportunity to
              broaden their horizons. (2) Parents (or prospective parents) of young children.
              Here, the goal is to supply information to inform and augment the parents in
              their roles as role model and teacher. Updated course materials,
              demonstrations, and modern information technology will bring powerful, highly
              visual tools to bear on these tasks.
%%% 
This project focuses on magnets and
              superconductors, which have important technological applications. Ultra-high
              frequency sound waves are used to probe some of these exotic materials. For
              superconductors, this technique gives a direct geometric "picture" of
              quantities that dictate the electrical behavior of the material (the
              superconducting "gap").  For magnets, it provides basic information about the
              often-puzzling roles of disorder and magnetic interaction in otherwise simple
              systems. The education component incorporates (a) teaching qualitative physics
              to non-scientists and (b) instilling an appreciation for science as a
              worthwhile human endeavor.  Two groups will be targeted: (1) Students enrolled
              in a large non-mathematical physical science course, which may be the only
              opportunity to broaden their horizons. (2) Parents (or prospective parents) of
              young children. Here, the goal is to supply information to inform and augment
              the parents in their roles as role model and teacher. Updated course materials,
              demonstrations, and modern information technology will bring powerful, highly
              visual tools to bear on these tasks.
*** 

