Title       : CAREER: Neural Network-Based Adaptive Critic Designs for Broadband Network
               Traffic Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9874601

Award Number: 9874601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Derong Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9874601
Liu
Adaptive critic designs (ACDs) are designs that approximate
              dynamic programming in the general case. A typical ACD consists of three
              modules that can be implemented using neural networks -- a Values module, a
              Prediction module , and a Decision module. This project aims to collaborate
              with industry in developing and implementing learning traffic control schemes
              for broadband communication networks using ACD's.
An open and challenging
              problem facing the designer of the next generation of communication networks is
              to design schemes that integrate multimedia traffic efficiently and that
              guarantee the quality of service (QoS) for each traffic source. The challenge
              here is to maximize the network bandwidth utilization and at the same time to
              guarantee QoS. For this purpose, traffic control schemes including call
              admission control and traffic enforcement have been studied extensively in the
              past. However, most of the existing schemes sacrifice bandwidth utilization
              (i.e., waste network resources/lose revenue) in order to guarantee QoS. The
              preliminary study of this project has shown that, with the same QoS goals,
              higher bandwidth utilization than existing schemes can be achieved using a
              self-learning approach based on ACDs.
Integrated self-learning traffic control
              at different levels (packet/call/network levels) will be implemented in this
              project. These include token bucket with optimized parameters, call admission
              control, and routing and congestion control. Two fundamental issues in the
              field of neural network-based ACDs will be investigated: (1) structural
              robustness analysis of neural network-based ACDs and (2) problems relating to
              convergence in neural network training. Education activities include: (1)
              Course, laboratory and curriculum development: To develop a graduate course on
              ACDs, to develop the Intelligent Systems Laboratory at Stevens, and the
              interdisciplinary effort which will emphasize ACDs/brain-like intelligent
              systems; (2) Research experience for undergraduate students: To expose
              undergraduate students to the numerous Opportunities available in a variety of
              ACDs research areas; and (3) Pedagogical initiatives: To develop a web-based
              interactive computer tool for automated homework submission and grading and to
              implement a white board system over the computer network to aid student
              learning; the evaluation of the pedagogical initiatives will use a web-based,
              on-line education assessment system in which the self-learning feature of ACDs
              is applied to optimal decision making.
***

