Title       : Studies of Interfacial Flow Behavior Using Langmuir Monolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9874701

Award Number: 9874701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Dennin mdennin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9874701
Michael Dennin/U. Cal. @  Berkeley

The flow behavior
              of Langmuir monolayers using a combination of optical (Brewster angle
              microscopy) and rheological techniques is proposed.  The rheological
              mesurements will be made using a newly developed Langmuir trough that is based
              on a Couette viscometer.  This proposal consists of  two sets of related
              experiments:  a study of the intrinsic flow behavior of Langmuir monolayers;
              and a study of flow in monolayer foams as a model for flow in three-dimensional
              foams and emulsions.  The common theme in both of these sets of experiments is
              the contribution of topology to rheology.

Langmuir monolayers are
              intrinsically two-dimensional and consist of  amphiphilic molecules that are
              confined to the air-water interface.  The Couette trough we have developed 
              consists of two concentric cylinders that are oriented vertically.  The inner
              cylinder is fixed and the outer cylinder is free to rotate.  The top surface of
              the water is free, and the monolayer is placed on this surface.  The outer
              cylinder is composed of an elastic band that is used for compression and
              expansion of the monolayer.  The inner cylinder consists of two parts.  A
              stationary cylinder in the water subphase, and a torsion pendulum that just
              makes contact with the water surface.  The dc viscosity is measured by rotating
              the outer cylinder and measuring the stress on the inner cylinder with the
              torsion pendulum.  The ac viscosity is measured by holding the outer cylinder
              fixed and oscillating the torsion pendulum.  Additional information about the
              flow properties of the monolayer is obtained by direct observation of velocity
              profiles and domain dynamics with a Brewster angle microscope.  Also, by
              continuously rotating the outer cylinder, shear alignment of the monolayer
              makes it possible to obtain highly ordered samples of Langmuir
              monolayers.

Recently, there has been a renewed interest in the rheology of
              Langmuir monolayers, in part, due to the elucidation of their liquid condensed
              (LC) phases. The LC phases are two-dimensional analogs of three-dimensional
              smectic liquid crystals.  They posses hexatic order, and in phases where the
              molecules are tilted with respect to the surface, the tilt azimuth exhibits
              orientational order.  Because LC phase are ubiquitous in Langmuir monolayers,
              understanding their rheology has relevance to a range of processes that involve
              surfactant monolayer flow at interfaces, including foam drainage and emulsion
              stability.  Furthermore, the macroscopic viscoelastic behavior of foams,
              emulsions, and colloidal suspensions subjected to external shear forces is
              often strongly dependent on their interfacial properties.

Two fundamental
              questions regarding the viscoelastic behavior of LC phases remain unanswered: 
              what is the contribution of the mesescopic structure to the viscosity, and what
              is the dominant microscopic contribution to the viscosity?  The work proposed
              here forcuses on the contribution of topology to the viscosity of the LC
              phases.  The LC phases are generally composed of  randomly oriented domains on
              the order of 100 mm.  Each domain corresponds to a region of uniform order.  We
              propose to study the contribution of the domain dynamics and the dissipation
              between the domains to the measured viscosity will be investigated.  Also, the
              effect of external shear on the structure and topology of domain.  Because
              Langmuir monolayers are two-dimensional, the domain dynamics are directly
              observable.  In contrast, systems in three-dimensional that are composed of
              domains are opaque, and the domain dynamics must be probed indirectly.  This is
              a significant advantage of studying advantage of studying flow behavior using
              Langmuir monolayers.
         

In addition to the importance of interfacial
              rheology, the viscoelastic properties of foams and emulsions are often
              dominated by the topology of the domains, or bubbles, that comprise the system.
               In addition to our studies of the domain dynamics in the LC phase we will also
              study the flow of two-dimensional gas-liquid foams using Langmuir monolayers. 
              It is proposed to address a number of questions concerning the dynamics for the
              bubbles.  What is the relation between stress and strain or shear rate?  Can
              one define an effective "temperature" for a flowing foam?  Does one observe
              shear melting of the foam?  Insights gained by this program are expected to
              generalize to three-dimensional systems where similar questions exist.    
              



