Title       : OPAAL: Optimized Meshless Algorithms for Seamless Integration of CAD, Simulation
               and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9874015

Award Number: 9874015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1481347            (Estimated)
Investigator: Weimin Han whan@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyung K. Choi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suely P. Oliveira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiun-Shyan Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A major bottleneck in integration of finite element or finite difference-based
              Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) tools with industrial Computer Aided Design
              (CAD) and Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) tools is the generation of
              well-shaped meshes that are consistent with complex CAD models and which
              provide computational accuracy and efficiency of numerical solutions,
              particularly for nonlinear simulation and design of manufacturing processes. A
              meshless-based numerical method is planned to provide seamless integration
              through CAD geometry, simulation, and shape design optimization. The method can
              be directly linked to CAD geometries since the shape/interpolation functions in
              the meshless method are formulated independent of the background integration
              zone. The meshless method will provide a higher rate of convergence and
              alleviate many numerical difficulties with respect to mesh distortion and
              moving continuities encountered in conventional finite element methods. A
              meshless formulation for linear and nonlinear problems involving elastic and
              inelastic materials and contact conditions will be developed. Efficient
              computable error estimates will be derived for the meshless formulation. Nodal
              integration methods will be formulated to enhance efficiency, and adaptive
              meshless methods will be developed for controlling accuracy and efficiency in
              large deformation problems. Development and implementation of the meshless
              methods will be accomplished using scalable and portable high-performance
              algorithms optimized for use in parallel processor computer environments. New,
              fast graph partitioning techniques and hierarchical methods for subdividing the
              domain will be used to gain maximum benefits in computational speed and
              efficiency from parallel processor computers. A meshless shape design
              sensitivity analysis method that exploits the CAD-linked geometries will be
              developed for rapid, robust design.

The objective of the planned research is
              to achieve technology solutions that promote seamless  and substantive
              interaction between diverse design and engineering analysis disciplines
              throughout the production process, from concept development to manufacturing.
              The technology developed under this effort will remove major impediments to
              comprehensive collaboration between product designers and engineers by
              maintaining a high degree of coherence between CAD, CAE and CAM modeling and
              simulation, as well as by significantly enhancing the speed and relevance of
              design information which designers and engineers exchange during all stages of
              the product development process. Achieving the meshless-based integration of
              CAD, engineering simulation, and design will have substantial positive impact
              with respect to cost reduction, mature design development, and reduced
              time-to-market by enabling more extensive use of accurate and reliable
              simulation-based engineering and design methods in lieu of costly and
              time-consuming prototype design, test, and evaluation. The application of the
              meshless technology is also designed to take maximum advantage of
              high-performance computer capabilities that are in widespread use in
              industry.
 
The research program to be carried out under this effort will
              expedite validation of meshless methods and technology transfer to industry. A
              partnership with Ford Motor Company has been established under which Ford's
              Research Laboratory will commit to an open exchange of data and expertise, as
              well as personnel resources for testing and validating meshless methods and
              their implementation on high performance computer platforms. Planned internship
              programs, graduate and undergraduate student participation, academic seminars,
              creation of new academic courses, reports and publications, and an
              international workshop will provide a range of options for practical and
              effective dissemination of the results and technical accomplishments of this
              effort.

Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and by
              DARPA.

