Title       : Aerodynamics, Wing Biomechanics, and the Evolutionary Diversification of the
               Chiroptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9874563

Award Number: 9874563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon M. Swartz sharon_swartz@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this study, the PI will investigate the functional significance of different
              wing forms and the evolution of flight in bats.  Bats have been selected as the
              study organisms because they comprise close to 1000 species, and range in body
              mass from 2 to close to 2000 g, possess a diversity of wing shapes and flight
              modes, and are characterized by an anatomical organization (rigid bony elements
              interconnected by an elastic wing membrane) that is ideally suited to modeling.
               This project will ask: 1) how do the morphology and wing kinematics of bats
              affect the joint forces and moments and the skin and bone stresses developed
              within the wing?; 2) how do the morphology and wing kinematics of bats affect
              the maneuverability, structural stability and aerodynamic performance of the
              wing, and the mechanical power of flight?; and 3) how has bat flight, dictated
              by these forces and constrained by these results, evolved from non-volant
              mammals?
	These questions will be answered by accomplishing a series of
              interrelated objectives.  A mechanically and biologically realistic computer
              model of a flying bat, based on the grey-headed flying fox, has been developed.
               This computer model is then used to generate information about the forces
              developed at the wing joints, the stresses in the wing bones and skin, the
              mechanical power of flight, the ability of the bones to withstand buckling, and
              the stability and maneuverability of the wing.  The model will be extended to a
              group of species representing diverse lineages, body sizes and flight modes. 
              This will be accomplished by obtaining detailed information about the wing
              motions and structure of several species by capturing high speed video
              sequences and detailed wing membrane strain measurements from these animals
              flying in a large wind tunnel.  Special attention will be paid to the analysis
              of the effect of body size, flight mode, wing shape, flight speed, and
              biomechanical properties on the model outputs.  
	Model results will be mapped
              onto a well-supported phylogeny of extant bats and their closest relatives to
              examine the evolution of flight performance within the Chiroptera.  The model
              will then be extended to theoretical morphologies proposed for bat ancestors,
              and results will be used to examine the relative merits of hypotheses about the
              nature of the earliest bats and the origins of bat flight.  
Finally, the
              complexity of the results of this analysis require novel approaches to data
              visualization.  Dynamic three-dimensional graphical animations will be
              developed to present results in a manner that will greatly increase
              understanding by both scientists and the general public.  This 3-D
              visualization program will be also be implemented on the PIs web site. 
              Supporting documentation will be used to create a web site to facilitate high
              school or general public level understanding of aerodynamics, animal flight,
              and bat evolution.  This web site will be built in part by an interdisciplinary
              team of undergraduates, graduates, and more senior staff, and will draw on
              biology, engineering, and computer science.

