Title       : CAREER: An A Priori Test of Retrieval of Coherent Structures in the Atmospheric
               Boundary Layer Using an Adjoint Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2001   
File        : a9874925

Award Number: 9874925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Long Lin ching-long-lin@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The wind near the ground is mainly turbulent and irregular but imbedded in it
              are often eddies, vortices, or swirls that persist long enough to be
              recognizable as entities that form, grow, and eventually dissipate.  These are
              called coherent structures and are an important class of small-scale
              atmospheric motions.  They account for substantial transports of heat,
              momentum, water vapor, and pollutants, and generate small-scale turbulence. 
              New methods of atmospheric remote sensing, in particular lidar because of its
              fine spatial resolution, hold the promise of observing and studying coherent
              structures.  However, instruments like lidar that are based on the Doppler
              principle are limited to observing only the radial component of velocity at a
              given point in space, not the three-dimensional velocity vector.  A challenging
              problem is the deduction of the three-dimensional velocity field from
              measurements of only the radial component.  The solution is not unique: more
              than one wind pattern can have the same pattern of radial velocity.  The
              approach to the problem is to constrain the number of possible solutions by
              requiring that the three-dimensional, time-evolving flow pattern conform to the
              known laws of atmospheric dynamics.  This is called the adjoint method of
              four-dimensional data assimilation (FDDA).  This project will apply FDDA to
              lidar data to observe and study coherent structures.  Initially it will be
              based on simulations.  A large-eddy simulation (LES) model will generate a
              turbulent wind field with coherent structures.  Lidar measurements will be
              simulated by determining the radial components of velocity observable from one
              or more prescribed observing points in the wind field.  Then FDDA will be
              applied to recover the complete wind field.  Real observations will be
              simulated by degrading the resolution of the synthetic observations and adding
              measurement errors.  These studies will indicate the accuracy and limitations
              of real lidar measurements and serve to define the optimum observing conditions
              for lidar systems of realistic capabilities.  Based on the understanding gained
              from the simulations, experiments on observing coherent structures using real
              lidar data will then be undertaken.  For the experimental portion of the work,
              the PI will collaborate with lidar specialists at his home institution and at
              the laboratories in Boulder, Colorado.  The educational component of the CAREER
              grant will focus on developing instructional material for an engineering
              curriculum with examples from meteorology and geophysical fluid dynamics.


