Title       : Navigational and 3D Object Shape Processing in Temporal Cortical Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9874495

Award Number: 9874495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph M. Siegel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Some complex aspects of visual stimuli are processed in the primate brain in
              areas besides the primary visual cortex, in areas known as association cortex. 
              This 'higher-order' processing includes responses by neurons (nerve cells) to
              stimuli producing the perception of objects in motion.  Perception of 'optic
              flow' occurs when a sensation of forward motion is elicited by a group of
              objects or even dots radially expanding from a central point, and 'structure
              from motion' occurs when a shape is perceived from just a pattern of dots moves
              coherently among other dots.  We know that there is some specialization of
              information flow into 'object' processing and 'motion' processing in the visual
              cortex, but it is not clear how those information streams are integrated to
              perceive moving objects.  This project begins to explore this integration in
              areas of the temporal cortex, where responses have been found to motion, to
              objects, and to motion of objects.  Behavioral tests and electrophysiological
              responses to visual stimuli are used to find out whether neurons in parts of
              the superior and inferior temporal cortex do encode sensory and cognitive
              signals.
    This exploratory work has potentially high impact on clarifying
              the hierarchical structure of visual processing, as well as providing a basis
              for further advanced computational studies in motion processing.  It also will
              provide student training that combines neurobiology, psychology and
              computational neuroscience.

