Title       : Nonsense-Mediated mRNA Decay: Characterization of Proteins and Targeted mRNAs.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9874516

Award Number: 9874516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : April 1,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Audrey L. Atkin aatkin@biocomp.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Audrey L. Atkin

The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway of the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae  is an example of a specialized mRNA decay pathway. 
              Targets of this pathway include mRNAs that have premature translation
              termination codons (nonsense mRNAs), and several wild-type RNAs.  The process
              by which wild-type mRNAs are recognized and targeted for accelerated decay by
              the NMD pathway is presently unknown, and the cellular compartment in which NMD
              occurs is controversial.  To begin to understand how wild-type mRNAs are
              recognized and targeted for NMD, it will be essential to characterize wild-type
              targets of the NMD pathway.  PPR1 mRNA is the first identified wild-type mRNA
              targeted for accelerated mRNA decay by the NMD pathway. The cis-acting
              element(s) within the PPR1 mRNA that target this mRNA for accelerated decay by
              the NMD pathway will be identified by a combination of fusion constructs,
              deletions and point mutations.  If the PPR1 cis-acting sequences are linear, as
              opposed to defining a characteristic secondary structure, these sequences will
              then be used to screen for other potential wild-type targets of the NMD
              pathway.  Translation appears to be required for NMD, suggesting that NMD
              occurs in the cytoplasm.  Consistent with that idea, Upf1p, Upf2p and Upf3p,
              three proteins required for NMD, are associated with ribosomes.  However,
              studies in mammals have implicated a role for the nucleus in NMD.  Upf1p
              interacts with Nup100p, a component of the nuclear pore complex that has a role
              in mRNA transport.  The biological significance of the interaction between
              these proteins will be determined using co-immunoprecipitation and genetic
              approaches. 

mRNA degradation is an important step for regulating gene
              expression.  The mechanism by which mRNAs are targeted for decay by specialized
              mRNA decay pathways is beginning to be understood. This project will study a
              particular decay pathway, called nonsense-mediated decay (NMD), which is
              responsible for the degradation of mutant mRNAs and at least one wild-type
              mRNA. The sequences in the wild-type mRNA that target it for decay by the NMD
              pathway will be determined. Furthermore, proteins that interact with the NMD
              pathway and components of the nuclear envelope will be characterized. These
              results will be significant because they may begin to explain the observation,
              made in mammalian studies, that the nucleus plays a role in NMD.  Since NMD is
              conserved in organisms ranging from Escherichia coli to humans, studies on NMD
              in yeast will have relevance to a broad range of organisms.

