Title       : Cell Cycle Regulation of Glc7p Protein Phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9874603

Award Number: 9874603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Cannon cannonj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The orderly steps of eukaryotic cell division are regulated in part by timely
              protein degradation and reversible protein phosphorylation.  Protein
              phosphatase-1 (PP1) enzymes are important for cell cycle dephosphorylation
              reactions.  The budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, offers the simplest
              known PP1 system because it has only a single gene for PP1, GLC7 (gene product
              is GlcTp).  Glc7p dephosphorylates proteins critical for two transitions in the
              cell cycle of yeast. The first, G1 to S-phase is regulated by the nutritional
              status of the cells.  The second transition, prior to anaphase, appears to use
              GlcTp to monitor the mitotic spindle assembly, which is necessary for faithful
              chromosome segregation.  The proteins dephosphorylated by GlcTp, which control
              the cell cycle, are unknown.

Recent results  of this investigator show that
              Glc7p protein levels oscillate during the cell cycle.  Peak levels of Glc7p
              were found in late G1 and S-phases.  Conversely, low levels were detected
              during cell cycle intervals in which G1 or mitotic cyclins are destroyed by
              ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis.  Therefore, they hypothesize that Glc7p is a
              target of ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis by the ubiquitin ligase complexes
              that destroy cyclins.  The first aim of this project is to analyze potential
              ubiquitin-dependent Glc7p proteolysis.   The second aim of this proposal
              defines the role of Glc8p, a noncatalytic subunit of  Glc7p,  in its
              regulation, to see if it shields Glc7p from ubiquitination and destruction
              during G1 to allow Glc7p to dephosphorylate substrate proteins .  The high
              cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK) activity found in Glc7p-depleted cells
              suggests that S-phase or mitotic cyclins are not destroyed appropriately when
              Glc7p activity is diminished.  This finding further implies the ubiquitin
              ligase known as the anaphase-promoting complex (APC) may be activated by Glc7p
              dephosphorylation.  The last aim seeks to identify the responsible regulatory
              phosphoproteins that are Glc7p substrates and APC regulators.


Although
              several phosphoproteins play important roles in cell division, the protein
              kinases and phosphatases that control their phosphorylation state are largely
              unknown.  The control of cell division is a complicated process, which involves
              many participants.  Preliminary analysis indicates that Glc7p protein
              phosphatase plays a part in this process.  The goal of this project is to
              integrate Glc7p function with other known aspects of cell division.

