Title       : CAREER: Single Spin Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a9874657

Award Number: 9874657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Doudin bdoudin1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9874657
Doudin
The aim of this CAREER project is to investigate the electrical
              properties of nanometer-sized ferromagnetic islands separated by insulating
              barriers from larger ferromagnetic contacts--an extension of the
              single-electron device, where electrons can be added individually to a small
              conducting island ("Coulomb island"). The magnetoresistance observed in
              tunneling magnetic systems is attributed to the spin polarization of the
              electrons in the ferromagnetic electrodes. Changing the magnetic orientation
              results in a drastic variation of the junction conductance, permitting the
              magnetic island to play the role of a gate in a single-electron transistor
              device. Control of current flow will be monitored through the magnetic
              orientation of the island, without the necessity of an electrical gate
              connection. A reduction in size compared to semiconductor devices can be
              expected because of  the larger carrier density of metals. Ultra-small devices
              will be fabricated by electrochemical template synthesis. Previous
              accomplishments on individual junctions of 0.01 mm2 area, with a 1 nm thick
              insulator separating two ferromagnetic half-wires will be the starting point of
              these studies. Specific goals of the project are: to understand the influence
              of impurities in the insulator, revealed by electron blockade effects and
              strong fluctuations of the recorded voltage; to synthesize junctions two orders
              of magnitude smaller; to make double junction systems, embedding an island of
              volume smaller than 100 nm3; to investigate systems where the island or the
              electron source(sink) is not ferromagnetic; and, to gain access into the spin
              relaxation time in the ferromagnetic island.
The interdisciplinary nature of
              the project will be the basis for a new undergraduate laboratory course
              introducing students to the science of electronics. The research topics will
              serve as a motivating application for students at all levels. The laboratory
              topics will be directly derived from the research, and will introduce
              electrical measurements on mesoscopic systems and techniques of small signal
              detection. A multi-disciplinary approach will be gained by introducing
              undergraduate and graduate students in physics to the technique of
              electrochemistry. The synthesis/processing methods employed in the research can
              be learned by undergraduate students in a relatively short time. Electrical
              connections to the samples can be initially preformed without special
              precautions, and suitable devices can be studied immediately which provide good
              examples for low signal measurements, for the study of noise properties, and
              for understanding the differences between high and low impedance
              circuits.
%%%
The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical
              area of materials science having high technological relevance. The research
              will contribute basic materials science, physics, and engineering knowledge at
              a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic materials and advanced
              devices/circuits. The scope of the project will expose students to challenges
              in materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature
              of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and on the integration of
              research and education.
 ***

