Title       : OPAAL: Integrated Design, Modeling, and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9874082

Award Number: 9874082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1646094            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schroder ps@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Ortiz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erik K. Antonsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerrold E. Marsden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Integrated Design, Modeling, and Simulation

At the highest level, the
              process of engineering design is: given a desired functionality, synthesize,
              refine, and describe a device which robustly exhibits the desired function. To
              build computational environments which support the designer and engineer in
              this task --- as the complexity of engineering continues to grow --- requires
              new, integrated modeling, simulation, visualization, and design environments.
              To be truly predictive they must be mathematically well-founded, scale
              gracefully to large problem sizes, and reliably model physical behavior across
              a wide range of scales. The research team represents computer science,
              mathematics, mechanical engineering, control and dynamical systems, and
              engineering design, to develop wholly new representations and algorithms,
              capable of addressing these issues in concert. The core integrating principle
              they employ is the mathematics of "multiresolution," i.e., descriptions at
              different levels of resolution, for geometry, numerical solvers, mechanics, and
              conceptual design. The technical approach is based on the use of subdivision
              geometry, coupled with thin shell equation dynamics. Integrating automatic
              model reduction techniques --- encompassing geometry, topology, and mechanics
              --- based on rigorous mathematics and dynamics principles allows them to
              accurately and efficiently model the behavior of complex assemblies across a
              wide range of physical scales from microscopic to gross behavior. Fluidly and
              accurately moving across many physical scales makes these representations and
              algorithms highly suitable for engineering design. Coupling them with set-based
              design methods allows designers and engineers to rapidly explore large design
              spaces.

The objective of the proposed research is to significantly advance
              modeling, simulation, and design environments as needed in, for example, the
              aircraft and automobile industries (among many others). Current industry
              practice is based on separately developed, often incompatible computational
              modules for geometric modeling, physical simulation, and analysis. With the
              increasing complexity of modern engineering, this approach incurs ever larger
              overhead and ultimately yields results whose physical accuracy is questionable.
              Reconsidering the mathematical, physical, and computer science foundations of
              such systems from scratch, employing an integrated team of researchers and
              students, can radically advance the state of the art in engineering design.
              Cross fertilization among the team members is already yielding a new approach
              to simulating the behavior of thin sheets of metal, removing a long standing
              problem in mechanics simulation, with the potential to revolutionize the use of
              computer simulations in this area. To ensure the relevance of their work to
              real industrial practice the researchers are collaborating closely with
              aircraft industry and vendors of computer modeling applications. Postdoctoral
              scholars, graduate students and undergraduates are integrated into this
              crossdisciplinary program. A new generation of researchers and practitioners is
              being educated who are equally at ease with questions of mathematics, computer
              science, and mechanical engineering.

Funding for this activity will be
              provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, and by DARPA.

