Title       : CALCRUST: A Regional Study of Crustal Structure and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9019513

Award Number: 9019513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Henyey henyey@earth.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  This proposal requests funds to continue CALCRUST                         
              (California Consortium for Crustal Studies) activities for the                 
              next year.  CALCRUST is a consortium composed of earth scientists              
              from California institutions with a common interest in crustal                 
              structure and evolution.  CALCRUST scientific teams include                    
              individuals with expertise ranging from regional geology to                    
              reflection seismology and seismic data processing.                             
                   The CALCRUST program continues to address important                       
              scientific questions in southwestern U.S. including continental                
              accretionary tectonics, the mechanics of crustal extension and                 
              compression, modes of deformation in the seismogenic regions of                
              southwestern U.S., the structure of batholiths, and basement                   
              tectonics of the petroliferous basins of coastal California.                   
              CALCRUST seeks to carry structural relationships from the outcrop              
              to depth in seismic sections, and also hopes to investigate                    
              techniques by which subsurface reflection data can be related                  
              directly to subsurface rheology and petrochemistry, such as                    
              through the use of shear waves and seismic velocity analysis.                  
                   The CALCRUST activities during the award period will consist              
              of data processing and subsequent analysis of existing data sets               
              and participation (with USGS and Stanford) in a pilot study to                 
              image the crustal structure and active faults of the San                       
              Francisco Bay area.
