Title       : Mycorrhizal Root Compeiition for Nutrients in Infertile Forests Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1993   
File        : a9019788

Award Number: 9019788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Sylvia dmsylvia@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Eissenstat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas B. Comerford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   There is intense competition for nutrients between                        
              understory vegetation and trees in forest ecosystems.  Yet, there              
              has been a notable lack of mechanistic analyses of belowground                 
              resource competition and the development of competition-induced                
              resource partitioning in plant communities.  This research will                
              quantitatively evaluate belowground competition for nutrients.                 
              Mycorrhizal fungi will affect the competitive exploitation of                  
              soil resources by plants, Despite the importance of external                   
              hyphae to the function of mycorrhizae, few researchers have                    
              attempted to quantify their distribution.                                      
                   The objectives of this research are (i) to determine the                  
              small-scale spatial patterns of roots and hyphae of mycorrhizal                
              fungi and assess their significance in regards to overlapping                  
              depletion zones and nutrient uptake and (ii) to examine the                    
              effects of understory roots and mycorrhizae on the seasonal and                
              annual pattern of pine-root growth and nutrient uptake.  The                   
              research will evaluate the field distribution of roots in species              
              mixtures and monocultures.  Under controlled environmental                     
              conditions, competition between external hyphae of                             
              ectomycorrhizal pine roots and external hyphae of vesicular-                   
              arbuscular mycorrhizal grass roots will be examined.  Mass                     
              flow/diffusion supply models will be used to elucidate how                     
              patterns of root and mycorrhiza growth affect nutrient                         
              competition.  The project will contribute basic ecological                     
              concepts which maybe infertile soils.
