Title       : Collaborative Research: Reciprocal Effects of Female Choiceand Male Traits in
               Poecillia Reticulata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9019050

Award Number: 9019050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : August 15,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Houde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Secondary sexual traits are common in animals, and male                   
              traits are sometimes so strongly developed that they appear                    
              maladaptive.  What causes a particular combination of male traits              
              and female preferences in a given population, and why do                       
              populations evolve different combinations of traits?  The                      
              investigators are addressing this question in the guppy at                     
              several levels: the mechanisms of female choice, the effects of                
              female choice on the evolution of color patterns within                        
              populations, and testing the prediction (from sexual selection                 
              theory) of co-divergence of female choice criteria and male                    
              traits among populations.                                                      
                   This is a collaborative effort with John A. Endler,                       
              University of California @ Santa Barbara.  They propose to                     
              explicitly test two major predictions from sexual selection                    
              theory.  First, they will investigate the reciprocal evolution of              
              male traits and female choice.  Second, they propose to explore                
              the effects of the sensory drive process, and how this interacts               
              with the evolution of male traits and female choice.  In order to              
              do this, they propose to carry out three long-term selection                   
              experiments which should lead to long term genetic changes in                  
              female preferences and male traits.  One experiment selects for                
              male traits and looks for evolution of female preferences.                     
              Another selects for female preferences (via selection on spectral              
              sensitivity) and looks for evolution of male traits.  The third                
              modifies the perception of color patterns (to females and                      
              predators) by varying ambient light color and predator color                   
              vision, and looks for changes in male traits and female                        
              preferences.                                                                   
                   The proposed continuation of the investigators work will                  
              yield an unusually complete understanding of the processes which               
              affect the long term joint genetic change of female choice and                 
              secondary male traits under the influence of sexual selection and              
              predation.
