Title       : Collaborative Research: Stimulus Equivalences and Stimulus-Class Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9019080

Award Number: 9019080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Zentall zentall@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              People can learn that different events are interchangeable                     
              because they essentially "mean the same thing."  Such "stimulus                
              equivalences" are one means by which people can respond                        
              immediately and appropriately to new situations on the basis of                
              learning and experience in other situations.  This characteristic              
              of behavior is often regarded as special, and maybe unique, to                 
              human beings.  Is language necessary for this important                        
              behavioral attribute?  If animals without language can learn                   
              stimulus equivalences, language is not necessary.                              
                                                                                             
              Dr. Zentall, in collaboration with Dr. Peter J. Urcuioli, of                   
              Purdue University, will examine this question using pigeons as                 
              the experimental animal.  Well-established training techniques                 
              and the excellent visual abilities of pigeons make them a most                 
              appropriate choice.  The pigeons will first be taught that                     
              certain (visual) stimuli go with other (visual) stimuli.  Later,               
              they will be tested to see if, as a result of that training, they              
              have learned that those stimuli belong to the same "group" or                  
              "class."  To do this, they will be taught in a second phase to                 
              match new stimuli to some of the stimuli with which they were                  
              originally trained.  Then, their ability to match the remaining                
              training stimuli to the new ones introduced in the second phase                
              will be measured.  Successful performance during this latter                   
              (test) phase would show that pigeons, like humans, can form                    
              stimulus equivalences or stimulus classes.                                     
                                                                                             
              If this ability can be established, it would mean that human                   
              language is not necessary for this important behavioral                        
              attribute.  It would also encourage scientists to study more                   
              intensively in the laboratory just how this supposedly special                 
              human characteristic comes about.
