Title       : Evolution of Specificity in Insect/Plant Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1993     
File        : a9019884

Award Number: 9019884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355616             (Estimated)
Investigator: John N. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Funds are requested for a study of how oviposition                        
              preference and specificity evolve in phytophagous insects during               
              shifts onto new hosts.  Current theory for host choice in                      
              insects holds that ovipositing females exhibit a preference                    
              hierarchy among potential host plants and according to the rank                
              order in the hierarchy.  Host shifts then begin either as (a)                  
              genetic shifts in the preference hierarchy, (b) genetic changes                
              that decrease the degree of specificity to highly ranked hosts                 
              and thereby broaden the range of hosts, or (c) colonization of                 
              plants lower on the preference hierarchy in the absence of more                
              highly ranked plants with little or no genetic change in                       
              preference.  Recent work on two closely-related swallowtail                    
              butterfly species, Papilio zelicaon and P. oregonius, that feed                
              on different plant families showed that these species exhibit                  
              quite different preference hierarchies.  Preliminary studies of                
              other populations within this species complex, however, indicate               
              that some host shifts may not involve complete rearrangements in               
              preference hierarchy but instead reflect changes in degree of                  
              specificity or behavioral responses to available hosts.  This                  
              variation provides an opportunity to ask how much rearrangement                
              of the preference hierarchy has occurred as populations in the P.              
              machaon species complex have diversified onto different host                   
              plants.                                                                        
                      Therefore, the proposed work will ask if the conclusions               
              on the evolution of oviposition preference drawn from                          
              interspecific differences between P. zelicaon and P. oregonius                 
              apply to population differentiation and speciation throughout the              
              P. machaon species complex in North America.  Objective 1 will                 
              ask how umbellifer-feeding species of the P. machaon complex                   
              differ in their preference hierarchy for plant species.  That is,              
              has colonization of new hosts always involved a reordering of                  
              the preference hierarchy and, if not, which hosts have required                
              such a reordering?  Objective 2 will ask if populations of P.                  
              zelicaon differ in their preference hierarchy.  Papilio zelicaon               
              populations differ geographically in their host plants.                        
              Consequently, it is possible to compare the interspecific results              
              from objective 1 with intraspecific results in this section.                   
              Finally, Objective 3 will ask whether differences in preference                
              hierarchy among populations of P. zelicaon are inherited as X-                 
              linked loci as are the interspecific difference between P.                     
              zelicaon and P. oregonius.  The recent finding that the major                  
              interspecific differences are primarily X-linked provides for the              
              first time the opportunity to compare the mode of inheritance of               
              intraspecific divergence in host preference with that observed                 
              for interspecific divergence.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              Thompson                                                                       
                                                                                             
                   Together, the results for the three objectives will aid in                
              the development of the theory of insect/plant interactions by                  
              addressing the fundamental problem of how oviposition preference               
              diverges as insect populations colonize new host plants.  Since                
              much of insect diversity appears to arise from divergence onto                 
              different host species, the proposed work therefore also                       
              addresses the problem of the origins of insect diversity.
