Title       : Sibling Speciation in Lichens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1991      
File        : a9019702

Award Number: 9019702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Culberson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chicita F. Culberson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Until now species concept in lichens has necessarily been                 
              based solely upon morphology and secondary-product chemistry.  No              
              parent/progeny information for the lichens existed prior to our                
              recent demonstration of reproductive isolation and gene flow.                  
              Using the methodology developed in that study, we are examining                
              five chemotypes of the Ramalina siliquosa complex that are starkly             
              zoned in bands on seashore cliffs in western Europe.  This group               
              epitomizes a form of variation widespread among the lichens:                   
              Chemical races with little or no morphological differentiation have            
              different ecologies where their geographic ranges overlap.  Are                
              such chemotypes sibling species or polymorphisms within                        
              morphological species?  Since hybridization cannot yet be tested               
              in lichen by artificial crossing, we are culturing the progeny of              
              different chemotypes that grew side by side where zones overlap.               
              If chemotypes are conspecific and freely interbreed, then the                  
              progeny of these haploid organisms will often match a chemotype                
              different from the maternal one.  The results of this study will               
              offer a guide to the interpretation of many hundreds of similar                
              chemotypes of lichens already will documented.  Additionally, the              
              methodologies developed here will make possible a new dimension of             
              experimental research in the systematics of the lichen-forming                 
              fungi.
