Title       : Scattering Studies of Polymer Deformation in Flowing Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9019527

Award Number: 9019527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219900             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hoagland dah@neurotica.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              When polymeric fluids flow, individual polymer chains may become               
              deformed by hydrodynamic forces.  Understanding this deformation               
              process is a central research goal of polymer rheology, as the                 
              conformational dynamics of individual chains ultimately create                 
              non-Newtonian flow properties.  Despite this obvious importance,               
              few attempts have been made to study directly polymer chain                    
              dynamics in flow.  In this project, low-angle light scattering is              
              used to probe the stretching and orientation of polymers in                    
              steady uniaxial elongational flow of dilute solutions.  Results                
              from the previous funding period indicate that the level of chain              
              stretching in a model flow, created between opposed jets, may not              
              be as great as previously suggested by indirect optical methods                
              (birefringence) or current molecular theories.  The physical                   
              mechanisms responsible for controlling the rate of deformation                 
              and the ultimate deformation level of flexible polymers are now                
              being examined by varying molecular weight, solvent type and                   
              quality, elongation rate, and backbone stiffness.  Experiments                 
              are being conducted in a recently completed light-scattering                   
              apparatus capable of low-angle measurements off an extremely                   
              small scattering volume located at a stagnation point.  These                  
              measurements will be complemented by birefringence studies and                 
              flow experiments in more transient stress environments.                        
                                                                                             
              This research aims to understand macromolecular behavior in flow,              
              which is of fundamental scientific importance as well as in                    
              technology, such as fiber spinning, turbulent-drag reduction, and              
              enhanced oil recovery.
