Title       : Age Assignment of the Erin Slate, Talladega Slate Belt, Clay County, Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9019286

Award Number: 9019286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Gastaldo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A controversy exists surrounding the age assignment of the                
              Erin Slate, outcropping in the Talladega Slate Belt of Alabama.                
              The age assignment of this unit has become pivotal in the                      
              paleotectonic interpretation and timing of emplacement of the                  
              Talladega slate belt in the southern Appalachian orogen.  The                  
              disputed age assignment of the Erin Slate is based on the reported             
              presence of permineralized Carboniferous lycophyte cones,                      
              Lepidostrobus hobbsii D. White.  Subsequent workers were unable to             
              collect additional permineralized fossil plants, although                      
              compression-impressions have been documented in the matrix and an              
              indistinguishable petrologic similarity between the Erin Slate and             
              matrix adhering to one of the cones exists.  The lack of                       
              subsequently collected material, equal in preservational mode and              
              type to that of the original two lycophyte cones, has led some                 
              workers to question the validity of a fossiliferous Erin.  The                 
              original plant fossils are currently considered to be "exotics",               
              and the Erin Slate has been lithostratigraphically correlated with             
              the Early Devonian Jemison Chert.  Newly discovered permineralized             
              plant fossils provide unequivocal evidence that the Erin slate is              
              fossiliferous.  The project herein proposed is designed to assess              
              this newly recovered paleobotanical evidence for a definitive age              
              assignment of the Erin Slate and its regional correlatives.  The               
              taxonomic diversity and systematic affinities of this                          
              permineralized flora will be ascertained and compared with those               
              plants of homologous structural advancement, paleogeographic                   
              distribution, and biostratigraphic position.  The age assignment               
              based on the constraints of the paleobotanical evidence will form              
              the foundation for evaluating the tectonic setting of the Erin                 
              Slate and its relationship to the tectonic framework now proposed              
              for the southern Appalachians.//
