Title       : International Workshop on Strong Ground Motion: Santiago de Chile, June 4-7,
               1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9019807

Award Number: 9019807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17580              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Anderson jga@seismo.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1555,
Abstract    :
              This award supports an international workshop on earthquake                    
              research to be held in Santiago, Chile from June 4-7, 1991.                    
              The U.S. organizer is John Anderson of the University of                       
              Nevada at Reno and his Chilean counterpart is F. Lund of the                   
              University of Chile who chairs a local organizing committee                    
              consisting of four Chilean scientists, three from U. Chile                     
              and one from the Catholic University (PUC).  There is also an                  
              international scientific committee consisting of scientists                    
              from the U.S., France, Italy, Japan and Chile.  The par-                       
              ticipants will come from all these countries, from Austria                     
              and, in Latin America, from Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia,                        
              Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.  This workshop                
              aims to bring together seismologists and earthquake engineers                  
              who share an interest in research problems that utilize                        
              strong motion data.  The strong motion program in Chile has                    
              collected significant data in recent years, especially from                    
              the March 3, 1985 earthquake.  Analysis of that data is                        
              contributing to our understanding of the earthquake source,                    
              wave propagation, and site effects as they affect strong                       
              shaking.  For the United States and Chile, specific benefits                   
              arise because the Cascadia subduction zone off Washington and                  
              Oregon, as well as the Alaska subduction zone, are similiar                    
              to the Chilean subduction zone.                                                
                                                                                             
              Apart from the attendance of established workers in the                        
              field, we expect to have a large participation of younger                      
              scientists and engineers from the region who will thus be                      
              exposed to the state of the art in strong-motion-related                       
              work.  This workshop will provide a place for the exposure of                  
              U.S. research efforts in the field, and the close contact                      
              among participants will generate interest among talented                       
              students from Latin America to pursue graduate studies in the                  
              U.S. and/or to do postdoctoral work.  Thus, it will fulfill                    
              the goals of the Science in Developing Countries Program and                   
              address education and human resource concerns.
