Title       : Synthesis and Study of Non-Keukule Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1992   
File        : a9019814

Award Number: 9019814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Dowd  DECEASED   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                     
              continuing work of Professor Paul Dowd at the University of                    
              Pittsburgh. The research is directed to the synthesis of reactive              
              intermediates which possess two unbonded electrons. The project                
              will further characterize the electronic state of these                        
              biradicals. There is an interest in biradical intermediates, since             
              they are involved in ferromagnetism and some biological processes.             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Dowd's research will provide a bridge between theory and                   
              experiment in the area of biradical chemistry. In one project, the             
              electronic structure of tetramethyleneethane will be probed                    
              experimentally in a rigid molecule. Previous studies in flexible               
              systems have suggested that this biradical is a triplet, while                 
              molecular orbital calculations indicate a singlet. The use of a                
              rigid system here will allow for an adequate comparison to the                 
              molecular orbital calculations. Simple molecular orbital theory                
              predicts that non-alternant biradicals will be ground state                    
              singlets, yet this has not been tested. As a test of this theory,              
              these biradicals will be generated and studied by spectrocopic                 
              methods and chemical trapping. Two other biradical systems,                    
              semilocalized biradicals and methylenecyclobutanone biradical, are             
              to be prepared and characterized as well. Since biradicals are                 
              important intermediates in several chemical reactions, this work               
              should add to our ability to understand and predict the course of              
              reactions.
