Title       : Sulfur Biogeochemistry in Freshwater Wetlands: The Potential for Accumulation of
               Anthropogenic Sulfur Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9019883

Award Number: 9019883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Morgan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is designed to assess the potential of freshwater                
              wetlands to accumulate anthropogenic sulfur.  The work is                      
              predicated on the observation that under certain circumstances,                
              stable sulfur isotope analysis can distinguish the origin of                   
              sulfur compounds within sediments.  These analyses, combined with              
              precise measurements of sulfur pool sizes and sulfate reduction                
              rates, can determine if and to what extent, sulfur is                          
              accumulating within wetland peat, in what form, and from what                  
              source.  Both a modeling and an experimental approach (including               
              laboratory and whole watershed manipulation) are used to detail                
              the important processes affecting sulfur cycling.                              
                   The total sulfur pool is considered as three separate                     
              subfractions: reduced inorganic sulfur (RIS), organic ester                    
              sulfate (ES), and organic carbon bonded sulfur (CBS), and                      
              analyzed for pool size, stable sulfur isotope ratio, and rate of               
              formation and breakdown.  The role of organic substrates and                   
              sulfate concentration in controlling the rate of reduced sulfur                
              formation is also examined.  The bulk of this research will be                 
              carried out in a well studied wetland in the New Jersey                        
              Pinelands.  An important adjunct to this research will be                      
              participation in an interdisciplinary and international research               
              effort called HUMEX in Norway.  HUMEX is a whole watershed                     
              acidification of a Sphagnum-dominated wetland and humic lake that              
              is similar to wetlands and surface waters in the Pinelands.                    
                   The results from this study will make important                           
              contributions to ecosystem ecology by  1) documenting the                      
              importance of wetland S biogeochemical cycling in regulating                   
              watershed S flux,  2) providing the first direct evidence on the               
              long-term storage products of dissimilatory sulfate reduction in               
              freshwater wetland peat,  3) identifying the important processes               
              regulating S flux in wetland peat, and  4) testing the                         
              generalizability of these mechanisms to other systems.                         
                   Dr. Morgan is a leading wetland ecosystem scientist with                  
              expertise in sulfur biogeochemistry.  The facilities for this                  
              research are outstanding.
