Title       : Specialized Craft Production in the Tuxtlas Mountains, Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1991   
File        : a9019658

Award Number: 9019658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Santley 5052771608  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ponciano Ortiz Ceballos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Arnold  (Co-Project Director current)
              Ronald R. Kneebone  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Santley and               
              his colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological                      
              research in the Tuxtlas Mountains of southern Veracruz, Mexico.                
              ThIs will center around the large Classic period site of                       
              Matacapan which has been the focus of past research by the                     
              investigator.  With the assistance of aerial photographs several               
              teams will carry out a broad scale regional survey designed to                 
              include all major environmental zones.  The location of all sites              
              will be noted.  During the second season, more intensive work                  
              will focus on more limited regions.  Ceramics and other cultural               
              materials will be collected from the surface.  This will be                    
              complemented by a limited number of excavations.  Data will be                 
              analyzed to reconstruct the regional settlement, economic and                  
              political systems and to show how these developed and changed                  
              over time.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The Matacapan region is of particular interest for the light it                
              can shed on prehistoric Middle American society.  Prior work has               
              shown that contrary to what is observed in other parts of this                 
              region, the Matacapan area exhibited a dendritic form of                       
              organization where settlements are arranged in an economic and                 
              political hierarchy with clearly defined size ranks.  It also                  
              appears that the economy was highly centralized in a dendritic                 
              form where very few goods passed horizontally among units of                   
              similar size, but rather flowed upwards to larger centers. The                 
              site of Matacapan which sits at the top of the hierarchy seems to              
              be a major trading center both for pottery and obsidian which was              
              highly prized for making stone tools.  While extensive work has                
              been conducted at Matacapan itself, to understand how the broader              
              regional system operated, wide scale survey work is necessary.                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a wide group of Middle American                            
              archaeologists.  It will not only increase our understanding of                
              how prehistoric societies functioned, but also provide insight                 
              into the mechanisms which control small scale societies in many                
              parts of the third world today.
