Title       : Genetic Analysis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9019220

Award Number: 9019220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan R. Signer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Plant molecular biology is currently limited by supporting genetic             
              technology, particularly in the model species Arabidopsis thaliana.            
              This project aims to explore the feasibility of using two site-                
              specific DNA enzyme systems from the yeast Saccharomyces                       
              cerevisiase to develop genetic methods in Arabidopsis based on                 
              site-specific recombination.  The two systems are the FLP                      
              recombinase, derived from the yeast 2-micron plasmid, and the HO               
              recombinase, which promotes yeast mating type switching.  FLP                  
              promotes reciprocal recombination between two asymmetric FRT target            
              sites, resulting in deletion or inversion of the intervening DNA               
              depending on whether the two sites are in direct or inverted                   
              respectively; HO promotes gap repair by homologous recombination               
              after cutting at its Y/Z target.  Demonstration of either or both              
              activities will allow the subsequent design of sophisticated                   
              schemes for targeted genetic events in plants.                                 
                                                                                             
              The goals for the present period are to demonstrate FLP and/or HO              
              activity in plant systems.  Available cloned genes encoding each               
              enzyme will be placed downstream of the available strong                       
              constitutive CaMV 35S promoter, and activity of the transcribed and            
              translated enzymes will be assayed.  For FLP, assays will score                
              deletion or inversion of a reporter GUS (escherichia coli B-                   
              glucuronidase) gene located between pair of direct or inverted FRT             
              sites; for HO, assays will score recombination between two copies              
              of GUS reporter gene promoted by gap repair of a Y/Z site in one               
              of them.  Assays will be carried out in both transient                         
              (electroporated tobacco and Arabidopsis protoplasts) and stable                
              (transgenic Arabidopsis plants) configurations.                                
               *** //
