Title       : Genotypic and Somatic Variation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9019622

Award Number: 9019622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research is a continuation of studies on                     
              somatic mutation and rapid genomic change in plants.  Work                     
              accomplished under that previous grant documented somatic                      
              variation in several plant species.  Differences in ribosomal DNA              
              within clones of  Solidago and somatic changes among a sexual                  
              progeny of Taraxacum officinale in ribosomal DNA and alcohol                   
              dehydrogenase were detected.  In addition, the previous work                   
              documented such flexible genomes within Taraxacum progeny which                
              responded to environmental pressure.  Finally, techniques were                 
              developed for minisatellite DNA analysis of plant species and                  
              applied to somatic variation among apples.  The work proposed                  
              here will extend studies of rapid genomic change by examining                  
              genomic changes in heat-shock as well as ribosomal DNA genes in                
              Brassica.  The effect of genomic changes on plant phenotype and                
              fitness will also be determined.  Studies of somatic variation                 
              will continue with an analysis of minisatellite DNA variation                  
              within individuals of Pinus longaeva.  These proposed studies                  
              will provide fundamental data on the types and frequency of                    
              somatic genetic variation in plant populations and determine the               
              phenotypic and fitness consequence of such changes.  The results               
              of this work will provide a basis for assessing the importance of              
              such somatic processes for the evolution of plant species.                     
              Moreover, somatic variation occurs in all organisms, and has been              
              implicated in the normal aging process, as well as the                         
              development of tumors.  The proposed work will provide detailed                
              information about the effect of accumulated somatic variation,                 
              which could be of use in studying age-dependent genetic changes                
              in humans.//
