Title       : High Resolution Studies of Solar Flares, Active Regions and the Quiet Sun at
               Centimeter and Millimeter Wavelengths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1992  
File        : a9019893

Award Number: 9019893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukul R. Kundu kundu@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will continue investigations of solar radio                    
              emissions in the millimeter and centimeter wavelength domain,                  
              making use of the Very Large Array (VLA) of the National Radio                 
              Astronomy Observatory, and the Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland                      
              Millimeter Array (BIMA) at Hat Creek.  The observed magnetic                   
              structure of sunspot associated microwave sources will be                      
              compared with model computations to determine the vertical and                 
              horizontal components of the magnetic field at specific locations              
              in the low corona.  Along with simultaneous soft X-ray                         
              observations, estimates will be made of the electron temperature               
              and emission measure and magnetic field in coronal loops.  The                 
              VLA microwave data along with Spacelab 2 observations of the                   
              transition region and coronal lines will be used to study the                  
              temperature and density structure of the sunspot atmosphere in                 
              three dimensions. Microwave imaging data will also be compared                 
              with hard X-ray burst data to compare the power law index of                   
              energetic electrons based on radio and X-ray data, to try to                   
              reconcile the two indices through appropriate energization                     
              mechanisms.  Using VLA observations of flares simultaneously                   
              acquired with balloon/rocket borne X-ray and UV measurements,                  
              flare physics including the origin of microbursts will be                      
              studied. Using BIMA, high spatial resolution studies of flares at              
              millimeter wavelengths will be conducted. In particular, the size              
              and spectra of millimeter burst sources, the problem of electron               
              and proton acceleration in gamma ray/millimeter flares and the                 
              anisotropy of these flares will be investigated.  The relative                 
              timing of mm wave vs. cm wave bursts should help distinguish                   
              among the possible causes of the simultaneous flare brightening                
              in H, EUV, and hard X-rays. Observations of filaments at mm and                
              cm wavelengths will also be made to determine the nature of                    
              bright lanes (at 15 GHz) spanning filaments, and to determine the              
              density-temperature structure of the transition sheath and                     
              coronal cavity.  Other proposed studies include mm active                      
              regions including their polarization and magnetic fields, mapping              
              of coronal holes and quiet regions such as supergranulation                    
              network boundaries at mm wavelengths, and to search for acoustic               
              waves in the chromosphere. ***
