Title       : Neural Networks and Fuzzy Sets with Applications to Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9019854

Award Number: 9019854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Yager ryager@iona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iona College
	      715 North Avenue
	      New Rochelle, NY  108011830    914/633-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Fuzzy set theory and neural network approaches                                 
              are two technologies which have proved to be                                   
              useful in the development of intelligent control                               
              systems.  The central focus of this research is to                             
              investigate the linking of these two methodologies                             
              for the analysis and construction of intelligent                               
              systems.  Particular benefit will come on one hand                             
              from the use of fuzzy logic structures to help in the                          
              crafting of these systems while on the other hand                              
              the use of neural concepts will help in the learning                           
              and parallel implementation.  The work in this                                 
              project will focus on four areas.  This first area is                          
              fuzzy logic controllers.  Part of the work here will                           
              concentrate on improving the performance of these                              
              kinds of systems by (among other methods) the                                  
              development of a neural implementation of fuzzy                                
              logic control.  This will involve alternative                                  
              procedures for defuzzification as well as the                                  
              development of a formal mathematical                                           
              understanding of these control systems.  A second                              
              focus of the research is new learning system,                                  
              emphasing a new model called participatory                                     
              learning.  This model emphasizes the role the                                  
              current belief system plays in the learning process.                           
              Another important aspect of this model is an                                   
              independent critic which monitors the performance                              
              of the current belief system.  The third part of the                           
              research concentrates on the fundamental                                       
              relationship between fuzzy set and neural network                              
              theory.  Here, the P.I. will look at the relationship                          
              between the neural aggregation process and the                                 
              basic operations of fuzzy set theory.  A major goal                            
              is to make some connection between the set based                               
              operations of fuzzy set theory and the vector                                  
              algebra approach of neural networks.  The final                                
              part of the research looks at the implementation of                            
              fuzzy expert systems rules in a neural framework, to                           
              see if these two technologies can provide some                                 
              insight into the manner in which experts develop                               
              rules.
