Title       : RUI: Molecular Cloning of the Phosphate Starvation Inducible Acid Phosphatase of
               Tomato
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9019048

Award Number: 9019048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this proposal is to characterize the expression               
              and distribution of an excreted phosphate starvation inducible                 
              (epsi) acid phosphatase.  Specific prioritized goals of the                    
              proposal are: 1. To isolate cDNA and genomic clones of the epsi-               
              APase.  2. To characterize the regulation of epsi-APase mRNA during            
              induction by Pi starvation.  3. To study, via immunological                    
              methods, the expression and distribution of the epsi-APase in plant            
              cells and whole plants in the presence and absence of phosphate.               
              My laboratory has shown that, in tomato, phosphate starvation                  
              inducible (psi) metabolism involves changes in gene expression,                
              protein synthesis, protein secretion, ion transport and biomass                
              distribution.   Therefore, (psi) metabolism provides an excellent              
              system with which to study the interactive and pleiotropic                     
              regulatory events that govern the relationship between gene                    
              expression and metabolism.  One of the most dramatic psi responses             
              is the synthesis and secretion of a specific acid phosphatase                  
              (APase).  Cloning the epsi-APase gene(s) is an essential first step            
              towards understanding psi metabolism in higher plants.  We now have            
              all the experimental tools necessary to conduct the proposed                   
              research including methods for large scale isolation and                       
              purification of APase, several highly sensitive enzyme activity                
              assays and cDNA libraries synthesized from message isolated from               
              cells at various stages of Pi starvation.                                      
                                                                                             
              Plants try to maintain a homeostatic cellular environment despite              
              great variations in the external environment.  One important aspect            
              of external variations is the availability of essential mineral                
              nutrients in the soil.  In response to shortages of essential                  
              nutrients, plants respond in many ways both to reduce the demand               
              for such nutrients and to increase the capacity of the plant to                
              scavenge nutrients from the environment.  It is of great interest              
              and importance to know how nutrient shortages are perceived and how            
              plants respond to alleviate the problem.  This proposal focuses on             
              how higher plants respond to shortages of the essential element                
              phosphorous.  Results from this work will help us in understanding             
              how various responses to nutrient stress are initiated and                     
              coordinated.//
