Title       : Bacteriophage Exclusion Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9019216

Award Number: 9019216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren R. Snyder snyderl@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              There are many known examples of exclusion of bacteriophages by                
              resident plasmids and prophages but the mechanisms underlying                  
              these exclusions are not known.  Experiments are proposed to                   
              study three exclusions: the exclusion of T4 by the lit gene                    
              product of the cryptic DNA element, e14; the exclusion of T4                   
              polynucleotide kinase and RNA ligase deficient mutants by the prr              
              gene product of another cryptic DNA element; and the exclusions                
              promoted by the rex gene products of the prophage.  We shall use               
              gene fusions to determine the mechanisms of the local and global               
              inhibition of gene expression promoted by the interaction between              
              the Lit protein and a short sequence within the major head                     
              protein gene of T4.  To explain the local inhibition the gol                   
              region may become a transcriptional terminator or target the RNA               
              for degradation in the presence of Lit protein.  The global                    
              inhibition may be due to the cleavage of an RNA or                             
              phosphorylation of a protein which is part of the translation                  
              apparatus.  Alternatively, it may be due to generation of a small              
              RNA or other inhibitor of translation.  Other experiments will be              
              directed toward determining the role of the prr and stp gene                   
              products as well as other auxiliary factors in the cleavage of                 
              host tRNA, and in searching for introns removed by the                         
              polynucleotide kinase and RNA ligase.  Finally, a system we've                 
              devised for inducing the rex inhibitions in the absence of phage               
              superinfection will by used to find the primary target of the rex              
              gene products leading to the global inhibition of cellular                     
              functions.
