Title       : Minority Research Opportunities in Interfacial Engineering: A Joint Program
               Between the Naval Research Laboratory and Atlanta University Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9019074

Award Number: 9019074
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Gaber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Research Lab
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    703/545-6700

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is a program of cooperative research and training                 
              at the Naval Research Laboratory for minority students of the                  
              Atlanta University Center.  Six undergraduate students will be                 
              selected to spend two months working in the Center working on                  
              small research projects for the Bio/Molecular Engineering                      
              group of the Naval Research Laboratory.  The program will                      
              first identify areas of research overlap between the                           
              cooperating institutions.  The students chosen will work                       
              within these research areas, thus establishing a continuity of                 
              their summer research with that at their home institutions.                    
              The Atlantic University Center (AUC) comprises four                            
              undergraduate institutions (Morehouse, Spelman, Morris Brown                   
              Colleges, and Clark-Atlanta University) and the Clark-Atlanta                  
              graduate School and Morehouse School of Medicine.  The AUC is                  
              the largest center for predominately black higher education in                 
              the country.  The plan is for up to six students and two                       
              faculty members to spend 2 summer months working at the Naval                  
              Research Laboratories on projects of mutual interest to the                    
              two centers in the area of interfacial engineering.  The major                 
              focus of research projects at NRL's Center for Bio/Molecular                   
              Science and Engineering is on the way in which biological                      
              molecules (particularly lipids) self-assemble into                             
              microstructures.  Other projects will involve molecular                        
              modeling, non-linear optical properties of large organic                       
              molecules, polymeric ferroelectric liquid crystals, and                        
              fundamental studies of liquid biophysics.  The NRL Center has                  
              wide experience with summer research projects for                              
              undergraduate students.
