Title       : An Environmental Approach to Enhamced Retention and Recruitment of Women and
               Minorities in Chemistry--A Pilot Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1990    
File        : a9019042

Award Number: 9019042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: DATA NOT AVAILABLE   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary R. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue Damme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul F. Barbara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marian T. Stankovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Chemistry Division supports a curriculum                     
              development project in the Chemistry Department at the                         
              University of Minnesota.  A team of department members will                    
              participate: Dr. W. Ronald Gentry, Department Chair; Dr. Marian                
              T. Stankovich; Ms. Susan Damme; Dr. Paul Barbara; and Dr. Gary                 
              Gray.  The department will develop a program for retaining                     
              women students in graduate study.  Their plans include                         
              assessment of student needs, developmental programs, and local                 
              outreach programs.  A significant portion of the project                       
              involves development of "modules" for classroom use, which will                
              be destributed to departments interested in adapting the                       
              program to their campuses.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The needs assessment component will continue research on the                   
              extent and complexity of cultural issues affecting women and                   
              minorities during graduate study.  Surveys and interviews of                   
              first-year students and members of research groups will be                     
              carried out in order to identify problems areas and determine                  
              the role of various means of student support, family                           
              responsibilities, and length of graduate study on student                      
              success rates.  Developmental programs include career                          
              counseling, development of career modules for classroom use,                   
              orientation and mentoring for new gradaute students, faculty                   
              development, interaction with professional organizations,                      
              travel grants for women and minority graduate students, and                    
              acquisition of libarary materials on careers and opportunities                 
              for women and minorities.  Graduate students will be involved                  
              in outreach activities in elementary and secondary schools.                    
              This is a multifaceted approach to retaining women and                         
              minorities in graduate study in chemistry.  Because of the                     
              interactive nature of graduate education, emphasis is placed on                
              the educational environment.
