Title       : Excavations at Babar Kot, India, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1995  
File        : a9019073

Award Number: 9019073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Possehl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst Indian Studies
	      1130 East 59th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    612/624-4500

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: This project supports travel and field expenses for               
              a team of U.S. scientists headed by Dr. Gregory Possehl from the               
              University Museum, the University of Pennsylvania, with                        
              logistical and technical backing of an Indian team, to conduct                 
              archeological research at the Harappan site of Babar Kot in the                
              State of Gujarat in India.  The research is expected to continue               
              over four seasons of excavation.  The Gujarat State Department of              
              Archeology will provide the local support.  The site is                        
              strategically located between Rojdi and the major Urban Phase                  
              Harappan settlements of Rangpur and Lothal.  The mound is                      
              approximately three meters high, one of the few stratified                     
              Harappan sites in Saurashtra, and about 2.66 hectares in size.                 
              Save for surface plowing, Babar Kot is undesturbed.  The research              
              design at Babar Kot is based on two theoretical issues: those of               
              relevance to understanding the complex societies generally, and                
              those relevant to understanding the Harappan civilization.  Given              
              the vrtually total lack of historical record for the Harappan                  
              Civilization, the route planned in this work is to study the                   
              spatial patterning, including the distribution of physical                     
              remains (artifacts, architecture, settlements) as well as the way              
              they went about doing things (subsistence systems, trading                     
              relations, cultural ecology).                                                  
                                                                                             
              Scope: This project is a major collaborative undertaking between               
              U.S. and Indian scientists in archeological research in an area                
              of great scientific interest.  The costs of the research are                   
              shared by the two teams.  The size of the undertaking is in this               
              case an indication of the potential for improving our                          
              understanding of the Harappan Civilization, based on the sucess                
              achieved in earlier excavations by the two teams in the area.
