Title       : Cranial Develpment in Direct-Developing Anurans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9019624

Award Number: 9019624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242780             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Hanken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Direct development is an evolutionarily derived life history mode              
              in vertebrates and invertebrates in which the free living,                     
              aquatic larval stage is lost. This project examines the pattern                
              and mechanisms of cranial development in direct developing                     
              anurans, and how these differ from those in metamorphosing taxa.               
              Experimental and descriptive methods include immunohistochemistry              
              (to localize the embryonic distribution of type II collagen and                
              visualize the initial skeletal pattern); scanning electron                     
              microscopy (to document neural crest morphology and migration);                
              heterospecific transplantation of premigratory cranial neural                  
              crest and cranial ectoderm (to examine inductive tissue                        
              interactions that underlie the development, and loss, of cranial               
              tissues); in vivo administration of thyroid hormone and TH-                    
              blocking agents; TH radioimmunoassay (to measure the contribution              
              of TH from maternal and embryonic sources); and conventional                   
              histology. Analyses will focus on Eleutherodactylus coqui                      
              (Leptodactylidae), whose ontogeny is among the most derived of                 
              any direct developing anuran with respect to the ancestral                     
              metamorphic pattern of cranial development. Reference data                     
              concerning the ancestral pattern will be obtained from several                 
              phylogenetically diverse species,including Bombina orientalis                  
              (Discoglossidae), Xenopus laevis (Pipidae), and Rana pipiens                   
              (Ranidae). Results will contribute to our understanding of the                 
              basis of direct development in amphibians and how this important               
              life history mode has evolved. They also will be used to address               
              a series of issues in developmental and systematic biology,                    
              concerning the relation between development and morphological                  
              evolution. These include the evolutionary implication of                       
              mechanisms of cranial pattern formation; the importance of                     
              ontogenetic repatterning vs. heterochrony; the role of inductive               
              tissue interactions; and the hormonal mediation of embryonic                   
              development. finally, they will allow comparison of direct                     
              development in amphibians with that in other groups with complex               
              life cycles.
