Title       : Dispersal and Dynamics of Planktonic Organisms in Hydrothermal Vent Plumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9019575

Award Number: 9019575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauren S. Mullineaux lmullineaux@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy L. Van Dover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   The discovery of endemic communities at deep-sea                          
              hydrothermal vents has promoted the question of how these species              
              are able to persist over evolutionary time in isolated, ephemeral              
              vent habitats.  One possibility is that larvae and early                       
              juveniles of benthic invertebrates are entrained into the buoyant              
              hydrothermal plumes emanating from vents, and are transported to               
              remote vent habitats in lateral plumes, several hundreds of                    
              meters above the seafloor.  Dr. Mullineaux and associates will                 
              examine this hypothesis by sampling larval distributions in                    
              hydrothermal plumes and by using hydrodynamic models to predict                
              larval dispersal dynamics.                                                     
                   Hydrothermal plumes may also transport reduced substrates                 
              (e.g. manganese, iron, methane), microbes, and vent-dwelling                   
              zooplankton up into planktonic communities several hundred meters              
              above the seafloor.  These scientists will investigate whether                 
              zooplankton assimilate chemosynthetically-derived resources, by                
              characterizing their carbon and nitrogen isotopic composition,                 
              and by examining their guts for presence of vent-derived mineral               
              precipitates.  If the injection of chemosynthetically-fixed                    
              carbon into the water column enriches the food resources at level              
              of the lateral plume, then they should find evidence of elevated               
              zooplankton biomass and altered species composition in the plume.
