Title       : Fundamental Studies of Heteorogeneous Procesess on Model Polar Stratospheric
               Cloud Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9019303

Award Number: 9019303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Tolbert   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Golden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This is a laboratory study of the chemistry of atmospheric                
              trace gases in contact with solid surfaces, representative of the              
              particulate matter of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs).  The                  
              solid matter will be ordinary water ice or frozen nitric acid                  
              trihydrate, which are believed to be constituents of the PSCs.                 
              Trace gases whose chemical reactions will be studied on the ice                
              surfaces will be chlorine nitrate and nitrogen pentoxide.  The                 
              ice solids will be studied both with and without dissolved                     
              impurities like hydrogen chloride, hydrogen bromide, and hydrogen              
              fluoride.  Solubilities of the impurities in the ices will be                  
              determined under a range of experimental conditions.                           
                                                                                             
                   The progress of chemical interactions between the gases and               
              the solids will be followed by simultaneous mass spectroscopy of               
              the gases and by infrared spectroscopy of the solids.  This will               
              allow real-time observations of the mutual interactions of the                 
              gases and the ice solids.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   Water ice and frozen nitric acid trihydrate in the polar                  
              stratospheric clouds are believed to act as catalysts for                      
              chemical reactions of chlorine- and nitrogen-containing gases                  
              involved in ozone depletion in the stratosphere.  These                        
              laboratory studies will develop new information about detailed                 
              chemical and physical mechanisms of transformations of chlorine                
              and nitrogen compounds in the stratospheric ozone layer.  Such                 
              information will help to confirm (or modify?) present beliefs                  
              about ozone depletion in the stratosphere and will help us                     
              understand the timing of ozone depletion and its relationships to              
              geographic factors.
