Title       : Global Change and the Carbon Balance of Arctic Ecosystems: The Importance of
               Carbon/Nutrient Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9019055

Award Number: 9019055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $816802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaius R. Shaver gshaver@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Giblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Rastetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Knute J. Nadelhoffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1325,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Subject of this research is the role of carbon/nutrient                    
              interactions as constraints on carbon cycling processes and                    
              overall carbon budgets of terrestrial ecosystems.  The specific                
              focus is on carbon/nutrient interactions in three contrasting                  
              tundra ecosystems along a continuum from dry uplands to wet                    
              lowlands in northern Alaska.  The research is placed in the                    
              context of global warming, viewing the predicted global                        
              temperature increase as an experiment in carbon/nutrient                       
              interactions at the ecosystem level.                                           
                                                                                             
              The central idea is that primary production of arctic ecosystem                
              is strongly nutrient-limited, and thus its ability to respond to               
                                                                                             
              higher temperatures is constrained by nutrient supply.  Soil                   
              respiration, on the other hand, is more directly limited by low                
              soil temperature, as is the mineralization of nutrients in soil                
              organic matter.  Plant carbon gains associated with increased                  
              nutrient mineralization must thus be balanced against soil carbon              
                                                                                             
              losses due to increased soil respiration.  To understand controls              
                                                                                             
              on carbon balance at the ecosystem level, one needs to understand              
                                                                                             
              controls on plant carbon/nutrient ratios and the ratio of soil                 
              carbon respiration to N and P mineralization.                                  
                                                                                             
              A program of research is proposed that includes process studies,               
                                                                                             
              whole- ecosystem experiments, and simulation modeling.  The                    
              process studies are designed to improve understanding of C/N/P                 
              interactions at key points in the cycle of organic matter in                   
              terrestrial ecosystems, with a particular focus on the balance of              
                                                                                             
              soil respiration and N and P mineralization.  The whole-                       
              ecosystem experiments are focused on determining correlations                  
              between changes in the C:N:P ratios of the major organic matter                
              fluxes and organic matter pools.  The modeling efforts are                     
              designed to help explain these correlated changes in whole                     
              ecosystems, to identify cause-effect relationships, and to                     
              clarify constraints on the observed range of variation in C:N:P                
              ratios.
