Title       : Trace Gas Cross-Site Comparison: A TRAGNET Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9416813

Award Number: 9416813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Ojima dennis@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arvin R. Mosier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1228,1306,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9416813  Ojima    This project will establish a database and model analyses to
              be used in determining general relationships of trace gas exchange across a
              broad environmental gradients in climate, atmospheric deposition of N, and
              soils to better quantify fluxes of these biogenic radiatively active trace
              gases across North America.  Trace Gas Network (TRAGNET) sites will be used, an
              International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme/International Global Atmospheric
              Chemistry (IGBP/IGAC) Midlatitude Activity of a network of locations around the
              U.S., as the core set of study sites.  This network includes many LTER sites
              and other long-term research sites, where fluxes of CO EMB1 2, CH4, and N2O and
              possibly other trace gases are being measured and locations where trace gas
              model development is being conducted.    Measurement of biogenic trace gas
              across a network of sites in North America and comprehensive analysis of these
              data are critical to understanding the factors controlling biogenic trace gas
              production and consumption.  Ecosystems in this region are major contributors
              of these important radiatively active biogenic trace gases.  Human activities
              modify gas fluxes both directly and indirectly.  Directly, agricultural and
              forest management practices affect soil physical and biological properties,
              including those that control gas fluxes.  Indirectly, air pollution and acid
              deposition affect fluxes and modifying biogeochemical cycles associated,
              especially N dynamics, with trace gas fluxes.  Natural systems are both sources
              and sinks of trace gases, but the magnitudes  of these fluxes are not known. 
              Although trace gas flux measurements in temperate ecosystems have been made for
              decades, measurements have generally been infrequent (rarely extending beyond a
              growing season), usually small-scale, e.g., plot size treatments and may not
              always be comparable to other flux data collected at other sites.  A
              coordinated analysis of biogenic trace gas flux measurements is essential to
              understanding these sour ces and sinks in a regional and global context.   
              Three critical research needs are : (1) improved estimates of net fluxes of
              methane, nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide and of environmental factors which
              control these fluxes; (2) identification and quantification of other
              potentially important regions of significant fluxes, particularly those from
              geographic areas that have been neglected in past research; and (3) development
              of models to quantify how trace gas fluxes will respond to climatic, N
              deposition, and land management changes.  The effort will bring together data
              from on going trace gas flux projects and provide the integrated database to
              researchers involved in the study.   {PAGE \# "'Page: '#'  '"|Page: 1  } EMB1
