Title       : Mathematical Sciences: International Conference on Scientific Computation and
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9416081

Award Number: 9416081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene H. Golub golub@sccm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Stuart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9146,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator and his colleagues organize a  meeting to bring
              together research workers at the forefront of  activity in the broad area of
              scientific computing and  differential equations; special emphasis is given to
              the solution  of ordinary differential equations.  The motivation for 
              organizing a conference with this emphasis is to stimulate the  field by
              fostering links among researchers in numerical ordinary  differential equations
              and researchers in important areas of  application and researchers expert in
              the qualitative theory of  differential equations.  The injection of these
              theoretical  themes and application-oriented themes is designed to facilitate 
              significant advances in computational aspects of ordinary  differential
              equations.       Scientific computing is fundamental throughout science and 
              engineering, underpinning many of the important breakthroughs in  basic
              research and technological advancement that have been seen  in recent decades,
              and that will continue to arise in the future.  Differential equations form
              models of many important real-world  phenomena and scientific computing in this
              context is thus of  paramount importance.  This conference aims to bring
              together a  variety of research workers in the field, including experts in 
              application areas of scientific and engineering importance and  computational
              applied mathematicians expert in computer  simulations of differential equation
              models.  The outcome of such  a cross-fertilization of ideas will be beneficial
              to the  advancement of basic science and to the development of  technology.
