Title       : Investigation of the Seasonal Variability of the Oceanic CO2 System and the
               Air-Sea Flux of CO2 at the U.S. JGOFS Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Study (BATS)
               Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9416565

Award Number: 9416565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony H. Knap knap@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas R. Bates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Knap  9416565             Although the intensity of carbon dioxide exchange 
              between the ocean and atomsphere may be more greater in  biologically rich
              areas of the world ocean, the role of the  less productive oligotrophic central
              ocean waters  in the  global carbon dioxide cycle must be taken into account 
              because of their geographic vastness.  As part of the U.S.  Joint Geochemical
              Ocean Flux Study (U.S. JGOFS), this study  at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series
              Station (BATS) will  endeavor to study sea-air carbon dynamics in the 
              oligotrophic North Atlantic.  Specially, high-precision  continuos time-series
              measurements of water column CO2  fugacity (a measure of ideal partial pressure
              of carbon  dioxide in seawater) will be added to the measurements  already
              being made at BATS to overdetermine (i.e., provide a  check of internal
              consistency) the components of the  carbonate system equilibrium and permit
              accurate calculation  of carbon dioxide fluxes (air to sea and vice cersa).  In
              so  doing, the investigators expect to more accurately estimate  the sea-air
              flux of CO2 at the BATS site and to reduce  uncertainties in the role of the
              North Atlantic as a sink  for atmospheric carbon dioxide.  Through comparison
              with  other time-series data at BATS, the investigators expect to  achieve a
              clearer understanding of the underlying biological  and physical processes
              impacting the dynamics of inorganic  carbon in the oligotrophic North Atlantic,
              and by  extrapolation, in other central ocean gyres.
