Title       : Biodiversity and Decomposition in Mesic Forests: An Across-site Experimental
               Study of Patterns and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1994  
File        : a9416819

Award Number: 9416819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199976             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              D. A. Crossley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce L. Haines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9416819  Coleman    Studies of decomposition and nutrient cycling in ecosystems
              have been very important processes for the interpretation of ecosystem
              function.  They have become "keystone" parameters in the LTER program.  There
              has been an increasing interest in the functional roles of hundreds of species
              of litter- and microbial- feeding fauna which occur in virtually all
              terrestrial sites.  How do these species operate and interact, and are they
              "necessary' for optimal functioning of the system?    This project will explore
              the interaction between biodiversity and decomposition processes, by studying
              factors causing marked differences which have been found between three moist,
              warm, broad-leaved forest sites, all on similar soil types.  Two tropical
              sites, Luquillo (LUQ) in Puerto Rico, and La Selva (LAS Rica, have low and high
              species richnesses of soil microarthropods, respectively. Cowetta (CWT), in the
              Southern Appalachian mountains, has a species richness of  microarthropods
              approaching that of LAS.  Both CWT and LUQ are in the general substrate
              decomposition network study currently being conducted by Harmon et al.    The
              same or similar litter substrates to those of the Harmon et al. network, will
              be contained in litter bags identical to the previous study.  The network will
              be expanded to include LAS, to test the hypothesis: forests with litters
              containing the most diverse litter faunas will have the most rapid
              decomposition rates.  Conversely, forests with relatively low species richness
              (LUQ) will have significantly lower rates of  decomposition, when corrected for
              differences in moisture/temperature regimes.  CWT is expected to have a
              decomposition rate intermediate to that of the two tropical sites, because of
              its seasonal cycles of warm wet weather.  This project uses simple, proven
              techniques to compare decomposition rates across sites and should be the
              groundwork for more widespread studies of biotic interactions and processes
              across the LTER network.
