Title       : Program Analysis: Logics, Algorithms, and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9416973

Award Number: 9416973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Aiken aiken@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This project is undertaking a systematic investigation of a  general class
              of structural program analysis problems. The term  structural  program analysis
              refers to compile-time program analyses that deal with the  types and structure
              of values  computed by programs. This class of program  analyses is broad, 
              including within it the classical dataflow analyses of C and  FORTRAN
              compilers, type inference for languages such as ML, and analysis of  class
              membership of values in object-oriented  languages.  The primary goal of  this
              work is the synthesis of set constraint  techniques for structural program 
              analysis in a common framework;  in particular, an implementation of set 
              constraints suitable for  use in a general class of program analysis problems 
              will be  developed and distributed for use in research and teaching.  There has
               been considerable activity directed towards using set  constraints for 
              structural analyses in recent years. Most of the  work has been directed either
               towards studying the theory of set  constraints itself, or at applications of 
              set constraints to  particular problems. Set-based analysis is the exception; 
              set-  based analysis provides a high-level characterization of a class  of 
              program analyses in terms of set constraints. Currently,  however, there is no 
              general-purpose implementation of set  constraints available for
              experimentation  with set-based (or any  other class of) analyses. This system
              is expected to be  expressive enough to encompass all set-based analyses and
              many  analyses that  are not set-based.    Aside from the primary goal of
              developing an  `off-the-shelf`  implementation of set constraints that can be
              used in many  settings, the project also pursues three secondary goals. The 
              first goal is to  develop a common technical language for  structural analyses.
              The second goal is  to describe the structure  of the design space for
              structural program analyses  using this  common technical framework. The
              tradeoffs between accuracy and  speed in structural analyses are poorly
              understood.  By studying  these  problems in an abstract setting, it should be
              possible to  make general  statements about the relative efficiency and 
              precision of various program  analysis techniques that apply  across a wide
              spectrum of applications. The  third goal is to  design algorithms using the
              above results. General algorithms  are  sought that would provide the best
              precision-speed tradeoffs for  various  classes of analysis problems.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
