Title       : Chlorophyll-Labeling Experiments and the Comparison of Environmental Factors'
               Influence on Phytoplankton Specific Growth Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9416838

Award Number: 9416838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98192              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan N. Newton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9416838  Newton    This project entails laboratory analysis of an extensive set 
              of chlorophyll-labeling experiments that have been conducted  in three
              different marine environments which represent very  different physical and
              biological regimes:  the equatorial  Pacific, an oceanic upwelling area; the
              California boundary  current, a coastal upwelling site; and Dabob Bay, a 
              temperate fjord with seasonal  blooms.  Roughly 500 samples  comprising
              multi-depth (7-8) profiles were obtained using  identical sampling and
              procedural techniques.  Within each  environment, large variations in growth
              conditions (e.g.,  light, nutrients temperature, etc.) were evident, associated
               with physical (e.g., EL Nino, seasonal upwelling,  stratification) and
              biological (e.g., blooms,  biogeographical shifts) variation.  Analysis of
              these  experiments entails using high-performance liquid  chromatography to
              isolate chlorophyll a for determination of  its specific activity.  Results
              will yield estimates of  phytoplankton carbon:chlorophyll ratios and specific
              growth  rates.  Correlation and regression analysis will be  conducted to gain
              insight into phytoplankton growth response  to physical forcing within and
              between these three very  different environments. The data set
              carbon:chlorophyll  (C:chl) ratios and phytoplankton specific growth rates (u) 
              generated will be unprecedented in size and comprehensives.  Because of these
              attributes, statistical analysis will be  meaningful and our basic
              understanding of phytoplankton  growth and cellular adaptation in relation to
              environmental  and biological conditions will be increased.  These analyses 
              will result in a better appreciation for the variability in  these parameters
              under different field conditions. Yet, more  importantly, because sampling
              within an environment spanned  variations in growth conditions that were
              quantified, these  comparisons can yield quantitative insight to the master 
              variables in determining phytoplankton specific growth rate  in the field.    
              A hypothesis to be evaluated is that an algorithm can be  developed such that
              typically measured parameters, such as  nutrients, light, and species
              composition, can constrain  phytoplankton specific growth rate (u) adequately
              for  modeling purposes.  The results will be useful for  estimating the errors
              induced from modeling efforts where  C:chl ratio or u measurements do not
              exist. Field  measurements of u are rare in many environments.  The pool  of
              physical, chemical and biological support data that  exists for each of the
              three projects will afford insight  into phytoplankton response to physical
              forcing within each  of the  three different environments.  ***
