Title       : NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Blue-Light Signal Transduction in Arabidopsis
               Seedlings: A Multidisciplinary Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9416016

Award Number: 9416016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar P. Spalding spalding@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9416016  Spalding       Blue light induces a large, transient membrane 
              depolarization a few seconds before a large reduction in the  rate of stem
              elongation in etiolated seedlings.  The  molecular mechanism that mediates this
              depolarization is  unknown although there is evidence that the plasma membrane 
              H+-ATPase is inhibited and anion channels are activated.  The proposed work is
              an electrophysiological investigation  of the changes in ion transport at the
              plasma membrane that  participate in the transduction of blue light into growth
               inhibition.  The growing cells of etiolated Arabidopsis  hypocotyls will be
              studied with the patch clamp technique to  characterize the ion channels that
              undergo a change in  activity after a pulse of blue light.  The participation
              of  anion-selective channels will be given particular attention.  The effect of
              blue light on the activity of the H+-ATPase  will be determined both
              electrophysiologically and  biochemically.  Mutants in Arabidopsis that do not
              display  blue-light inhibited growth will be studied in addition to  the
              wild-type.  Well defined energies and wavelengths of  blue light will be used
              to construct fluence rate response  curves for the magnitudes and kinetics of
              the electrical  responses of the different genotypes.  At least one double 
              mutant, blu1 hy4, will be constructed and similarly studied.  The results will
              demonstrate if and how the genetic lesions  affect these early blue-light
              induced changes in membrane  transport.  This combination of electrophysiology,
               biochemistry and genetics is expected to reveal some  important features of a
              transduction chain that links blue-  light receptors to a growth control
              mechanism.  %%%  Seedlings grown in the dark undergo a suite of developmental 
              changes upon illumination, resulting in a green plant that  is competent to
              perform photosynthesis.  One aspects of this  important developmental process
              is the inhibition of stem  elongation by bright blue light .  A pulse of blue
              light  inhibits stem  growth after a few seconds.  This means a  receptor that
              absorbs blue light is closely connected to a  mechanism that controls the
              growth rate of the stem.  The  events that occur between the activation of the
              blue light  receptor and the beginning of the growth response  are said  to
              transduce the blue light into growth inhibition.  Collectively these events are
              called a transduction chain.  All that is currently known about this
              transduction chain is  that the transport across the cells outer membrane of
              ions  is altered just before the growth rate slows.  The proposed  work is
              focused on elucidating at the molecular level the  details of how blue light
              alters the activities of ion pumps  and channels in the membrane and how this
              then affects the  seedlings growth rate .  The electrophysiological technique 
              of patch clamping will be used for many of the experiments,  all of which will
              be performed on the Arabidopsis plant   In  addition, genetic techniques to
              take advantage of the  existence of mutants in Arabidopsis which do not display
               blue light inhibited growth will be sued, as will some  biochemical
              techniques.  Taken together, these experiments  will reveal certain aspects of
              how light controls plant  growth and development and how ion channels and pumps
               participate in the transduction of environmental signals.  ***
