Title       : Performance and Behavior of Non-Structural Components in Instrumented Buildings
               Including Their Contribution to the Overall Earthquake Resistance:Inter-Story
               Drift Behavior...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9416524

Award Number: 9416524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satwant S. Rihal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1497,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416524  Rihal    The performance and behavior of non-structural components in 
              instrumented buildings during the Northridge earthquake of  January 17, 1994 is
              investigated.  The focus is placed on the  seismic design implictions/lessons
              learned.  The proposed  research on the influence of the interior as well as
              exterior  building components on the overall seismic behavior of building 
              systems is analyzed.  Included is also an investigation of the  contribution of
              non-structural wall components to the overall  earthquake resistance of
              building systems as well as their  influence on the inter-story drift behavior.
                 All available data on damage of interior as well as exterior  building
              components, including shelving and contents, will be  screened, categorized and
              analyzed.  Available data on the costs  of repair and retrofit of
              non-structural building components will  also be studied.  Case-studies of two
              buildings that suffered  significant non-structural damage in addition to
              structural  damage will be constructed.  The first one is a instrumentedd 
              seven story hotel building suffered not only severe structural  damage but also
              significant non-structural damage.  A second case-  study will be cladding and
              connections in steel framed buildings,  especially with moment-resisting
              frames.  The results and final  products of this research will be improved
              understanding of the  contribution of non-structural component to the overall 
              earthquake resistance of building systems. The quantitative  results obtained
              will help develop improved seismic design  criteria for non-structural
              components including guidelines for  their repair and retrofit.    This is a
              Northridge earthquake project.  ***
