Title       : U.S.-Chile Research: Desertification and Soil Disturbance in the Arid Regions of
               Chile: The Role of Mycorrhizal Fungiin the Restoration of Atriplex Shrub
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9416708

Award Number: 9416708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. Friese friese@udavxb.oca.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9416708  Friese    This Americas Program award will support a collaborative
              research  project  between Dr. Carl Friese, University of Dayton, and Dr. 
              Lorgio Aguilera, Universidad de la Serena, Chile.  The objective  is to study
              the symbiosis between mycorrhizal fungi and plant  species belonging to the
              genus Atriflex in order to better  understand the effect of desertification on
              the plant and  microbial communities, as well as the natural disturbance
              regime,  in the arid regions of Chile.  A descriptive analysis of the 
              plant-microbe communities currently undergoing desertification  will be
              compared to that of a protected site in the same region.  Two integral
              components of arid ecosystems will be studied:  plant-microbe communities, and
              small scale disturbances.  Descriptive studies of the plant, fungal and
              microbial  communities will be linked together with spatial analyses of  animal
              disturbance, along with experimental studies of the effect  of the disturbance
              on plant-microbe interaction.  This complete  analysis will yield much more
              information about desertification  than a single study of the system.   
              Desertification is the process by which the productivity and soil  quality of
              ecosystems are significantly reduced.  As a result of  mining and farming
              activities, much of the arid land of Chile has  been subject to
              desertification.  The effects of this process on  arid lands can be
              devastating, nearly eliminating the ground  forage for livestock and other
              animals.  The aim of this study is  to determine the specific processes of
              desertification that are  causing the loss of soil fertility and thus, plant
              community  diversity, with the ultimate goal of reversing or halting the 
              desertification process.  ***
