Title       : Evaluation of Reinforced Steel Moment Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9416287

Award Number: 9416287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Engelhardt mde@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl H. Frank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Yura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416287  Engelhardt  The January 1994 Northridge Earthquake caused unprecedented
               damage at beam-to-column connections in steel moment  resisting frames.  The
              failures occurred largely at the  standard welded flange - bolted web type of
              steel moment  connection.  These failures reflected nonductile behavior,  and
              has raised serious questions on current methods and  standards of design.   
              The research undertaken in this project will experimentally  evaluate the
              performance of reinforced moment connections.  Two reinforcing schemes will be
              investigated.  Both involve  the addition of reinforcing plates at the
              connection.  The  reinforcing plates substantially increase the flexural 
              capacity of the connection, and at the same time, reduce  stress levels on the
              beam flange welds.  The lower weld  stresses will significantly reduce the
              sensitivity of the  connection to welding quality.  Such reinforced connection 
              details have shown promising performance in limited past  tests.  However
              additional large scale verification of these  details is needed, and will be
              provided by this research  project.  Most tests will be conducted using beam
              steels  with high yield strength and high yield to tensile strength  ratio, in
              order to provide a severe test of the reinforced  connections.  However, some
              tests will also be conducted  using beam steels with a controlled low value of
              yield and  yield to tensile strengths.  These tests will demonstrate  the role
              of steel strength characteristics in the observed  connection failures, and
              investigate the possibility of  improved connection performance through control
              of steel  material properties.    The results of this testing program will
              provide urgently  needed data for structural engineers and building code 
              officials involved with design of new steel moment frames,  as well as the
              repair or retrofit of existing steel moment  frames.    This is a Northridge
              Earthquake project.  ***
