Title       : Theoretical Problems in Condensed Matter and Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9416910

Award Number: 9416910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $670000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand I. Halperin halperin@cmt.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9416910  Halperin  Research will focus on a range of theoretical problems in the
              field  of condensed matter and statistical physics.  Long-range goals are  to
              improve the basic understanding of strongly interacting many-  body systems and
              highly disordered materials, to develop new  theoretical and computational
              techniques, and to explain  outstanding experimental puzzles.  A major concern
              will be  properties of quasi-two-dimensional electron systems at low 
              temperatures, in very strong magnetic fields.  Research will  concentrate on
              Landau-level filling fractions where the quantised  Hall effect is not
              observed.  Theoretical analysis will be based on  a mathematical transformation
              where the electrons become a set of  fermions that interact through a fictitous
              electric and magnetic  field of the Chern-Simons type.  Topics to be studied
              include  finite temperature transport experiments, as well as fundamental 
              limits to the applicability of the fermion Chern-Simons theory.   Another major
              concern will be low-temperature properties of spin  systems where quantum
              mechanical fluctuations are very important.   One focus will be properties of
              materials such as high temperature  superconductors which contain
              quasi-one-dimensional spin-one spin  chains with antiferromagnetic
              interactions.  Other work will  explore higher dimensional spin systems with
              frustrated  interactions.  Other research will include properties of disordered
               systems, especially nuclear magnetic resonance studies of water in  porous
              media such as rocks.  The focus here will be the analysis of  the effects of
              the diffusion of water molecules on nuclear magnetic  resonance signals
              obtained using various pulse sequences in complex  geometries.  %%%  Research
              will focus on a range of theoretical problems in the field  of condensed matter
              and statistical physics.  A major concern will  be properties at low
              temperatures, in very strong magnetic fields  of quasi-two-dimensional electron
              layers, which occur in various  semiconductor devices  such as the field-effect
              transistor.  The  research also has implications for other materials such as
              high-  temperature superconductors.  Other research will include  properties of
              disordered systems, especially nuclear magnetic  resonance studies of water in
              porous media such as rocks.  This  work may have application to oil recovery.
