Title       : Evaluation of Repair and Rehabilitation Strategies for Tilt-Up Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9416449

Award Number: 9416449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sigmund Freeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane M. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wiss Janney Elstner&Assoc
	      
	      Northbrook, IL  60062    /   -

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1497,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416449  Freeman  Tilt-up construction is widely used throughout the U.S. for 
              lowrise industrial and warehouse facilities.  Tilt-up  buildings are economical
              to construct, however, they are  susceptible to seismic damage.  Approximately
              25% of the  tilt-up buildings in the epicentral area sustained  structural
              damage during the 1994 Northridge earthquake.    The objective of this project
              is to develop procedures for  evaluating existing tilt-up construction and
              designing cost  effective rehabilitation schemes.  Establishing a link  between
              the structural characteristics of the building and  the expected performance
              during an earthquake is emphasized  in this study.    In-situ tests of tilt-up
              buildings will be conducted to  evaluate diaphragm stiffness, damping
              characteristics, and  displacement distributions.  The results of these tests, 
              together with data collected on tilt-up buildings damaged in  the Northridge
              earthquake, will be used to validate detailed  analytical models under
              development.  Existing retrofit  requirements as well as the latest proposed
              changes will be  reviewed and summarized.  Typical rehabilitation schemes  will
              be evaluated.    Alternate analytical models and design methodology that are 
              consistent with dynamic behavior of tilt-up construction  will be developed.   
              The results of this investigation will provide a basis for  evaluating the
              seismic vulnerability of and developing cost  effective rehabilitation schemes
              for the large number of  potentially hazardous tilt-up buildings throughout the
              U.S.    This is a Northridge Earthquake project, involving  complementary
              efforts between the University of Illinois and  a consulting engineering firm,
              Wiss, Janney, Elstner and  Associates.  ***
