Title       : Damage Assessment of Transportation System for the Northridge, CA Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9416420

Award Number: 9416420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82159              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne S. Kiremidjian ask@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kincho H. Law  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1497,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416420  Kiremudjian  January 17, 1994 Northridge earthquake provides an 
              invaluable opportunity to study the damage and post-  earthquake performance of
              transportation systems.    The objectives of this project are to:    (a) 
              evaluate the effectiveness of pre-event planned  optimal routes by comparing
              them to traffic patterns after  an earthquake;  (b)  evaluate the effectiveness
              of a GIS-based  methodologies for the estimation of damage and loss to 
              transportation systems; (c)  estimate the expected travel  costs to the users
              based on time delays due to damage of  transportation network components;  (d) 
              evaluate the effectiveness of GIS-based resource  allocation, hence the
              interaction of the transportation  network and the critical facilities for
              emergency responses;  (e)  determine the general effectiveness of mitigation 
              activities over the past two decades.    A complete inventory of the system in
              the region and partial  damage data are already available to the project team. 
              Upon  completion of data collection, a series of network analyses  and
              simulations, taking full advantage of geographic  information system and
              relational database technologies,  will be conducted to draw conclusions on the
              availability of  routes in emergency situations, time delays and travel costs 
              due to traffic congestion in a possible future earthquake  event.  Optimal
              strategies for the movement of available  resources and methodologies for
              identifying critical  structures that need to operate in an emergency situation
               for resource allocation will be studied.    It is anticipated that the results
              of the research will  contribute to seismic hazard mitigation in the areas of
              post  disaster planning and emergency management.  the assessment  of the
              effectiveness of the available tools and  methodologies will have a significant
              impact towards the  development of future mitigation policies, in the 
              identification of critical structures for traffic  management, in the decision
              making process for retrofitting,  and  in the development of better earthquake
              preparedness  management.  The careful collection, organization, and  spatial
              and tabular storage of structural damage and post  disaster performance data
              from the 1971 and 1994 earthquakes  will provide an invaluable source of
              information for current  and future studies of the effects of earthquakes on 
              transportation systems.    This is a Northridge earthquake project.  ***
