Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Inverse Heat Transfer Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9416874

Award Number: 9416874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14047              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. N. Ozisik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9416874  Ozisik    This award provides funds to permit Dr. M.N. Ozisik,
              Department  of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, N.C. State University to 
              pursue with Dr. Woo-Seung Kim, Department of Mechanical  Engineering, Hanyang
              University, Korea, for 24 months, a program  of cooperative research on inverse
              heat transfer problems.  The  goal of this collaboration is to make a
              systematic study of  inverse heat transfer problems of (1) forced and natural 
              convection, (2) radiation in a semitransparent absorbing,  emitting, and
              scattering medium, and (3) interaction of radiation  with conduction, with the
              objective of developing improved,  accurate methods of analysis for estimating
              various  thermophysical properties of materials, unknown surface, inlet,  and
              source conditions from simulated transfer heat transfer  experiments.    The
              results from this study should provide a better understanding  of the
              capabilities and limitations of the use of inverse methods  of analysis for
              estimating thermophysical properties of materials  and unknown surface or
              interior conditions.  Potential  applications of inverse problems arise in many
              fields of science  and technology.  Their usefulness in practical applications
              lies  in the fact that they enable researchers to conduct experimental 
              investigations under conditions encountered directly during the  operation of
              engineering devices.  The collaborators have  considerable complementary
              research experience in the field of  their proposed project.  This project is
              relevant to the  objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
               seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and  Korean scientists
              and engineers through the exchange of  scientific information, ideas, skills,
              and techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. 
              Korean  participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science  and
              Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
