Title       : Evaluation and Design Requirements for RC "Gravity" Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9416441

Award Number: 9416441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57248              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack P. Moehle moehle@peer.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416441  Moehle  It has been common practice in building seismic design to 
              assume part of the building resists all the seismic forces  and the remainder
              of the building resists only gravity  forces.  Though code provisions require
              the gravity-load-  carrying system to be designed to accommodate the imposed 
              lateral drifts, it is not clear that the procedures for  checking the imposed
              drifts are adequate, and it is not  certain that many engineers actually check
              the gravity  system for lateral drifts.  Several reinforced concrete (RC) 
              buildings designed in this way sustained damage and collapse  associated with
              failure of the so-called gravity columns  (the columns not designed to resist
              lateral forces.    This project is to develop improved understanding of the 
              factors leading to failure of RC gravity columns, as well as  to develop
              improved designed approaches.  This need is  relevant to evaluation and
              upgrading of existing buildings,  and equally relevant to the design of new
              buildings.  The  proposed research will address this need using analytical 
              methods based on experimental evidence, and will involve  both academic
              researchers and design professionals.    Specifically, the research tasks
              include:  (a) study of the  deformability of reinforced concrete columns; (b)
              study of  deformation demands imposed on columns by practical building 
              systems; (c) examination of practical procedures for design  and evaluation;
              (d) transfer of findings to relevant  code/guidelines activities; (e)
              coordination of other  Northridge research projects that are related to the
              ongoing  NSF R/R program; and (f) contribution to the professional  papers
              series to be assembled by NEHRP agencies, as well as  other publications and
              professional presentations.    This is a Northridge earthquake project.  ***
