Title       : Re-evaluation of Conventional Seismic Beam-to-Column Flange Steel Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9416457

Award Number: 9416457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egor P. Popov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Mahin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416457  Popov  A coordinated research effort on steel beam-to-column joints  is
              conducted in this project.  The study will concentrate on  the fundamental
              problems of welding and connections.  Some  subassemblages will be tested to
              study:  1.   The effect of backing bars.  By experiments with  backing bars and
              with such bars removed and weld roots  cleaned and rewelded, the extent of
              improvement in behavior  would be documented.    2.   The effect of dams and
              run-off tabs at the ends of full-  penetration groove welds.  A few experiments
              illustrating  the influence of such dams versus run-off tabs would be 
              valuable.    3.   The general use of FCAW high deposition electrodes.  Although
              the FCAW high deposition electrodes are almost  universally used, laboratory
              experience using GMAW (stick)  often shows better results.    4.   The
              contribution of preheat and controlled cooling to  the integrity of joints. 
              Cases where AWS guidelines are  exceeded or violated would indicate sensitivity
              to this  parameter.    5.   The effect of size on joint integrity.  In many of
              the  failed joints during the Northridge Earthquake, steel member  sizes,
              driven by desire for long clear spans, were very  large.    6.   Improved
              details for large-size connections.  Some  possible details will be studied for
              enhancing such joints  by forcing the critical plastic hinge away from the face
              of  the column.  Testing of several specimens of different size  is
              contemplated.  This may include specimens with concrete  slabs.  Capacity
              analyses will be used in establishing  member sizes, as well as in developing
              design requirements.    7.   Residual Stress Distribution.  The residual
              stresses  together with those imposed by dead and live (earthquake)  loads that
              can cause failures of the type repeatedly  observed in steel building joints in
              the damaged area.    8.   Cantilever Beam-Column Subassemblages.  It is planned
               to fabricate and test two conventional beam-column  subassemblages.    9.  
              Cantilevers on Both Sides of Col umn.  Due to limitation  of the funds, only a
              single specimen is contemplated.  The  main purpose of this test is to study
              the panel zone, as  well as beam connections.    This project is coordinated
              with companion projects at the  University of California at San Diego and at
              the University  of Texas at Austin.    This is a Northridge Earthquake project.
               ***
