Title       : Coil Deformation, Scattering, and Fracture During Flow of Dilute Polymer
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1996   
File        : a9416955

Award Number: 9416955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hoagland dah@neurotica.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9416955  Hoagland  A "strong" flow field can substantially deform the usual
              coiled  conformation of a long flexible polymer.  This investigation will  use
              laser light scattering to measure the molecular deformation of  dilute polymer
              chains (MW<10 million) dissolved in a flowing  solvent. Experiments will focus
              on opposed jets and orifice flows,  geometries where the flow field best
              approximates uniaxial  elongation.  Variables characterizing the chain,
              solvent, and flow  strength will be adjusted systematically to test
              polymer/flow  models from the literature.  When flow-induced tension in the 
              backbone becomes sufficiently large, the chain breaks, generating  two fragment
              chains of potentially unequel molecular weight.  The  breadth of the fragment
              distribution reflects the chain  conformation at the instant of fracture.  Gel
              electrophoresis will  be employed to examine the distributions produced in
              various steady  and transient laminar flows capable of chain deformation and 
              fracture.  Turbulent drag reduction has often been explained using 
              polymer/flow models that presuppose full chain extension; a study  of chain
              fragments created in drag reducing flow will allow this  hypothesis to be
              tested.  %%%  Flow-induced molecular deformation and chain fracture have been 
              observed in nearly every application or environment where polymer  solutions
              are found.  A list of polymer technologies that would  benefit from an improved
              understanding of polymer/flow interaction,  and especially of flow-induced
              chain extension, includes the  following:  control and stabilization of bulk
              elongational flow  properties (foods, coatings), filtration and processing in
              porous  matrices (biopolymer manipulation, oil recovery), lubrication of 
              sliding surfaces (memory devices, motor oils), and solution  spinning
              (flow-induced crystallization of natural proteins,  preparation of high modulus
              fibers).
