Title       : Biomimetic Structured Porogen Freeform Fabrication System for Tissue Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0300405

Award Number: 0300405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388705             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Zhou zhoug@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter I. Lelkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Wootton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this project is to integrate biomaterials research,
              biomimetic modeling, solid freeform fabrication, systems and control, and
              tissue engineering in one intelligent system for structured, highly porous
              biomaterials, which will be applied to bone tissue engineering scaffolds.  The
              manufacturing system is based on the following principles:  (1) A
              computer-aided design model of bone is created based on images of computed
              tomography or magnetic resonance imaging and internal structure modeling using
              reverse engineering.  (2) A specially designed sucrose material is used to
              build a structured porogen, a skeleton that has the negative structure of bone
              extra-cellular matrix voids, using Solid Freeform Fabrication technology.  (3)
              A bio-composite of polymer and ceramic is cast into the sucrose negative
              skeleton and air-solidified.  (4) The sucrose porogen is then removed using
              water; and the bio-composite scaffold is sintered at a low temperature to
              improve its mechanical integrity and strength.  Biocompatibility will be tested
              in cell culture assays.

Success in this project will enable tissue engineers
              to optimize mechanical, transport, material, and biological properties of bone
              tissue engineering scaffolds with a degree of structural control not currently
              available.  Bone tissue engineering may offer a less painful alternative to
              traditional bone grafts in over 800,000 implants per year, with lower risk of
              infection. The new biomimetic structured porogen freeform fabrication system
              will also have application to scaffolds for other tissues, including
              vascularized tissue.  Broader benefits include training of two Ph.D. students,
              new course modules on "Biomimetic Tissue Modeling
and its Freeform
              Fabrication" and "Biomaterial Mechanical Property Measurement," and a
              biomaterials biocompatibility case study. The educational and research
              infrastructure can be enhanced by this interdisciplinary collaboration, and by
              development of new cross-disciplinary course modules for both College of
              Engineering and Biomedical Engineering School at Drexel University. The project
              will also be used in outreach workshops for local high school and community
              college students, including many underrepresented minority students.

