Title       : Optimization of Jump Stochastic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0300121

Award Number: 0300121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Feinberg eugene.feinberg@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project investigates dynamic optimization of continuous time jump
              stochastic systems with single and multiple performance characteristics.  The
              goals of this project are: (i) to develop new theoretical results that describe
              the structure of optimal strategies for problems that are applicable to large
              classes of engineering systems and provide efficient algorithms for computation
              of optimal policies, and (ii) to apply these results to solve particular
              optimization problems for production, service, information, and other man-made
              systems.  This project consists of two major parts.  The first part develops
              new methods for the analysis of jump stochastic systems based on: (a)
              developing new approximations of objective criteria for undiscounted
              continuous-time jump processes, (b) developing a theory of such processes that
              describes the structure of optimal policies and provides algorithms for their
              computation, (c) studying multiple-objective problems and the corresponding
              infinite-dimensional linear programs.  The utilization of these techniques will
              lead to the development of new results for the optimization of continuous time
              jump stochastic systems with multiple objectives and constraints.  These
              results will include the description of the structure of optimal strategies for
              undiscounted problems with unbounded cost functions and the algorithms for
              their computation.  The second part of this project deals with the applications
              of the results of the first part to the analysis and optimization of particular
              engineering and operations management models.  The results of the first part of
              this project will be applied to production, service, and inventory systems with
              stochastic demand, to replacement and preventive maintenance problems, to
              energy management, and to other engineering problems.

The intellectual
              impact of this research is that it will develop new methods for optimization of
              broad classes of jump stochastic systems.  It will contribute to a better
              understanding of the structure of optimal policies and develop algorithms for
              their computation.  It will improve our ability to manage production, service,
              information, energy, and other man-made systems.  The broader impact of this
              project is that it will contribute to the development of human resources in
              science and engineering, to technological progress, and to mutually beneficial
              interactions between industry and academia.

