Title       : BST Based Linearizers and Matching Circuits for High Efficiency RF Power
               Amplifiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300421

Award Number: 0300421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir Mortazawi amirm@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0300421
Mortazawi

The RF power amplifier is one of the key components in
              radio frequency communications. It is the determining factor in cost, power
              consumption, reliability and system performance. Since the power amplifier is
              the most power consuming element in a communication system, the design of high
              efficiency power amplifiers has drawn considerable attention in the past
              several years. The requirement for high efficiency originates from the
              limitations imposed by the available dc power, as well as the size, weight and
              cost requirements for the system. These requirements are even more severe for
              mobile and space borne communication applications. In response to the above
              technology needs, this program proposes to develop novel approaches for the
              design of efficient, linear and compact RF power amplifier
              architectures.

The key objective of the proposed research is to incorporate
              thin film barium strontium titanate (BST) ferroelectrics into power amplifier
              circuits for improved linearity and efficiency. This approach would allow
              significant benefits in terms of better matching and control of the circuit
              properties through the introduction of the ferroelectric components to yield
              compact, versatile and reproducible designs.  Specifically the PI will design
              RF power amplifiers integrated with BST varactor based predistortion
              linearizers and tunable matching networks to improve the amplifier's overall
              performance and functionality.


Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
              Research

The proposed research is expected to have a significant impact on
              the design of low cost, power efficient and compact transmitters for electronic
              communications at RF, microwave and millimeter-wave frequencies. Services and
              applications provided by satellites will also benefit from these developments
              due to the limitations on available dc power.


Broader Impact of the
              Proposed Research

The combination of RF Engineering and Materials Science
              expertise required here will provide rapid insight and learning into the
              development of tunable high frequency electronics for wireless applications,
              where there are numerous applications of strong commercial value. The
              dissemination of research will be based on journal publications,
              conference/workshop presentations and through their collaboration with ATMI.
              The Radiation Laboratory at UofM offers biweekly seminars on current research
              that are well attended by both graduate as well as undergraduates.

