Title       : Pushing Dielectrophoresis to the Single Molecule Limit for Applications in
               Molecular Electronics, Electronically Assisted Chemical Self-Assembly,
               Nano-manufacturing, Nano-biotech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300557

Award Number: 0300557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Burke pburke@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Brody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this proposal are two-fold: First, to investigate the
              electrical polarizability of macromolecules of DNA and proteins at frequencies
              from D.C. to 100 MHz and second, to investigate whether di-electrophoretic
              forces based on local non-uniform electric fields generated by micro- and
              nano-fabricated electrodes can be used to manipulate individual bio-molecules
              on a chip. This will be an extension of similar electronic manipulations of
              living cells to nanometer scale "objects". An important and as yet unexplored
              research challenge will be to investigate the following questions:  Are the di-
              electrophoretic forces sufficiently strong to overcome thermally induced motion
              of the DNA and protein molecules in solution? What is the spatial resolution of
              the ability to control the positions of macromolecules through the use of these
              "electronic tweezers", and what physical processes set that limit?
The ability
              to lithographically define arbitrary electrode geometries and apply an
              arbitrary sequence of voltages to the different electrodes can ultimately be
              exploited to manipulate individual macromolecules of biological significance,
              control chemical reactions one molecule at a time in solution, and construct
              new materials and electronic circuits one molecule at a time with custom
              designed electronic, optical, magnetic, and mechanical properties, including
              but not limited to large scale integrated molecular electronics
              ("LIME").

The broader impacts are multi-fold: First, to enhance the nation's
              health and health care system-using nano-biotechnology. The integration of
              nanoscale electronic and mechanical devices such as carbon nanotubes chemically
              functionalized with specificity for biologically and chemically interesting
              measurements on single molecules such as DNA, proteins, and viruses could have
              applications such as genetic sequencing and gene chips, proteomics and protein
              folding science, nano-medicine for site-specific and organ-specific drug
              delivery within a patient, lab-on-a-chip devices for fast candidate drug
              screening, biological and chemical hazard detection for counter terrorism, as
              well as low-cost deployment of point-of-care medical service and
              diagnostics.

In the area of education, the impact will be to broaden the
              participation of underrepresented groups at the high-school, undergraduate, and
              graduate level through integrated, interdisciplinary research and training
              programs in micro and nanofabrication as well as modern DNA chemistry.
              Furthermore, the broader impact will be to establish long-term relationships
              between high-school students, teachers, and administrators with educationally
              disadvantaged students from neighborhoods with predominantly ethnic-minority
              student populations and University of California scientists and engineers from
              the undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and faculty levels.

