Title       : Quantum Cohomology, Representation Theory, and Feynman Amplitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300356

Award Number: 0300356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prakash Belkale belkale@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Prakash Belkale
Proposal Number: 0300356
Institution:
              University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Abstract:  Quantum Cohomology,
              Representation theory and Feynman Amplitudes


The principal investigator
              wants to pursue research in two areas: Representations of the fundamental group
              and Quantum Cohomology, and the study of the structure of Feynman amplitudes
              (the second area is in collaboration with  Patrick Brosnan of UCLA). In the
              first field, the PI wants to generalise his recent geometric proof of Horn and
              Saturation conjectures to the Quantum analogues of these conjectures. This
              project is inspired by the the problem of unitary representations of the
              fundamental group of p1 of projective n-space with n points removed with
              prescribed local monodromies. The principal investigator plans to investigate
              the existence of  Horn type recursion for other groups and study analogues of
              the Saturation conjecture.  A final goal of this work is to determine an
              optimal set of inequalities for the problem of existence of unitary
              representations with prescribed monodromies. In the second field (in
              collaboration with Brosnan), the principal investigator will continue the study
              of relations between Feynman amplitudes and algebraic geometry. The first step
              of this work is to understand in general Algebro-geometric terms the integral
              computations of the physicists.

The study of relations between
              Representation theory (`symmetries') and Algebraic Geometry is a very important
              area of research. Part of the motivation for this work comes from eigenvalue
              problems, which are important in numerical computing and in wave mechanics. 
              The work on the geometry of Feynman amplitudes is of interest both in
              mathematics and physics. The aim is a better mathematical understanding of
              Feynman amplitudes, which are fundamental to the quantum theory.
              














