Title       : Non-Contacting Sampled - Line Reflectometers for In-Situ Measurement of
               Microwave and Millimeter-Wave Circuit Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300086

Award Number: 0300086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Weikle rmw5w@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7234,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0300086
Weikle

The objective of this project is to investigate and develop a
              new approach for the non-invasive measurement and characterization of
              integrated microwave and millimeter-wave circuit modules.  This work, in
              particular, aims to address present-day difficulties and challenges associated
              with measuring and characterizing high-frequency subsystems that are integrated
              with other components on a single circuit board or chip. The ultimate goal of
              this program is the development of a non-contacting network analyzer for the
              direct, in-situ measurement of scattering parameters of integrated or on-chip
              microwave and millimeter-wave subsystems.

The research activities to be
              undertaken during this project will include the refinement and application of
              device and IC processing technologies to the development of fully-integrated
              network analyzer sampling circuits, the establishment of calibration standards
              and procedures for non-contacting measurement schemes, and the investigation,
              design, and demonstration of non-contacting reflectometers for s-parameter
              measurements. These activities will directly address and impact the merit
              review criteria set forth by the National Science Foundation:

(1)The
              intellectual merit of this project lies in its potential to significantly
              expand
and improve the measurement and diagnostic capabilities currently
              employed
for high-frequency integrated circuits. This will not only benefit
              the microwave
measurements community but will significantly impact all fields
              that rely on
millimeter and submillimeter-wave instrumentation.

(2)The
              broad impact of this proposed work will be felt by researchers working
              on
high-frequency integrated systems as well as students, researchers, and
              faculty
at the University of Virginia and other institutions. The
              instrumentation de-
veloped through this program will enhance and complement
              the capabilities of
the PI's research and teaching laboratories while the
              close involvement and partici-
pation of graduate and undergraduate students
              will be crucial to supporting the
educational mission of the university and
              provide an avenue for incorporating
this work into the existing curriculum. In
              addition, through current collabora-
tive work with other institutions, the
              technical achievements developed from this
program will be shared and
              disseminated directly to the communities that rely
on millimeter and
              submillimeter-wave systems.

The program will culminate with the
              demonstration of a fully-integrated non-contacting
s-parameter measurement
              system operating in the millimeter-wave range and scalable to frequencies
              reaching into the submillimeter spectrum

