Title       : Chip-Level Self-Assembly: Tools and components that self-assemble and
               self-package to form desired microsystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300263

Award Number: 0300263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heiko O. Jacobs hjacobs@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Broader Impact: If the research part of this work proves successful, it could
              have tremendous impact. The ability to assemble multiple components (integrated
              circuits, optical components, sensors, actuators, fluidic devices) in two or
              three dimensions will enable the creation of improved and entirely new
              microsystems that go far beyond the capacities of current micromachining and
              microassembly. Furthermore, it would allow the merging of technologies based on
              otherwise incompatible materials. Examples of known applications include
              flexible displays, smart materials, integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics
              for wearable intelligence, and merged optical/electronic structures for optical
              off-chip and cross-chip communication.

Societal Implications: Advances in
              Microtechnology including Self-assembly Based Manufacturing promise to have
              major implications for health, wealth, and peace in the upcoming decades.
              Knowledge in this field is growing worldwide, leading to fundamental scientific
              advances. In turn, this will lead to dramatic changes in the ways that
              materials, devices, and systems are understood and created. The proposed
              research is one element to advance knowledge in this field. It suggests a
              dramatic change in the way that devices and systems are created.

The first
              objective is to develop a parallel tool that is based on directed self-assembly
              to assemble, and electrically connect chip-level-sized components, to form two
              and three-dimensional microsystems. This research includes (i) the study of the
              key factors affecting the assembly in experiment and theory, (ii) the
              demonstration of large area assemblies with minimal defects, (iii) the
              investigation of different schemes of agitation using acceleration and fluid
              flow, (iv) and the study of the resolution limit of surface tension-driven
              self-assembly involving liquid solder.

The second objective is to apply the
              gained knowledge to design intelligent components that undergo self- assembly
              to form a desired device. Proposed examples are (i) self-packaging chips for
              micro- and optoelectronics, and (ii) hemispherical emitter/detector arrays for
              surveillance.

The third objective of this program is to foster a
              cross-disciplinary education of our students and outreach to the general
              public.

