Title       : Workshop on Nanoengineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0300597

Award Number: 0300597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Goodnick   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Aylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry J. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Kenneth Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ECEDHA
	      549 West Randolph Street
	      Chicago, IL  606612208    312/559-4620

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposed workshop is to develop potential approaches for
              the introduction
of nanoscale engineering into the undergraduate and graduate
              engineering education process.
Recognizing that nanoscale engineering is a
              very interdisciplinary activity, the correct approach
to accomplish the
              education of future nanoelectronic engineers is not clear. The primary goal
              of
this effort is to hold a workshop with a collection of individuals well
              versed in the various
technologies that are necessary to accomplish advances
              in nanotechnology as well as individuals
that have been instrumental in
              developing roadmaps for new curricula. The attendees will be
primarily invited
              from the membership of the Electrical and Computer Engineering
              Department
Heads Association (ECEDHA). The co-located workshop will be held
              during the first two days
of the highly successful IEC DesignCon conference,
              taking place January 27-30, 2003.
DesignCon attracts more than 6,000 design
              engineers and managers and is also a draw for the
academic community. The
              proposed program plan is to hold a one-day tutorial on the general
topic of
              nanoscience and engineering that both the educators and the industrial
              participants of
IEC DesignCon can attend. The second day will be focused on
              the development of an
educational plan. The outcome of the workshop will be a
              report that outlines the possible
approaches that should be attempted to
              support the development of the undergraduate and
graduate nanoengineer. The
              workshop will be organized by ECEDHA, with board members
serving as the
              organizers and workshop hosts.
Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity:
              This workshop will bring together for the first time
educators in the general
              areas of Electrical and Computer Engineering with researchers in the
areas of
              Nanoscience and Engineering to address the critical issues of education and
              workforce
development relative to the emerging field of nanotechnology. This
              workshop will provide a
unique intellectual forum to identify problems and
              bottlenecks in educating engineering students
in this multidisciplinary
              arena.
Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity: The proposed
              activity represents only the
first step in a broader program seeking to impact
              the engineering educational system in terms of
new and emerging areas of
              science and technology. Since nanoscience and engineering are
broadly
              interdisciplinary, the ideas relative to curriculum and education emerging from
              this
workshop are expected have much broader impact in approaches to
              multidisciplinary education
in other fields, such as information technology.
