Title       : Theory of Aperiodic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0300398

Award Number: 0300398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Bellissard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Bellissard

Following a program initiated in 1979, the PI's project
              concerns some mathematical problems in the theory of aperiodic solids. The main
              tools used are coming from the Noncommutative Geometry, the theory of Random
              Matrices, the theory of Schrodinger operators, and the K-theory of C*-algebras.
              The project is divided into the following sections: (i) Phonons in Aperiodic
              Solids, (ii) Spectral Properties and Random Matrix Theory, (iii) Transverse
              Geometry of the Noncommutative Brillouin zone, (iv)  Schrodinger's Operators on
              Tilings, (v) N-body Problem and Noncommutative Fermi Surface, and (vi)
              K-theory: toward a physical interpretation.

This program develops a self
              contained general theory liable to describe all possible solids from their
              microscopic structure. This framework is a unification of various point of
              views developed by physicists specializing in different types of materials. On
              the other hand, it brings into the theory the most advanced mathematical
              theories, such as Noncommutative Geometry, K-theory, Dynamical Systems,
              Noncommutative Probability, Random Matrices. It is a truly interdisciplinary
              program between Physics and Mathematics.  Such an interdisciplinary program
              helps bring problems and ideas from one community to the other. K-theory is a
              tool that is appealing already in the field of string theory. This project
              shows that K theory applies also in other area of physics, where experiments
              are available.  Conversely, the recent solution of the so-called "gap labelling
              conjecture" is an example of the impact of such research in mathematics.

