Title       : Importance Based Visualization of Energy Networks via Progressive Simplification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0300071

Award Number: 0300071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Abur abur@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ergun Akleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Large scale power networks are controlled by a small number of regional
              transmission organizations
(RTO), which collect a vast amount of data on line
              and try to filter the useful information out of them. One
way to do this
              filtering is by the use of Level of Detail (LOD) representation, which is an
              important tool
for real time rendering of complex geometric environments. This
              proposal develops a method to utilize
LOD modelling in the efficient
              monitoring and operation of power networks. The intellectual merit of
this
              proposal is in the observation that the LOD representations can not only be
              used to visualize the power
networks but also be applied to their efficient
              analysis, modeling and optimization. This can be accomplished
by customization
              of the network reduction based on the specific characteristics of not only the
              network but
also the study of interest.

The broader impacts of the project
              will include the reduction of transmission costs via more efficient
power
              exchanges due to the facilitation of transmission relief procedures. Graduate
              and undergraduate
students will be trained in one of the critical
              infrastructure areas. The results of this research will be made
available on
              the web, also through papers in journals and conferences. Finally, the
              integration of the most
recent technical innovations in computer graphics in
              the monitoring of nation's energy grid will facilitate
much needed technology
              transfer between these two technical areas.
