Title       : Fast Simulation Methods for Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300044

Award Number: 0300044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Glasserman pg20@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Perwez Shahabuddin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Computer simulation is widely used in measuring and managing risk.  The
              objective of this project is to develop fast simulation methods for risk
              management, focusing on three specific problems:   (1) estimation of
              value-at-risk and related measures of the risks resulting from changes in
              market prices; (2) estimation of portfolio credit risk; and (3) estimation of
              ruin probabilities and insurance risk.  Each of these problems poses a
              computational challenge at least in part because it involves aspects of rare
              event simulation.  This project seeks to develop variance reduction techniques,
              based primarily on importance sampling, specifically designed to address the
              key sources of difficulty in each case.  From a methodological perspective, the
              research challenge lies primarily in two issues: (a) these applications often
              require developing methods suitable for heavy-tailed distributions to which
              traditional rare event simulation methods are inapplicable; (b) the models used
              in these applications often involve complex dependence between sources of risk,
              and this too complicates the development of variance reduction techniques. 
              Both issues are of central importance in practice because risk management is
              necessarily concerned with tail events and with the extent to which spreading
              risk reduces risk.

Sound risk management is essential to the stability of
              the nation's financial system. Yet firms sometimes view it as a cost of
              complying with regulations rather than as a source of competitive advantage and
              therefore underinvest in developing the necessary tools. Funded academic
              research has an important role to play in advancing risk management methods. 
              The US is currently a world leader in developing quantitative methods for the
              financial services industry.  Its success relies primarily on its educational
              base and supply of highly trained individuals.  With its proximity to one of
              the world's major financial centers, Columbia University is particularly well
              positioned to be a leader in research and education in this area. This project
              is part of a network of research and educational activities at Columbia.  In
              addition to supporting the PIs' research it will support doctoral students and
              foster research interactions with industry.  


