Title       : Cell Insertion and Manipulation Using MEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300390

Award Number: 0300390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Makarand Paranjape paran@physics.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A program of multidisciplinary research and education is proposed to address the
              scientific and engineering challenges associated with manipulating and
              injecting living cells using microfabricated devices. The goal of this project
              is to develop an integrated microfluidic chip-scale structure, employing
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) technology, to efficiently inject
              functionally useful material within living cells, and to separate these cells
              from those that experience unsuccessful insertions. Such a high throughput
              device would find application in several areas of biology and medicine. The
              incorporation of specific functional DNA segments into the nucleus of a host
              cell holds tremendous potential for gene therapy applications. Conversely, the
              device can be used in reverse to extract DNA from cells. Injecting contrast
              agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or low-dose therapeutics enables
              the encapsulating cells to be re-introduced in vivo and immuno-guided (via
              antibody-antigen binding) to specific target locations to function as
              diagnostic cellular beacons, or for highly localized drug delivery. The device
              also has application in the agriculture industry for large-scale in vitro
              fertilization.


Broader Impact: In addition to the device development, this
              project will strengthen and broaden the education and training of physics
              undergraduate and graduate students in technologically advanced topics offered
              through the facilities of the Georgetown Advanced Electronics Laboratory
              (GAEL), located in the Physics Department, where the majority of microsystem
              development will be undertaken. This research will also foster
              interdisciplinary collaborations with Biology, Genetics, Pharmacology, and the
              Medical Center. The principal investigator has an established record of
              involving undergraduates in research, and this project will provide tangible
              examples of the applied physics involved in micro- and bio-engineering for
              improving the human condition. Plans are also underway to initiate MEMS
              short-course for local high school students and teachers, emphasizing
              state-of-the-art technologies with the opportunity of experiencing hands-on
              learning through device design and fabrication. Teachers from the Arlington
              County School District (Virginia) were contacted and expressed great interest
              in participating in such a program. Select participants will be actively
              involved in the proposed research during the summer months, while continuation
              of both student and teacher involvement beyond the summer will be encouraged,
              in particular for students interested in science fair projects. The experience
              gained by students and teachers alike will have a positive, long-term impact on
              education, especially in grades 9-12, in the areas of science and technology -
              both fundamentally important subjects for the future.

