Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Public Support in the Aftermath of 9-11
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0300419

Award Number: 0300419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Marcus george.e.marcus@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonie Huddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Taber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. MacKuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the emotional underpinnings of support for national
              security policy in the period before, during, and after a major international
              event, in this case the anticipated armed conflict with Iraq. Tremendous
              uncertainty surrounds the threat posed by Iraq and the risks associated with
              U.S. military action there. This uncertainty is very likely to rekindle and
              intensify emotional reactions that were present in the aftermath of 9/11. Will
              citizens rally behind the President as has happened in past conflicts? Or has
              the landscape been altered by the events of 9/11, so that the potential risks
              of military action now dominate public deliberation? Will those Americans whose
              sense of security was shattered by 9/11 be reassured by talk of preemptive
              strikes against Iraq, or will they feel even less secure? More generally, what
              roles do the emotions play in public reactions to national security threats and
              support or opposition for government policies in response to those threats?
              Recent work in psychology and political science (Bargh and Chartrand, 1999;
              Marcus, Neuman, and MacKuen, 2000; Marcus, 2002; Zajonc, 1998), especially when
              coupled with the early findings from 9/11 research would suggest a central,
              perhaps determinative, role for emotions when national security is on the line.
              
The Administration's increasingly intense campaign in support of taking
              imminent 
action against Iraq makes it vital to understand the public's
              deliberation on Iraq over the coming weeks. To capture the evolution of public
              opinion in the midst of this major national security crisis, the investigators
              add two additional waves to an existing national dataset collected by
              researchers at Stony Brook in the months after 9/11 (Huddy, Feldman, Taber, and
              Lahav, 2002); the second wave will be a re-interview of this sample (with 200
              new respondents) to be conducted in October, 2002, and the third wave will be
              split, with half re-interviewed immediately after hostilities begin and half
              when things settle down. This design gives the investigators maximal purchase
              in understanding how perceptions of risk, depression, anxiety, anger, and
              reassurance shape public opinion with measures taken at three different time
              points: before Iraq was on most people's radar (wave 1, post 9/11), in the
              midst of public discussion of proposed military action against Iraq (wave 2,
              October 2002), in the immediate aftermath of military action (wave 3,
              split-half), and after some time has passed (this last phase reflect the impact
              of the course of military action (wave 3, split-half)). 
The broader focus of
              this research is on the central role of emotion in shaping how people
              comprehend and respond to major crises. Although concerned with the central
              role of emotion in threat situations, the project also provides a test of the
              theory of affective intelligence, a comprehensive theory that provides a
              taxonomy of preconscious emotion appraisal systems and hypotheses about their
              various impacts on cognition and behavior. 
The project contributes to a
              deeper understanding of public support for US military 
engagement overseas,
              and sheds light on public support for the war on terrorism. The Vietnam war,
              military activity in Somalia, and other military engagements have highlighted
              the power of public opinion to strengthen or weaken the ability of the US
              government to send armed forces into combat, station troops overseas, and
              deploy ground forces. This project helps to highlight the critical role of risk
              and fear in explaining the dynamics of public support for military engagement.
              This research has broad applicability to government agencies and other
              organizations interested in public support of US foreign policy. 


