Title       : Planning and Optimizing 5-Axis High Speed Machining with Feed Scheduling for
               Sculptured Surface Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0300297

Award Number: 0300297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan-Shin Lee yslee@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate strategies and techniques for
              optimizing five-axis tool paths required in high-speed machining of complex
              products.  To generate optimal feed schedules for high-speed machining, both
              the geometric error analysis and the physical mechanistic errors that are
              relevant to five-axis machining of complex parts are considered.  A robust
              modulated performance control system combined with a machining potential-field
              analysis will be developed to improve the computational efficiency of
              contour-curve interpolation for optimization of five-axis high-speed machining.
                

Successful completion of this research project would open up a number of
              possibilities for high-speed machining of complex products.  The application of
              high-speed machining has been recognized as an economically viable
              manufacturing technology for increased productivity and throughput.  The
              results of this research will provide techniques that are critical for future
              development of high-performance, five-axis machining with feed scheduling. 
              This research could also extend the capability of computational geometric and
              mechanistic modeling of high-performance machining to provide both the speed
              and accuracy required for state-of-the-art manufacturing operations.  The
              developed techniques will enable more adaptive and agile machining processes
              for next-generation manufacturing.
