Title       : Operator Algebras, Interpolation and Frames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300128

Award Number: 0300128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vern I. Paulsen vern@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Paulsen

My research will focus in three directions. I will continue
              to study injective envelopes, seeking deeper results about their structure and
              further applications of these objects to the study of operator spaces and
              C*-algebras. I will especially focus on attempting to develop a deeper
              understanding of the connections between injective envelopes and the weak
              expectation property. I will also continue to study applications of operator
              algebra techniques to the study of Nevanlinna-Pick type interpolation,
              especially focusing on the use of the C*-envelope and Schur ideals. The third
              direction that I will focus is the study of finite dimensional frames from the
              viewpoint of coding theory, especially the problem of determining optimal
              frames for certain coding theory problems.-

My research on frames could have
              the broadest impact. Frames are used as a way to ensure accurate communication
              of analogue information in the presence of uncertainty, usually coming from a
              noisy communication channel. My work on frames from a coding theory point of
              view intends to find the optimal frames to use for transmitting data, when it
              is anticipated that some of the data will be lost during the transmission. My
              work is especially relevant to the problem of "lost packages". Here one assumes
              that the data is packaged into discrete "bundles" that are then transmitted
              separately, perhaps even over different channels, and then reassembled later.
              The problem is what to do if only some of the bundles arrive? Clearly, one
              wants to build some redundancy into the transmitted data so that one can still
              reassemble a message, that if not exactly the original message, is close to the
              original message in some sense.

