Title       : Lagrangian and Autonomous Sampling Methods in Oceanography: A Workshop,March
               2003, San Diego, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a0300208

Award Number: 0300208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Rudnick drudnick@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5418      OCE SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0300208

Rudnick / SIO

	
The Principal Investigator, in
              collaboration with M. J. Perry at the University of Maine, proposes to co-chair
              an interdisciplinary workshop to develop a strategic planning document that
              details the exciting, new scientific opportunities for using Lagrangian and
              autonomous platforms for interdisciplinary studies of the ocean. The last
              decade has witnessed a revolution in ocean observing capabilities as new
              platforms and sensing systems have been introduced and matured. It is now
              possible with a class of oceanographic platforms that can be loosely
              characterized as autonomous to track water masses, record their biological,
              physical, optical and chemical properties, and periodically receive the data at
              home via satellite telemetry All of the recent disciplinary and
              interdisciplinary oceanography reports sponsored by the Foundation in the last
              few years highlight the potential and profound impact of these new observing
              capabilities on experiments and observations. Because of the new and rapidly
              evolving nature of this mode of sampling, there has been to date no concerted
              effort to detail the new opportunities that will be enabled in
              cross-disciplinary activities. The time is now right to develop a national plan
              so that all oceanographers can share in the technological advancements achieved
              to date and can participate in future activities. We propose a workshop to
              formulate such a plan with the goal of answering four primary questions:
*
              What new science can be done with Lagrangian, autonomous, or other novel
              platforms?
* What technological developments need to be pursued, including
              sensor development and information technology?
* How should these new
              platforms be made available to the community?
* What training, education, and
              outreach efforts must accompany these activities?
A steering committee with
              representation from a diverse cross section of the ocean community will
              organize a workshop of 40 participants in San Diego in March 2003. Broad
              participation from senior and junior scientists in ocean sciences, engineering,
              information technology, and sensor development will be solicited. The
              participation of women at all levels and scientists from under-represented
              groups (who most likely will not be at the senior level) will be sought. A
              draft report will be vetted and community comment incorporated in the document;
              the final report will be published in autumn 2003. The goal of the workshop is
              to help catalyze the revolution in ocean observations and to facilitate access
              to these tools and data by a broader community.  The research resulting from
              these technologies will contribute to more detailed studies of climate and the
              impacts of climate variability on ocean ecosystems. The workshop will address
              how data sets can best be used in educational venues as a vehicle for enticing
              K-16 students into science and engineering.





