Title       : Applications of Quiver Representations to Algebra and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300064

Award Number: 0300064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerzy M. Weyman j.weyman@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Jerzy Weyman	
Proposal Number: 0300064
Institution:
              Northeastern University

Abstract: Applications of Quiver Representations to
              Algebra and Geometry

Technical description. 
The proposal consists of
              several interrelated parts. The first part is to study the rings of
              semi-invariants of quivers and the combinatorial invariants they define. The
              investigator proposes to continue to study the walls of cones of weights of
              rings of semiinvariants and the multiplicities of weight spaces for these
              rings. In one particular case this includes  the cones defined by Klyachko
              inequalities. This part also includes the study of modules of covariants for
              quiver representations. The investigator proposes to compute the defect of the
              dimension vectors for the Dynkin quivers. The second part is concerned with
              semi-invariants for quivers with relations. The main problem here is to
              characterize in terms of semi-invariants those quivers with relations that are
              tame and have finite type. The third part is to study the generalized quivers
              associated to reductive groups. In particular the investigator proposes to
              study the rings of semi-invariants of symmetric quivers. His graduate student
              Steve Lovett studies the orbit closures for such quivers. The last part
              consists of studying how the defining ideals of orbit closures of codimension
              three and four for quivers and symmetric quivers are connected to the structure
              theory of perfect ideals of codimension three and Gorenstein ideals of
              codimension four.

Non-technical description.

This proposal is related to
              two branches of algebra: representations of quivers and commutative algebra. A
              representation of a quiver is a way to associate vector data  to the
vertices
              of some oriented graph. The edges of a graph can be viewed as relations between
              these data. Abstract algebra allows us to study such objects systematically.
              The results of this research might lead to better algorithms for dealing with
              linear algebra problems.  In fact some of the published research of the
              investigator has led to such algorithms. Commutative algebra studies sets
              defined by polynomial equations. The last part of the proposal relates certain
              types of objects defined by such equations (Gorenstein ideals of codimension
              four) to representations of quivers. If successful this would lead to a
              combinatorial description of such objects.


