Title       : Propagation and Capacity Studies for Multi-Polarized MIMO Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300130

Award Number: 0300130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramakrishna Janaswamy janaswamy@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis L. Goeckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0300130
Janaswamy

Future wireless systems, providing high data-rate services
              with limited spectrum, will increase capacity by exploiting additional degrees
              of freedom provided by the spatial dimension. Examples of such systems are
              multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems, where multiple antennas are
              employed at each end to scale the number of degrees of freedom. Further degrees
              of freedom can be obtained through employing various electric and magnetic
              field components of the electromagnetic wave. Assuming that the same
              configuration is employed at both the transmitter and receiver, information
              theoretic results for independent fading demonstrate that the system capacity
              scales linearly with the product of the number of antennas and the number of
              field components per antenna employed. This has led system designers to
              consider systems with a vast number of antennas where possible. However, as
              these systems push rapidly towards implementation, it is important to be able
              to analyze and design such systems for realistic propagation environments,
              where the amount of independence is inherently limited. Thus, under this
              project, the PIs will: (1) develop stochastic propagation models that include
              depolarization and multiple scattering of waves (2) study capacity limitations
              arising from element correlation and mutual coupling that results from
              restricting antennas to a fixed volume and realistic environment, and (3)
              design and analyze robust single-user and multi-user communication techniques
              that exploit various forms of channel state information in these
              environments.

The technical merit of this project is significant both in
              fundamental advances in the individual areas of the PIs and also in the close
              connection of such. The modeling techniques for MIMO systems will represent
              significant advances in electromagnetic modeling for this important new
              environment. The capacity analyses will introduce new techniques and
              mathematical devices that will prove of general use to the community. The
              techniques of design and analysis of  communication systems based on the
              derived electromagnetic models represent a new approach to robust communication
              system design. Just as importantly, however, is how the connection of the two
              areas of the PIs furthers the goals of the project; in particular, the
              communications research helps define the parameters of the electromagnetic
              model that will have a significant impact on system design and analysis, and
              the electromagnetic models drive the techniques and tools required to design
              and analyze MIMO systems. This promising technical merit is substantiated in
              this proposal by the description of the proposed and recent work of the PIs -
              both individually and in collaboration.

The broader impact of this project
              will be significant in a number of ways. First, the models and techniques
              developed in this research will be used widely by researchers and designers of
              MIMO systems. In particular, the development of such models and techniques by
              this multidisciplinary team will guarantee both the accuracy of such and that
              the results are in a form that can serve the research community in the analysis
              and design of algorithms.  Second, this project will continue the team's
              successful program of undergraduate research, which has sent a number of
              University of Massachusetts undergraduates to top graduate programs around the
              country, and supports two PIs with a sincere dedication to undergraduate
              teaching. Finally, this project will further the strong collaboration of the
              PIs across the boundary that separates electromagnetics from communication
              theory, and it will further the understanding that integrated academic research
              is not only needed across layers in the typical networking model but also
              within the physical layer itself.

