Title       : Fabrication of Open-cell Biodegradable Polymer Foams using Ultrasonic Implosion
               for Tissue Engineering Scaffolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0300415

Award Number: 0300415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Li weiwli@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vipin Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes to exploit a special physical phenomenon, ultrasonic
              cavitation and implosion, to fabricate open cell biodegradable polymer foams
              with controlled size and structure for tissue engineering scaffolds. Existing
              scaffold fabrication methods involve the use of either organic solvents or a
              leaching step, both of which are undesirable for tissue engineering
              applications. Conventional gas foaming techniques have limitations in creating
              open cell polymer foams.   The study explores gas-polymer-ultrasound
              interactions, gas solubility and diffusivity, ultrasonic cavitation and
              implosion, bubble dynamics and disruption, The research will first explore the
              effects of foaming temperature and time on the structures of closed cell PLGA
              (poly(DL-lactic-co-glycolic acid)) foams. Then, the cell rupture behavior under
              ultrasonic energy will be studied for different frequencies and amplitudes. The
              created open cell structures will be characterized in terms of their
              morphology, density, porosity, and mechanical properties.  Using CO2 as a
              blowing agent and the ultrasonic vibration to create open cell structures, the
              proposed process is biocompatible, environmentally benign, and easy to scale
              up. The new processing technology will result in not only a family of novel
              biomaterials that will find wide applications in tissue engineering, but also
              other open-cell polymeric materials that can be used in many applications such
              as micro filtration. Collaboration with medical researchers from the Fred
              Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (U. Washington) and the Integra Lifesciences
              Corporation, which specializes in medical devices, implants, and biomaterials
              should lead to a faster technology transfer and an education interdisciplinary
              experience for the students involved.  

The proposed research will address
              the feasibility of a solvent and leach free open-cell polymer foaming process
              that represents a quantum leap forward from the capability of the current
              technology. It could change the way the tissue engineering community processes
              synthetic degradables into scaffolds and revolutionize the field of ex vivo
              expanded cell therapy. 


