Title       : RUI: Moments of Short Divisor Sums and the Distribution of Primes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300563

Award Number: 0300563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Goldston goldston@math.sjsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator in joint work with C. Y. Yildirim has over the last three years
              determined the correlations of a short divisor sum which approximates the prime
              numbers. The corresponding correlations for primes were conjectured by Hardy
              and Littlewood in 1923 and are now referred to as the prime r-tuple conjecture.
              The proof of this conjecture is probably far beyond our current state of
              knowledge, but the corresponding result for the short divisor sum is now
              available. Further, using the Bombieri-Vinogradov theorem one can also obtain
              all the correlations when one of the divisor sums is replaced by the primes.
              These two types of correlations together with positivity allow us to obtain
              information about primes in the form of lower bounds on certain sums over
              primes. The first and main aim of this project is to apply these new
              correlation results to the problem of  finding small gaps between  primes. The
              main question to be answered is whether one can prove that there are infinitely
              many prime gaps shorter than any small multiple of the average gap size. At
              present it is only known that there are small gaps of size less than 0.248
              times the average spacing. The method we use is based on moments for short
              divisor sums in short intervals. Preliminary work indicates we should be able
              to substantially improve on all previous results. There are many possible
              refinements and a variety of ways to apply the moment results which will be
              investigated. The second aim of this project is to refine the correlation
              results so far obtained and extend their range of applicability. A third aim is
              to seek further applications of the method to primes in arithmetic progressions
              and zeros of the Riemann zeta-function.


This proposal is concerned with
              proving results on the distribution of primes. The primes have been a topic of
              interest since the Greeks who first proved both the infinitude of primes and
              the unique factorization of all integers into primes. The primes are intimately
              connected with the Riemann hypothesis and are fundamental objects in both
              number theory and mathematics. New results and methods concerning primes have
              been used in many areas of mathematics, physics, and computer science. To cite
              a recent example, the celebrated proof that primality testing can be done in
              polynomial time depended on the existence of primes   p   with  p - 1 having a
              large prime factor, a result proved by Fouvry 17 years ago which up to this
              year had only an esoteric application to the first case of Fermat's last
              theorem.









