Title       : Harmonic analysis and applications to geometric PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300511

Award Number: 0300511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Atanas G. Stefanov stefanov@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Atanas G.  Stefanov
DMS-0300511


ABSTRACT:

The proposal deals with
              several problems arising in geometry and in the theory of electromagnetism. The
              main goal is to study analytically the behavior of the solutions 
of the
              partial differential equations, describing these processes. 

The PI will
              concentrate on the study of the following equations: the Wave map problem, the
              Schroedinger map problem and the Yang-Mills fields equations. Following the
              fundamental physical principle that every physical system is trying to minimize
              its energy, one form and studies the solutions to these nonlinear partial
              differential equations, which arise as the minimizers of the corresponding
              energy functionals. The questions for existence, uniqueness and stability for
              these equations have been studied extensively in various settings. However to
              conform to a more natural physical situation, one needs to consider low
              regularity data. Stefanov will concentrate on showing regularity for solutions
              with critical degree of regularity. That is, one requires the least possible
              amount of smoothness in order to show that the solution exists globally in
              time. In the physically interesting case of small energy data (modeling systems
              that are very close to their equilibrium), the proposal will address the
              question of stability, i.e. whether the system will remain close to its initial
              state or will eventually develop some singularities. Stefanov proposes to study
              these problems, by using a variety of techniques including frequency analysis
              and gauge theoretic methods. A concurrent aim of the project is to make these
              methods more readily applicable to other problems.  

The wave equation
              models the propagation of different kind of waves in materials. Nonlinear
              models of conservative type arise in the study of vibrating systems and
              semiconductors.
The nonlinear Schroedinger equation describes the propagation
              of a laser beam in a medium whose index of refraction is sensitive to the wave
              amplitude. Better theoretical understanding of the time evolution of these
              models will allow one to better predict the physical behaviour of such systems.
              For example, if a physical system of the kind described above, is stable
              (rigid) with respect to small perturbations, one could afford to have certain
              amount of noise/impurities in the
system. The analytical study of the
              equations governing such processes will lead to a better understanding of the
              corresponding physical phenomenon. 

