Title       : Multi-scale Microstructure Prediction in Thermo-mechanical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300273

Award Number: 0300273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sven K. Esche sesche@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project aims at (i) establishing a systematic methodology for
              predicting the microstructure evolution during thermo-mechanical processing in
              metals by modeling at multiple length scales, (ii) developing and implementing
              the method in the form of efficient numerical algorithms, and (iii) applying
              the algorithms to study the fundamental microstructural phenomena of grain
              growth and recrystallization. This approach is superior to the empirical
              modeling techniques prevalent in current industrial practice.
The proposed
              multi-scale methodology will be implemented into a simulation system
              that
consists of continuum-based coupled thermo-mechanical models, a
              multi-scale modeling
interface and mesoscopic microstructural models. The
              simulation input includes the processing conditions, macroscopic and mesoscopic
              material properties and initial microstructure features. The final output of
              the simulation sequence is the resulting microstructure.

The proposed
              three-year project will comprise three major phases:
Phase I, involves (i) the
              development of a model for computing the stored energy as a function of strain
              and stress, (ii) the development of two- and three-dimensional Monte Carlo (MC)
              models for simulating static recrystallization and normal grain growth, and
              (iii) the application of these models to study the fundamental physics of
              various microstructural phenomena. In Phase II of this project, the length and
              time scale conversions between the physical and MC domains will be performed by
              conducting grain growth experiments with a pure material. In Phase III, cold
              upsetting and subsequent annealing tests of a pure material will be carried
              out. The grain sizes measured in these experiments will be used to validate the
              proposed
methodology of microstructure prediction through multi-scale
              modeling.  Through the development, implementation and validation of a
              multi-scale approach for modeling microstructure phenomena in metals, this
              project will advance the state of the art in microstructure prediction in an
              industrially relevant way. An industry collaborator (McWilliams Forge Co.) will
              participate in the project. Furthermore, both undergraduate and graduate
              students at Stevens Institute of Technology (SIT) will be involved in the
              research, with an strong effort made towards including female and
              underrepresented minority students.

