Title       : Dynamic Resource Allocation in Stochastic Processing Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0300599

Award Number: 0300599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiangang Dai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Complex systems like semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities (fabs), networks
              of data switches, and large scale call centers all demand efficient resource
              allocation.  Deterministic models like linear programs (LP) have been used for
              capacity planning at both the design and expansion stages of such a system.
              LP-based planning is critical in setting a medium range or long term goal for
              many systems. But it does not translate into a day-to-day operational policy
              that must deal with discreteness of jobs and the randomness of the processing
              environment. This research project will investigate a general class of
              stochastic processing networks.  A processing network is a system that takes
              inputs of materials of various kinds and uses various processing resources to
              produce outputs of materials of various kinds.  These processing networks
              provide high-fidelity stochastic models in diverse economic sectors including
              manufacturing, service and information technology.  The key goal of this
              research is to devise dynamic, operational policies that can achieve long term
              objectives for networks.  These objectives include (i) achieving maximum
              throughput predicted by LPs, and furthermore, (ii) minimizing work-in-process
              or delays in networks.  The research team will make fundamental understanding
              of these stochastic processing networks by building mathematical frameworks at
              all three time and space scales.  More importantly, the team will use the
              frameworks to (i) devise operational policies that require minimal state
              information; (ii) prove that these policies are throughput optimal; (iii)
              identify and prove that policies are asymptotically optimal in terms of some
              second order performance measures when the system has a unique pooled
              bottleneck station; (iv) adapt the theoretically proven policies so that they
              can be readily implemented in a number of application areas.

The project
              attempts to solve dynamic resource allocation problems that are challenging in
              different economic sectors including manufacturing, service and information
              technology.  The results discovered from this research can directly be applied
              to wafer fab scheduling, input-queued data switch design and control, Internet
              Border Gateway routing, congestion based road traffic pricing/control, and call
              center scheduling. These applications intersect with many disciplines including
              electrical engineering, computer science, civil engineering, industrial
              engineering, and management.  The Ph.D. students who conduct research on the
              project will have excellent interdisciplinary training. These interdisciplinary
              skills are essential for future academic leaders.  Building on proven track
              record, the PI will turn cutting edge research results into course materials to
              be used for both graduate and undergraduate students at Georgia Tech and
              elsewhere.

