Title       : Dynamics and Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0300349

Award Number: 0300349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Loss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Carlen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI/Co-PI:Michael Loss/Eric Carlen, Georgia,
              Tech
DMS-0300349

ABSTRACT:

The investigators will study a variety of
              physical problems ranging from a probabilistic investigation of the rates of
              equilibration in many particle systems, to the stability of matter in the
              presence of a quantized radiation field.  More specifically, in the first
              problem mentioned, they will be studying the distance from equilibrium of a
              many particle system as measured by entropy
or related Lyapunov functions. 
              The goal will be inequalities that yield realistic rates of approach to
              equilibrium for initial conditions that are far away from the equilibrium
              state.  In recent work on the Kac model of molecular collisions, the
              investigators developed a method for controlling the rate of dissipation as a
              function of the number of molecules in the system.  New work will extend this
              to other measures of the distance from equilibrium that is better suited to
              initial data far from equilibrium.  The second problem is concerned with
              understanding the stability of matter problem for relativistic models with pair
              creation taken into account.  Moreover, various questions concerning the
              self-energy of systems interacting with radiation and the existence of ground
              states will be investigated.  All these problems will be treated from a
              non-perturbative perspective.


It is a fundamental observation that many
              laws of nature can be formulated as maximization or minimization problems.  It
              is therefore important to describe the configurations of the physical systems
              that yield these minima or maxima, as well as understanding how these
              equilibrium configurations are reached by the system.  This proposal
              investigates such problems in specific but fundamental models.  These models
              are physically diverse: both classical and quantum, deterministic and
              probabilistic.  The common mathematical thread that binds these problems, and
              many others discussed in the proposal, is that they all lead to challenging
              problems in the calculus of variations.  Thus, they are tied together in that
              their solutions require new a--priori estimates, in the form of inequalities.
              This can be an estimate on the ground state energy in field 
theory or an
              estimate on the rate of dissipation in kinetic theory.  Ideally, these
              inequalities should be sharp enough to serve as the basis of exact
              calculations, and have applicability to problems other than the one that
              motivated them, as in the previous work on the Kac model.  What makes it
              especially attractive to work in this area is that it cuts across the
              boundaries of mathematics and other scientific disciplines.


