Title       : Superefficient Fits to Linear Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0300806

Award Number: 0300806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf J. Beran beran@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Recent theory for shrinkage estimators, techniques from signal-processing, and
              effective algorithms for computing orthonormal bases now make it possible to
              exploit the superefficiency loophole in classical information bounds for
              estimation. In linear regression, if the first few vectors in the regression
              basis closely approximate the unknown mean vector, then the risk of an
              estimator that shrinks to zero those regression coefficients associated with
              the unimportant basis vectors can be much smaller than the risk of the least
              squares estimator. Such shrinkage estimators, which are particular symmetric
              linear smoothers, realize the benefits of C. Stein's and M. S. Pinsker's
              pioneering ideas on estimation of high- or infinite-dimensional parameters.
              Specific goals of the research are: (a) to construct and interpret confidence
              sets centered at a superefficient fit; (b) to handle, through multiple
              shrinkage, cases where the chosen basis is sparse but not well-ordered; (c) to
              develop within- and between-observation shrinkage techniques to handle the
              multivariate linear model; (d) to draw on relations with signal-processing
              techniques that use the discrete cosine basis or wavelet bases.

	Regression
              models fitted by the method of least squares are widely used in scientific
              research and other disciplines to establish quantitative relationships within
              sets of data. Studies related to the program on Environment and Global Change
              and to the program on Manufacturing are examples. The broad goal of the
              proposed research is to improve the reliability of these fitted relationships
              by replacing least squares with better adaptive linear smoothers. Recent
              statistical theory supports the general feasibility of this project. How to
              realize what is possible in theory is the essence of the work. The author's
              REACT method, described with references in the proposal, is a practical
              technique for regression with one response variable that demonstrates
              real-world
improvements over least squares fits. REACT competes well with
              current nonparametric regression methods while offering certain advantages,
              such as built-in diagnostics that indicate the quality of the fit. The proposed
              research will extend REACT methods to finding relationships among sets of
              variables and will develop practical methods for assessing the uncertainty of
              the estimated relationships.  Least squares regression, a standard function in
              modern statistical packages and spreadsheets, is widely used in data-analysis.
              This circumstance provides strong motivation for improving on least squares.
