Title       : Development of a Common Modeling Framework for The Sensitivity Analysis, Optimal
               Dispatch, and Control Design of Multiple FACTS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0300025

Award Number: 0300025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe H. Chow chow@ecse.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) Controllers are useful in improving
              power system reliability and relieving congestions in power systems, which are
              particularly important in deregulated electricity markets using locational
              marginal prices and thus are of national interest. The proposal addresses the
              development of a common modeling framework suitable for implementing both
              thyristor-controlled and voltage-sourced converter (VSC) based FACTS
              Controllers. This common power system model will have the ability to include
              injected series voltage sources, which can circulate active power with other
              injected voltage sources, thus expanding the capability of power system models.
               In this framework, network sensitivities can be readily computed and be used
              to evaluate the effectiveness of FACTS Controllers for steady-state power
              transfer and voltage support, and transient power and voltage swings. The
              proposed research will develop the FACTS Controller models and the sensitivity
              computation tools. The models and tools will be used in determining the optimal
              FACTS Controller dispatch for a given power transfer condition, as well as
              evaluating the maximum transfer capability over a congested transfer path. In
              interarea-mode damping control design, they will be used in computing the
              controllability of a FACTS Controller; the observabilities of potential input
              signals for the controller, and the inner-loop gain limitations of the
              individual input signals. In addition, the use of the common FACTS Controller
              model in state estimation will be investigated.
