Title       : Questions in commutative algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0300600

Award Number: 0300600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anurag K. Singh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Anurag Singh
Proposal Number: 0300600
Institution:
              Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Institute of Technology

Abstract
              
The investigator proposes to work on questions that arise from tight closure
              theory, local cohomology, and the theory of intersection multiplicities.  Tight
              closure theory was developed by Hochster and Huneke, and leads to the notion of
              F-regular rings. This class of rings includes well-studied examples such as
              determinantal rings and normal monomial rings, but several questions about
              F-regular rings remain unanswered. The theory of local cohomology has
              applications to fundamental questions such as determining the minimal number of
              equations needed to define an algebraic set. Local cohomology modules often
              have useful finiteness properties, and the investigator proposes to continue
              his work on Lyubeznik's conjecture, which states that local cohomology modules
              of regular rings have finitely many associated prime ideals. The work on
              intersection multiplicities will focus on the recently developed theory of
              Roberts rings: these rings provide a framework in which intersection
              multiplicities have several desirable properties. Some of the questions
              described in the proposal create possibilities for students to be involved in
              research by performing computer verifications to suggest answers and plausible
              approaches. The investigator will also be involved in curriculum development in
              areas related to this proposal, and intends to enhance opportunities for
              students interested in algebra in the Deep South.

This project is concerned
              with questions in commutative algebra. This is a field closely related to
              algebraic geometry: while algebraic geometry focuses on the geometry of
              solution sets of polynomial equations, in commutative algebra the main objects
              of study are certain functions on these solution sets. It continues to develop
              a fascinating interaction with several other branches of mathematics, and is
              becoming an increasingly valuable tool in engineering, coding theory,
              cryptography, and other applications of strategic interest. 

