Title       : Stability of compressible flow in real media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0300487

Award Number: 0300487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543103             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Zumbrun kzumbrun@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Kevin Zumbrun, Indiana University
DMS-0300487

ABSTRACT

The principal
              investigator proposes to study stability of compressible flows in ``real''
              media featuring often-neglected effects such as viscosity, heat conduction,
              electromagnetic
dynamics, phase-transition, non-thermoequilibrium, and
              chemical reaction, in the physically interesting (usually large-amplitude)
              regime where transition to instability may be expected to occur: for example,
              multidimensional stability of strong shock and detonation waves, or of
              classical shear flows. This involves interesting and nonstandard issues in
              singular perturbation theory, dynamical systems and bifurcation, spectral
              theory of linear operators, and nonlinear partial differential equations, and
              should result in the development of new mathematical tools of general
              application. The ultimate physical goal is an understanding of stability
              phenomena that is both more complete and more precise than can be obtained
              within simplified models: on the one hand resolving philosophical puzzles at
              the level of mathematical foundations and on the other yielding quantitative
              predictions at the level of practical application. The plan of attack centers
              around Evans function and related spectral techniques developed recently in the
              study of stability of viscous shock fronts.

The stability of regular flow
              patterns is an old and central topic in fluid, gas, and plasma dynamics,
              deciding which (stable) patterns will typically be observed, and which
              (unstable) are only mathematical and not physically observable solutions.  The
              transition from stability to instability is of particular importance, since it
              usually signals the arising of alternative, more complicated flow patterns
              close to the original (now unstable) one- this is a way to understand
              complicated flows by the study of simpler and better-understood ones.  Despite
              a large and well-known body of theory on this subject, dating back to the late
              1800's, there are still many aspects that are poorly understood, particularly
              for compressive, viscous, or reacting flows.  Here, we propose to study several
              of these issues arising in compressible gas and plasma dynamics, and in
              combustion, applications in which such usually neglected effects are of
              considerable practical importance.  Our goal is, by including these
              mathematically problematic terms, to move existing theory from the qualitative
              to the quantitative regime, obtaining new information of use to practitioners
              at the same time that we advance the mathematical theory. The planned
              activities have both analytic and numerical components, and involve
              collaboration with domestic and foreign colleagues and with current and former
              graduate students and post doctorates. This may be expected to strengthen and
              extend existing networks of cooperation across field and institution, and to
              aid in training of graduate and postdoctoral students.  The ultimate aim of
              these investigations, of quantitative predictions of transition to instability,
              would, if achieved, be of direct and practical use at the level of engineering,
              in chemical, manufacturing, and other processes.

