Title       : Studies in Interacting Particle Systems and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0300672

Award Number: 0300672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto H. Schonmann rhs@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0300672
Schonmann
	Schonmann will work on various projects in the areas of
              interacting particle systems, statistical mechanics, percolation, and other
              related subjects in probability theory. The main targets in this research are
              the ergodic behavior and the relaxation patterns of several interacting
              particle systems, including Ising models, contact processes and other lattice
              spin systems. Percolation theory is also a major component of this research,
              because of its close relations to the processes indicated above and its
              simplicity, which makes it a paradigm in the study of probabilistic models with
              many components. Part of the research addresses the study of the above
              mentioned processes on arbitrary graphs -- an important current trend in the
              area. Several of the problems have their motivation in phenomena observed in
              nature as, for example, phase transitions, critical behavior, metastable
              behavior of systems in the vicinity of phase transition regions and domain
              formation and growth.
	On an informal and broad level one can see the objects
              of interest in this research in the following fashion. A system contains a
              large number of similar components and each component interacts in a simple way
              with a few other ones, which are near to it in some sense. For instance one can
              think of the atoms in a crystal interacting when they are close enough, or
              individuals in a large population which may suffer or not from some infection
              with contamination occurring between neighbors. The local interaction may
              involve a substantial amount of randomness, but since the system as a whole is
              large, one expects and indeed observes a much more predictable behavior at the
              global level. A great deal of interest in such systems stems from the fact that
              the qualitative behavior of the whole system may depend in non-trivial ways on
              parameters which are built into the local interactions, but which only affect
              those in a smooth way (e.g., the rate of infection between neighboring
              individuals in our second example above). The general issues of interest are
              then the understanding of which sort of equilibria can be reached by such types
              of stochastic dynamics, how an equilibrium state is reached, and how the
              parameters which affect the local rules may affect the answers to these
              questions. 

