Title       : Congestion in Facilities Location and Layout: Deterministic and Stochastic
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0300370

Award Number: 0300370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rakesh Nagi nagi@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajan Batta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The project aims at developing a common theory base to model movement and
              resultant congestion in the context of facilities location and facilities
              layout.  The motivation stems from the fact that the two bodies of literature
              in facility layout and facility location have generally evolved separately. 
              The objective is to produce a superior class of models that are expected to
              provide better performance in real-life applications via the explicit
              consideration of slow-downs, congestion, flow capacity, and accurate distances.
               
The research work has three main tasks.  The first one is called the Planar
              Facility Location Problem with Generalized Congested Regions that advances and
              unifies existing restricted facility location literature by common modeling of:
              Barriers (no travel, no location), Forbidden Regions (no location), and
              Congested Regions (no location and travel with additional cost).  In the
              dynamic/stochastic version of this problem the congestion cost might change
              with time of day (to represent rush hour traffic) or be a random variable.  The
              second research task is called the Connection Location Problem, where
              ``connection'' is used to define a connected part of a manufacturing facility
              or an urban flow network that links different sets of departments/cells or
              facilities.  The stochastic version of this task concerns selection/location
              and the service rate of the connections (and to assign the flows) so as to
              minimize the sum of the fixed connection installation costs, the queuing delay
              cost, and the material movement cost, that take into consideration the
              congestion effects.  The third task is to embody the theoretical results of the
              study in Educational material.

The intellectual merit of the first task is
              the study the plant layout problem in which distance measures vary in different
              sections of the plant, and also consider location problems in a modeling
              framework that simultaneously allows for barriers, forbidden regions and
              congested regions.  The second task would allow for modeling of aisle
              capacities and placement and add significantly to the limited literature
              available in this area.
