Title       : Strain Path Control and Defect Formation and Suppression During Forming of
               Highly Contoured Composite Parts Using Active Tooling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0300268

Award Number: 0300268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Walczyk walczd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Dvorak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Complex products requiring a large number of high-performance parts characterize
              the aerospace industry, but this product complexity is contrasted by an
              extremely low volume throughput.  For aerospace applications, advanced
              composite materials offer a number of advantages over metals including
              relatively high specific strengths and elastic moduli, which can lead to
              tailoring of shape and microstructure to meet performance requirements. 
              Unfortunately, the use of composite parts in this industry has been severely
              limited by the prohibitive fabrication cost and time of advanced composite
              component, along with the need to store and maintain many under-utilized molds
              at great expense.  In response to this need, the use of active discrete tooling
              (i.e., matrix of pins tooling that changes shape during the forming process
              based on electronically stored geometry) for composites forming is currently
              being considered. Recently, the PIs have successfully demonstrated that (1)
              composite forming using active tooling is possible and (2) it increases the
              number of components that can be successfully manufactured by the forming
              process.  In addition, mold development and storage is greatly simplified
              because a single reconfigurable tool is used.  
This 3-year project sponsored
              by the National Science Foundation will seek to develop a fundamental
              understanding of composites forming process with active tooling, emphasizing
              particularly the effects of process variables on part formability and fiber
              reorientation.  The research will concentrate on process development and on
              developing mathematical models and numerical modeling schemes that relate the
              material deformation modes necessary to form complex shapes, to advanced
              forming techniques and geometric features. The project includes support from
              Northrop Grumman in the form of materials testing, expertise in composites
              forming, and access to a larger reconfigurable tool, resulting in more rapid
              technology transfer to the aerospace industry. In addition, the proposal
              includes involvement of undergraduates (REU) and the integration of the
              research into specific undergraduate and graduate courses as case studies,
              semester design projects, and laboratory exercises. Overall, the proposed
              research has the potential to significantly improve part formability and reduce
              process time and cost for low to medium volume forming of relatively large
              parts from composite sheet. This can extend beyond aerospace to specialized
              automotive, marine, and biomedical applications. The research will also lead to
              improved simulation of composites forming, which is currently a major barrier
              to expanded use of composites.



