Title       : Analysis and Design of a Global Adaptive Critic Controller
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0300236

Award Number: 0300236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Silvia Ferrari sferrari@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,7238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in a variety of technologies and applications call for improved
              performance and reliability, while exacerbating the complexity and uncertainty
              of systems and their surroundings. Although classical control and system theory
              already allow for a high degree of machine automation, a renewed interest in
              systems that display intelligent behavior is emerging across disciplines. This
              project will formally investigate the stability and robustness of a novel
              design that has proven particularly effective for the full-envelope on-line
              learning control of a full nonlinear aircraft simulation, subject to unmodeled
              dynamics and unexpected control failures. This adaptive control system will be
              further tested on anew and more advanced aircraft simulator capable of
              reproducing highly nonlinear phenomena, such as aeroelastic effects, and
              stall/post-stall behavior. One major goal is to reduce the rate of loss of
              aircraft or even spacecraft under conditions even more extreme then those
              addressed by more conventional forms of "reconfigurable flight control."

The
              design consists of a two-phase learning procedure that is realized through
              novel techniques for neural-network function approximation. Firstly, a global
              classical control design is incorporated in a network of neural networks off
              line, by solving linear systems of equations. Secondly, the network parameters
              are updated or fine tuned incrementally over time, through
              dual-heuristic-programming adaptive-critic architecture. The author recently
              showed that this approach to on-line learning control could considerably
              improve performance with respect to the classical control design, under a range
              of unforeseen conditions. The proposed research would combine a novel algebraic
              training approach with integral-quadratic-constraint techniques to prove
              closed-loop stability and establish performance guarantees for this global
              control system.

The intellectual merit of this project consists of providing
              a systematic, rigorous framework for understanding the behavior, quality, and
              characteristics of intelligent control systems. The design of systems that are
              not only adaptive and reconfigurable, but also safe and reliable would widen
              the range of workable applications and, thus, encourage further research in
              this field. The broader impact of the proposed research is the creation of new
              performance metrics for comparing intelligent vs. classical control systems.
              Furthermore, the proposed objectives would enhance our understanding of
              rational intelligence as a viable paradigm for dealing with complexity.

