Title       : SBIR Phase I: Neuromorphic Color Sensor for Object and Place Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9961136

Award Number: 9961136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96199              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Lewis tlewis@iguana-robotics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iguana Robotics
	      805 E. Buckthorn Circle
	      Mahomet, IL  61853    217/586-6525

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6840,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Iguana Robotics,
              Inc. proposes the construction of a single chip, color aVLSI/dVLSI Neuromorphic
              sensor (camera) with onboard segmentation and object and place recognition
              capability.  For each pixel, this chip will compute the transformation to hue
              and saturation values in the focal plane, perform class assignment based on
              color, and perform histogramming based on the class assignment.  This chip will
              be part of a symbiotic system.  In addition to the chip, Iguana Robotics will
              design special target color and texture coded patterns.  By designing the
              targets to be easy to recognize, the investigators will achieve a very high
              recognition rate.  The utility of this device is that it will (1) be capable of
              associating symbolic tags with objects in natural environment; (2) estimate the
              position of objects;  (3) track and find human face and hands in an image as a
              pre-processing step in HCI applications; and (4) provide a technique for place
              recognition for personal robots.  In addition, this chip that will be (1) very
              low power (<1mw); (2) very low cost; and (3) very small and compact.  These
              features will facilitate the wide spread use of this object in cost and power
              sensitive applications.

Iguana Robotics proffers low-cost, compact
              neuromorphic color sensor for object and place recognition that can provide
              real-time object and place recognition for diverse areas of application such as
              entertainment, education, industry, interfaces, and banking.  The research
              project has the potential to make a significant impact on the discovery and
              understanding of automation in gesture recognition and to advance the
              state-of-the-art in on-chip computer vision hardware.


