Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electroplating of Tribocoatings Containing Nanophase WC/Co
               Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9961316

Award Number: 9961316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Danny Xiao inframat@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inframat Corporation
	      20 Washington Avenue, Suite 10
	      North Haven, CT  064732343    860/678-7561

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1403,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
              feasibility of developing a unique, cost-effective and low-friction/low-wear
              tribological coating.  This will be accomplished using an electrolytic
              codeposition process employing a colloidal solution of nanophase WC/Co in a
              standard nickel or cobalt sulphamate bath. This has not been demonstrated
              previously.  The current effort is directed toward metallic seals and pneumatic
              ducting components for aerospace and power generation gas turbine engines, and
              high performance automobile cylinders and piston rings to reduce life-cycle
              costs.  The coating is expected to contain an extremely fine dispersion of
              metallurgically bonded nanophase WC particles in a nickel or cobalt matrix,
              which will offer a unique combination of low friction/low wear.  Unlike hard
              chrome, this coating process is environmentally friendly and easily integrated
              within current operations, thereby facilitating its commercialization.  The
              process will also generate near-net shape coatings with superior surface finish
              and thickness uniformity.  These coatings will require little or no mechanical
              polishing, therefore, resulting in reducing the overall component cost. The
              selection flexibility of colloidal nanophase particles and electrolytic bathes
              will offer the possibility of a new surface engineering tool.  This has the
              potential of filling the gap between thermal spray and vapor deposited coatings
              and have broader applications of national interest.

Commercial potential of
              the proposed technology includes:  aerospace and power generation metallic
              seals, pneumatic ducting, high performance automotive cylinder linings and
              piston rings, bearings, and other tribological surfaces.


