Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Facilitated Transport Membranes for Olefin Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9961414

Award Number: 9961414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Atsushi Morisato   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Membrane Tech & Res Inc
	      1360 Willow Road Suite 103
	      Menlo Park, CA  940251516    415/328-2228

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
              separation of olefins from saturated hydrocarbons.  The separation of olefins
              from paraffins is currently carried out by distillation, which is an extremely
              energy-intensive process due to the very low relative volatilities of the
              components.  The selectivities and gas fluxes of polymer membranes are
              inadequate for olefin separation from paraffins. Facilitated transport
              membranes have higher selectivities and gas fluxes than polymeric membranes for
              olefin/paraffin separation but their application have limited by membrane
              selectivity, low gas fluxes, and the requirement of a water-saturated feed.  To
              overcome these problems a new type of solid-polymer-electrolyte facilitated
              transport membrane with high gas fluxes and high selectivities will be
              developed for the separation of olefins from paraffins. The membranes consist
              of rubbery, polyether-based polymers that form polymer electrolyte solutions
              with the ionic salts used as gas-complexing agents.  To provide high gas
              fluxes, the resulting polymer is formed into thin-film composite membranes. 
              Preliminary studies indicated that these novel membranes show dramatically
              improved performance over conventional facilitated transport membranes for
              olefin/paraffin separation and can be used with a dry feed.  The membranes are
              stable in ethylene/ethane separation experiments for up to 40 days.

If
              successfully developed, polymer electrolyte composite membranes will
              significantly reduce energy consumption in olefin/paraffin separation in the
              petroleum refining industry. The anticipated improvements in gas separation
              performance over state-of-the-art facilitated transport membranes will make
              membrane systems competitive over conventional distillation technology for this
              or similar applications.


