Title       : SBIR Phase I: Miniaturized Air Turbulence Compensating Interferometer Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9961427

Award Number: 9961427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Lis stevelis@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LLT
	      254 Marked Tree Rd.
	      Needham, MA  02192    781/449-5297

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR Phase I project is to develop an optical sensor for high performance
              interferometric measurements which directly compensates for air turbulence and
              humidity effects on optical path length measurements. It also permits the rapid
              measurement of refractive index changes at multiple wavelengths for a wide
              range of materials. This miniaturizable device will provide high sensitivity,
              and stability, allowing for sub-nanometer precision distance measurements. This
              sensor will provide greatly enhanced performance and stability over typical
              nonlinear crystals and allow multiple nonlinear processes to be performed in
              the same crystal, while being of lower cost and much smaller size. it can even
              be assembled into two-dimensional arrays for monitoring the performance of high
              power optical systems, and optical fabrication measuremerts. The Phase I
              objective is to theoretically and experimentally investigate potential of this
              device concept for high precision (5ub-nanometer) interferometric
              measurements.

High precision measurements in an air environment are of
              critical importance in the manufacture of advanced integrated circuits, large
              optics of high precision such as for the Next Generation Space Telescope
              (NGST), and high precision machining. If coupled with a Scanning Tunneling
              Microscope (STM) it can enable extremely precise distance measurements over
              long paths in air. An alternative application is in high power laser
              diagnostics, where real-time monitoring of pulsed laser optics can provide
              important information for enhancing stability and performance.


