Title       : SBIR Phase I: Rare Earth Doped Polymer Optical Fiber Amplifiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9961156

Award Number: 9961156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Welker welker@senteltech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sentel Technologies L.L.C.
	      Box 41-1, NE
	      Pullman, WA  99163    509/335-5526

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project is to demonstrate
              optical amplification in a single-mode polymer optical fiber. The technical
              objectives required to meet this goal include the following: 1) incorporate
              rare-earth chelates into polymers that we use to make fiber; 2) demonstrate
              amplification in the material; 3) make a polymer fiber with a rare-earth core;
              and 4) demonstrate amplification in the fiber. Because the principle
              investigator has the expertise to make single mode polymer optical fiber
              waveguides with a mode profile that matches the mode in standard silica glass
              fiber, the amplifier fiber is compatible with existing fiber-optic components.
              

Besides applications for Phased Array Radar, Sentel's amplified single mode
              polymer fiber (APOF)  will have impact on the long-haul fiber amplifier
              business, but it will have the largest impact in WAN and MAN applications,
              particularly for fiber-to-the-neighborhood (FTTN) and fiber-to-the-curb (FTTC).
              As the length-bandwidth products decrease (for smaller networks, e.g., WANs or
              MANs with fewer channels per fiber but perhaps more fibers), the revenue
              carried by lit fiber decreases and component costs become more important to the
              system designer. Thus, it should be clear that this technology could have
              significant impact on the amplifier market for WANs and MANs, and will also
              provide cost-effective amplifier solutions for (single-mode) LANs for the first
              time. This technology is also expected to provide cost-effective solutions for
              hybrid fiber-coax CATV systems for the same reasons.
