Title       : SBIR Phase I: Scientific Data Management System (SDM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9961113

Award Number: 9961113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99558              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Zuccolotto info@pstnet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Psychology Software Tools
	      511 Bevington Road
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152214531    412/244-1908

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,1321,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Scientific Data Management (SDM) project from Psychology Software (PST)
              Tools Inc. addresses the critical need for safe and secure scientific data
              retention and management with current distributed computing technology. 
              Experimental behavioral testing of the user interface drives the design of the
              proposed system.  PST will investigate SDM in behavioral, economic, biological,
              and social sciences.  Currently, there are few options to meet government
              requirements for the retention and use of scientific data.  Existing options
              are expensive, complex, and difficult to use, and designed for other
              organizational environments.  As a result, most academic scientists are not
              meeting government retention and scientific ethics guidelines.  The proposed
              technology uses a scalable distributed computing architecture, suitable for a
              single laboratory or many investigators spread across an institution.  PSI
              proposes to study how scientists, data entry, and data administrators manage
              data, as well as develop a user interface that makes the system a scientific
              data management 'appliance'.  Java technology will be used to create clients
              for use in WWW browsers and servers for retrieval and report generation.  The
              system provides long life expectancies for data, beyond the useful life of the
              applications that create them.  Data submitted to the system are timestamped
              and catalogued, providing important information for assuring data
              quality.
Psychology Software Tools proffers a user-centered design of an
              entire suite of data management tools that are customized to meet the
              particular needs of research scientists.  The technology is of potential value
              to the National Science Foundation in its concern for the accessibility,
              transparency, and reproducibility of research results as well as to the
              scientific community.  Significant progress in the area of data management
              along with progress in processing and storage power and in expressive power are
              important to advancing Information Technology.


