Title       : SBIR Phase I: Eyesafe Laser Transmitter for Clear Air Turbulence Warning Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9961295

Award Number: 9961295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Stoneman bobs@ctilidar.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coherent Technologies, Inc
	      655 Aspen Ridge Drive
	      Lafayette, CO  800269341    303/604-2000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate
              the feasibility of a novel eyesafe laser transmitter for integration into a
              clear air turbulence (CAT) warning system for commercial airliners. The CAT
              warning system is a coherent laser radar that measures wind speed in the
              forward flight path and alerts the pilot to turbulent wind conditions.  The
              proposed high-power eyesafe diode-pumped solid-state laser transmitter utilizes
              a novel design that does not require liquid coolants, in contrast with existing
              high-power eyesafe transmitters.  As a result the proposed transmitter requires
              significantly less volume, weight, and prime power than existing eyesafe
              transmitters, making it suitable for airborne applications such as CAT warning.
               The proposed transmitter delivers Q-switched output with pulse energies, pulse
              repetition frequencies, and pulse durations which are ideal for coherent laser
              radar wind sensing.  In Phase I, key laboratory demonstrations will be
              performed, and a high-power transmitter design will be developed, to show
              feasibility of the proposed transmitter for integration into a coherent laser
              radar transceiver.  A complete coherent laser radar transceiver would be
              demonstrated with Phase II funding.
      The proposed eyesafe laser
              transmitter will be useful for applications in which prime power, weight, and
              volume are restricted, in particular for airborne and spaceborne remote
              sensing.  The transmitter will be of use in commercial aviation for clear air
              turbulence monitoring, and for wake vortex avoidance and traffic monitoring,
              both airborne and in the terminal environment.  The transmitter will also be
              useful for measuring global winds from space for weather forecasting and
              modeling.





