Title       : STTR Phase I: High Data Rate Transmission using TPCs and FM Subcarrier Mod.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9961230

Award Number: 9961230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Vanderaar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ECC
	      4512 Renaissance Pkwy
	      Cleveland, OH  44128    440/918-9626

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project from Efficient Channel
              Coding (ECC) will investigate a combination of techniques to enable the
              transmission of CD-quality digital audio using subcarriers in the commercial FM
              band.  Unlike other proposed services, this approach promises to allow the
              present analog FM channels to co-exist with new digital services with minimal
              interference and without requiring vacant FM channels.  Specifically, in Phase
              I, Efficient Channel Coding will determine the feasibility of the reliable
              transmission of Motion Pictures Experts Group Advanced Audio Coding (MPEG-AAC)
              digital audio data at the maximum rate of 96 kbps through the existing
              subcarrier allocation 54-98 kHz above and below the host analog FM-channel. 
              This effort will lead to a prototype implementation and on-air characterization
              under Phase II.  The techniques to be employed included a powerful error
              correction technique called Turbo Product Codes (TPCs), Orthogonal Frequency
              Division Multiplexing (OFDM), and a variety of interference rejection
              techniques.  Within the feasibility study, only algorithms that have a clear
              path to implementation will be considered.  Turbo Product Codes-Application
              Specific Integrated Circuit (TPC-ASIC) and software devices already developed
              by ECC will greatly accelerate the practical implementation of the
              system.

The ability to successfully deploy CD-quality digital audio in the
              U.S. is of obvious merit.  The ability to achieve this result without a new
              frequency band and without impacting the current FM infrastructure is the key
              to making this happen.  The difficulties being encountered with the current
              IBOC/IBAC systems provide the opportunity for new technology to make an impact.
               The result of  technology and work performed in this project will be a design
              specification that can be taken forward to the broadcast community (primarily
              the National Association of Broadcasters) for comment and review.


