Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reactive Nanoparticles as Destructive Adsorbents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9961227

Award Number: 9961227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Klabunde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nantek, Inc.
	      1500 Hayes Drive
	      Manhattan, KS  66502    913/532-0179

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine how
              certain critical steps in the synthesis of reactive nanoparticles (RNP) can be
              transformed from batchwise to a continuous process. This research is critically
              needed in order to develop a commercially viable process for manufacturing RNP
              materials for applications in both the civilian and military marketplaces.  RNP
              materials and related technologies hold great promise for meeting a number of
              critical and high-value needs.  Military applications include personnel
              protection, demilitarization, and decontamination.  Nantek's proprietary RNPs
              are capable of destroying both chemical and biological warfare agents.
              Applications include destroying chemical weapon stockpiles; developing topical
              skin protectants against chemical agents; and materials for decontaminating
              equipment and personnel.  Civilian uses include kits for counter-terrorism and
              safety response for the chemical industry.  RNPs are effective against a wide
              range of toxic compounds, including PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) and
              dioxins, and can remove acid gases from industrial emissions.  With the number
              of important commercial applications growing, it is critical that the synthesis
              of these nanostructured materials be simplified into a commercially viable
              process. 

RNPs are truly a dual-use enabling technology capable of meeting a
              wide range of critical and high-value needs in both the military and civilian
              marketplaces. In the military area Nantek is developing RNPs to destroy
              chemical and biological warfare (CBW) agents for (1) personnel protection, (2)
              demilitarization, and (3) decontamination. In the civilian marketplace,
              potential products include materials and devices for counter-terrorism, and
              emergency response kits for accidental spills and releases in the chemical and
              biochemical industries.

