Title       : SBIR Phase I: Copper Selective Silica-Polyamine Extraction Materials for
               Processing Copper Ore Leach Liquors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9961006

Award Number: 9961006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Fischer bfischer@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purity Systems, Inc.
	      3116 Old Pond Road
	      Missoula, MT  59802    406/543-4228

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              silica-polyamine composite material to be used in an efficient, environmentally
              benign system to selectively extract copper from copper ore leach liquors. In
              this process the copper is extracted from the acidic leach solution into an
              organic solvent, typically kerosene, where it is concentrated and then released
              back into an aqueous solution for final processing. While this process is
              superior to smelting with regards to environmental impact and efficiency it
              still possesses environmental liabilities, chiefly toxic, flammable organic
              solvents and unfavorable economic factors namely solvent and solvent modifier
              loss. In  this Phase I project, a material with a long useful lifetime, that
              will separate copper from low copper concentration acidic leach liquors
              containing ferric iron efficiently and effectively at high processing rates
              without using organic solvents, will be produced. 

Presently thousands of
              tons of copper are produced in the United States and abroad using a solvent
              extraction process. The process using these new materials will produce highly
              concentrated copper solutions ready for final copper recovery. The cost of
              these materials is predicted to be significantly less than the resin based
              materials currently being tested for this application.
