Title       : SBIR Phase I: Robotic Systems for Network Interrogation of Smart Civil
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9961188

Award Number: 9961188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Arms info@microstrain.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MicroStrain Inc
	      294 North Winooski Avenue
	      Burlington, VT  054013680    802/862-6629

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1473,5371,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
              an autonomous robotic structural inspection system capable of remote powering
              and data collection from a network of embedded sensing nodes, and providing
              remote data access via the internet. The system will utilize existing
              microminiature, multichannel , wireless, programmable Addressable Sensing
              Modules (ASM's) to sample data from a variety of sensors. These inductively
              powered nodes do not require batteries or interconnecting lead wires, which
              greatly enhances their overall reliability and reduces their installation cost.
              Networks of sensing nodes can be embedded, interrogated, and remotely accessed
              in applications where visual inspection by people is not practical due to:
              physical space constraints, remote geographic locations, high inspection costs,
              and high risks involved for those performing the inspections. The sensors can
              indicate the need for repair, replacement, or reinforcement, which will reduce
              the risks of catastrophic failures and would be useful after natural disasters,
              such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, and floods. The availability of
              critical structural health data on the internet would greatly assist highway
              engineers and scientists, to improve their working database on these
              structures, which will improve our understanding of the safety of civil
              structures and their requisite maintenance.

If successful, market potential
              could be  significant, as various task-specific robots can be employed with the
              systems for remote inspection and internet data delivery from a broad spectrum
              of structures, such as: bridges, bridge footings, dams, offshore oil rigs,
              buildings, hazardous waste sites, and nuclear power plants.

