Title       : STTR Phase I: Investigation of Throttled Flow Performance in Venturi Off-Set
               Technology VOSTtm Valves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9961311

Award Number: 9961311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Burgess vost@fiberpipe.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Big Horn Valve
	      555 Absaraka
	      Sheridan, WY  82801    307/672-0968

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1443,1505,9148,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will explore, using
              numerical modeling and prototype testing, the feasibility of using axially
              actuated valves for flow control of various viscosity and two-phase fluids. 
              Preliminary research with the innovative Venturi Off-Set Technology (VOSTtm)
              valves indicates that these valves exhibit a linear flow response as a function
              of valve actuation position.  Because these valves require short (1/2 turn) and
              therefore rapid actuation motion, they have great potential
for use as flow
              control devices in a variety of industries.  However, before throttling valves
              can be designed and produced, problems with seals and wear within the valve
              must be addressed solved.  Solution of these problems requires understanding
              the flow within the valve.  The purpose of this Phase I research is to
              investigate the feasibility of using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) tools
              to model flow within the unique VOSTtm valve flow passage when used as a
              throttling or control valve.  Two significant challenges are presented by this
              problem.  First, the need to determine flow through the valve at a variety of
              opening positions imposes unique demands on the computational grids that model
              the geometry.  Second, it may be difficult for the flow solver to capture
              details of the flow field in this complicated internal passage.  Once CFD
              modeling feasibility is demonstrated in Phase I, CFD design tools and
              techniques will be developed in Phase II for use in developing VOSTtm valves
              for a variety of difficult flow control applications involving high viscosity
              or multiple-phase fluids.  Utilizing University of Wyoming modeling and
              measurement capabilities and Big Horn Valve Inc. flow testing facilities,
              investigators will:  (1) develop CFD tools to simulate flow characteristics
              within the flow passage; (2) fabricate a throttling valve body to
              verify
computer results; and  (3) conduct parametric studies of flow behavior
              for high viscosity or multiple phase conditions.  Successful research in this
              arena will strengthen the understanding of valve throttling and performance
              characteristics, while also investigating new ways to perform numerical flow
              modeling of changing geometry.  

Transfer of CFD analytical tools and
              techniques into the industrial environment will permit designers to develop low
              loss linear flow control valves for a variety of industries.  Initial
              applications to be studied will be for slurry transport of solids (Trona
              industry) and for use in the petrochemical industry.  Petrochemical process
              valves alone constitute a $1.4B US industry.
