Title       : SBIR Phase I: Battery Design by Using an Electronic Interface (ENTERFACE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9961209

Award Number: 9961209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Spotnitz rspotnitz@batdesign.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Battery Design Co.
	      2277 Delucchi Drive
	      Pleasanton, CA  94588    925/858-0699

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will assess the
              feasibility of a user-directed software system for designing electrochemical
              power sources (batteries).  The software couples performance and process models
              with an optimization routine.  Battery users direct the design of batteries by
              providing objective functions; battery developers insure the designs are
              feasible by providing parameters for the process model.  This software allows
              battery users and developers to collaborate without disclosure of
proprietary
              information, and incorporates the best work of university professors.  The
              research proposed here will identify optimal designs for batteries used in
              portable electronics, and viable strategies for coupling product and
              performance models.  Leading manufacturers of portable computers and cellular
              phones will participate.  This innovation would create a new route for rapid
              development of battery materials and components, batteries, and devices that
              use batteries.  The innovation would be timely, as new polymer
battery
              technology is emerging that is amenable to customized mass production.  This
              system would give the US an edge in the incredibly competitive and rapidly
              growing portable electronics industry, help US battery companies and their
              suppliers compete, be a useful tool for government and educational
              institutions, and serve as a model for other industries.

This research could
              lead to an Internet-based software system for battery design and evaluation,
              accessible for a fixed fee.  This software would help companies sell products
              by providing access to battery makers and users, and allowing the benefits of
              products to be demonstrated through simulation.  This system would also help
              users access and select products, by evaluating them through simulation.  By
              2003, the business of updating and maintaining this software for battery design
              and evaluation, could reach $3 million and
employ six people.


