Title       : SBIR Phase I: Cottonseed Trait Development Using Chimeraplasty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9961240

Award Number: 9961240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Beetham pbeetham@kimeragen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kimeragen, Inc.
	      300 Pheasant Run
	      Newtown, PA  18940    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1167,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project will study the use of
              chimeraplasty in plants. Chimeraplasty is the use of a novel technology
              currently being explored in prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems which utilizes
              chimeric, self-complimentary oligonucleotides comprised of DNA and modified RNA
              to target and mutate genes in vivo.  Phase 1 of this project will use the model
              system of Arabidopsis thaliana to assess the applicability of this new
              technology to modify a complex biosynthetic pathway. Follow-on
Phase 2 funding
              will be used to apply the strategies learned in Phase 1 to a commercial oilseed
              crop. Lipid synthesis in plants has many potential trait development
              opportunities in many oilseed crops. The major objective of this phase 1
              project is to modify a well-characterized gene in A. thaliana with this new
              exciting in vivo genome modification technology. Completion of this objective
              will lead to the translation of this technology into a specific trait and
              product development program. When complete this program will have produced a
              unique and stable non-transgenic modified-oil product, never before seen in the
              market place.  The development of a novel cottonseed oil product.  This product
              will be a stable genome modification that is non-transgenic and therefore has
              the potential to quickly reach the market. The product will also have
              completely new oilseed characteristics never before seen in the vegetable oils
              market.

