Title       : SBIR Phase I: Active Textiles for Life Support Ensembles and Medical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9961132

Award Number: 9961132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Paine jpaine@dynamic-structures.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dynamic Struc & Matls LLC
	      205 Williamson Square
	      Franklin, TN  370641320    615/292-7022

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves improvements in
              current pilot life support equipment and emergency medical compression clothing
              that can be achieved through the incorporation of the shape memory alloy (SMA)
              Nitinol as part of an active system to replace traditional air bladder
              concepts. Used to reduce the risk of pilot blackout during high-G maneuvers and
              for pneumatic tourniquets in emergency situations, clothing components with air
              bladders may be dramatically improved by using SMAs to reduce size and power
              requirements. The developed system will be the application of active cinching
              straps for leg compression and emergency tourniquets, and for mask sealing
              during high-G maneuvers. These actively controlled straps will be less
              cumbersome and more reliable than air bladders used to seal masks, and compress
              limbs. For pilots, the proposed systems will incorporate sensors to activate
              the uniform components during critical times and reduce pilot error. Shape
              memory alloys can form very high stroke, high force solid state actuators for
              use in textile structures. They offer a high degree of flexibility and are
              easily incorporated into fabric designs. Using amplified designs and leverage
              mechanisms, DSM proposes to develop the integrated fabric components that will
              perform the desired functionality.

Potential commercial Applications for the
              Nitinol and smart material reinforced uniform components have a great potential
              in the medical and physical therapy industry. Pressurized suits or selectively
              stiffened or reinforced suits can be used to stop significant blood loss, aid
              in supporting damaged legs, arms or necks, and help patients achieve
              therapeutic advances in motion by providing some support during 
              rehabilitation.
