Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Fast and Efficient Wave Field Modeling System with Digital
               Signal Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9961003

Award Number: 9961003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Orrey jeffo@ojosol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ojo Solutions
	      2888 Bluff St., Suite 400
	      Boulder, CO  80301    303/938-1038

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1448,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
              feasibility of significantly increasing the speed and accuracy of acoustic and
              elastic wave field simulations in 3-D heterogeneous materials by using arrays
              of digital signal processors (DSPs ) in conjunction with a new wave field
              modeling algorithm. The DSPs will perform the floating point operations of the
              algorithm by functioning as the processing elements in a parallel computing
              environment. A multi-processor system based on this concept could achieve
              supercomputer performance at a small fraction of the cost.  The resulting
              system would, for the first time, make wave field simulation a practical and
              cost-effective tool for industrial applications to subterranean imaging and
              earthquake hazards analysis. The most appropriate existing DSP board for the
              application will be identified. A workstation computer will be configured with
              DSP modeling software and with the wave field simulation software. The system
              will be tested, and performance will be optimized. The system's performance
              potential will be compared to the software's performance on a supercomputer and
              on a network of workstations. The proposed system could be of immediate use as
              a practical tool for improving subterranean and medical imaging techniques and
              for earthquake hazards studies.

Potential commercial applications of the
              research include 1) improving subterranean imaging for oil and gas exploration,
              2) providing synthetic data sets for the development and testing of medical
              imaging systems, 3) ground motion maps for scenario earthquakes in complicated
              Earth structures, 4) non-destructive testing and failure analysis of solid
              materials, and 5) industrial and educational applications of high performance
              computing.

