Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Catalysts with Tethered Ligand-Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9961206

Award Number: 9961206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Hammen chelatec@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChelaTech, Inc.
	      4200 Fox Farm Road
	      Missoula, MT  59802    406/728-5897

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,9165,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I program will develop advanced
              heterogeneous catalyst support materials that will reduce costs and enhance
              productivity in the chemical process industries. Existing heterogeneous
              catalysts are limited by slow diffusion of reactants and products in the
              interfacial boundary region where chemical reactions occur.  The objective of
              this work is to develop heterogeneous catalysts that have the combined benefits
              of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.  Solid support materials with long
              tether molecules terminated with metal-ligand complexes will be prepared.  The
              tether removes the reactive complex from the surface of the support and
              'dangles' it into the solution phase, where rapid chemical transformations
              occur.  These non-diffusion-limited catalysts constitute a fundamental physical
              chemistry change in the nature of solid-liquid interfaces and are an enabling
              technology innovation for both improved products and processes. Tethered
              phosphine-palladium catalysts will be prepared and tested for their performance
              in the olefination reaction of an aromatic halide.  The catalysts will be
              tested for their reaction kinetics, turnover number, and durability for
              regeneration and reuse. 
 The results of this project will provide technology
              for a new generation of enhanced efficiency catalysts for the chemical process
              industry that are significantly more cost effective that those based on
              diffusion-limited technologies.
