Title       : SBIR Phase I: Biosensor Microprobes for Physiological Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9961203

Award Number: 9961203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilson Smart smart@kumetrix.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kumetrix, Inc.
	      29524 Union City Boulevard
	      Union City, CA  94587    510/476-0950

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will combine recent
              advances in electrochemical biosensor technology achieved in many laboratories
              with unique silicon microprobe technology developed in our laboratory, to
              produce low cost disposable biosensor microprobes for painless physiological
              measurements. The analyte in this work will be glucose because glucose
              biosensors are the most advanced, and diabetic glucose self-testing is the
              largest existing biosensor market opportunity. Integration of biosensors with
              silicon microprobes comparable in cross-section to a human hair to provide a
              practical technique for painless blood testing is not restricted to glucose but
              is an enabling technology applicable to many other analytes. Impressive
              biosensor R&D progress has not yet resulted in commercial devices for painless
              in vivo applications because workers in needle biosensors have used
              conventional configurations and fabrication methods. The high cost and size
              (hypodermic needle diameters, requiring painful surgical implantation) of
              conventional biosensors requires that they last a long time.  The principal
              approach taken by others to make them practical is to extend their lifetimes
              toward six months of operation, but this effort has produced only slow
              incremental progress. The strength of the proposed approach lies in the
              combination of biosensors and silicon microprobes. By rendering insertion and
              removal completely painless and sharply reducing the cost, disposable
              integrated biosensor microprobes employing electrochemical sensor technology at
              its present state of development become commercially practical.  The largest
              commercial application for biosensor microprobes is diabetic blood glucose
              self-testing, which is currently a three billion dollar per year market.  Other
              markets include quality control in the food industries, emergency medicine,
              control of blood levels of therapeutic drugs, and physiological monitoring of
              many analytes for clinical and research purposes.
