Title       : SBIR Phase I: StickMouse: An Assistive Device to Enable Full Access to Computer
               Applications for Physically Disabled Users
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9961205

Award Number: 9961205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96086              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Sterle msterle@txcyber.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RCSI
	      10209 Pinehurst Drive
	      Austin, TX  78747    512/292-4760

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1545,5371,9102,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I from Reata Computing Services,
              Inc. project will develop a computer interface product, StickMouse, that will
              represent a significant advance in surmounting the limitations of current
              assistive devices.  There are millions of disabled people in the United States
              who do not have normal use of their hands or arms due to paralysis or disease. 
              These individuals cannot utilize a computer fully because they cannot
              manipulate both the mouse and keyboard with an integrated device.  The
              educational and economic impact of these disabilities becomes more and more
              severe as technology-enabled, Internet-based products, services, and education
              become more prevalent.  This situation not only has an impact on each
              individual's economic and personal well being, but also it has implications for
              our national productivity as well.  StickMouse will enable keyboard entry as
              well as simulate mouse manipulation within constraints of ease of use; comfort;
              cost effectiveness; material suitability; and reliability, durability, and
              maintainability.  Because StickMouse is a general user interface device, it
              will be enabling for any type of computer use, including education, creation of
              job opportunities, and enhancing personal life and independence.  StickMouse
              will facilitate the use of the computer so that physically disabled individuals
              will have much greater access to and interaction with computer applications,
              including web interface and programming skills.

The technology proffered by
              Reata Computing Services will increase employment opportunities and enhance
              educational development, financial independence and quality of life for
              disabled individuals through their access to software requiring the mouse.

