Title       : SBIR Phase I: Highly Aligned Carbon Nanotube/Polymer Composite Fibers for
               Enhanced Electrical Conductivity and Structural Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9961210

Award Number: 9961210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard K. Newman gknewman@newmantechnologies.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NewMan Technologies Inc.
	      4607 Heritage Place Dr. #4
	      Norman, OK  73070    405/321-0598

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
              procedure for controlling the nanostructure and orientation of carbon nanotubes
              within a composite fiber matrix.  This technology lends itself well to high
              volume production of a versatile and usable fiber form for fabricating and
              molding large composites with enhanced strength to weight ratios, optical and
              electronic properties.  Specifically, this SBIR Phase I project will
              investigate the ability to achieve alignment of nanotubes in polymer fibers and
              their contribution to the overall fiber strength.  A variety of polymers,
              including electrically conducting, can be used in this procedure.  This
              combination of achieving small composite fiber diameters (down to 1 micron), as
              well as the highly aligned nature of the nanotubes within the micro-fiber, has
              an added benefit allowing greater characterization of the average optical,
              electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes.  Despite
              the significant potential for using carbon nanotubes, successful strategies for
              utilizing them in composites have yet to be achieved.  This SBIR Phase I
              project represents an important step towards the production and commercial
              utilization of carbon nanotubes in composite materials and their ensuing
              applications.

POTENTIAL COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH
This
              proposal lays the foundation for fabricating carbon nanotube composite fibers
              that can easily be used in forming structures with significant physical and
              electronic properties.  These ultra strong, lightweight composite fibers can be
              used to revolutionize aircraft and other structures and in the process provide
              the U.S. with significant military and economic advantages.

KEY
              WORDS
carbon nanotube polymer fibers composites, versatile nanostructure
