Title       : Root Length and Its Relationship to Root Plasticity and Root Life-Span
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1991      
File        : a9111824

Award Number: 9111824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eissenstat   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberlyn Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ratio of root length to root dry weight (specific root length              
              SRL) varies widely among plant species.  Since water and nutrient              
              uptake is influenced more by root length than mass, species of                 
              high SRL may appear to invest their root biomass more efficiently              
              than species of low SRL.  A more complete cost-analysis, however,              
              must include the life-span of the root.  Species that construct                
              fine roots (high SRL) may tend to proliferate roots in favorable               
              volumes of soil and shed roots in unfavorable soil volumes more                
              readily than species with coarse roots (low SRL).  Thus, the                   
              short-term efficiency of high SRL roots may be offset by higher                
              costs associated with higher root turnover rates.  This proposal               
              tests the relationship of SRL to root plasticity and root life-                
              span by using a microvideo camera inserted into transparent tubes              
              buried in the ground in the field.  A citrus rootstock trial,                  
              with genetically diverse root systems grafted to genetically                   
              identical shoots, will serve as the model plant system.                        
                                                                                             
              This study will provide information on factors that influence                  
              root death and turnover as well as insights into how                           
              interspecific differences in root characteristics may influence                
              nutrient and water acquisition, root turnover, and, ultimately,                
              plant productivity.  In plant breeding, selection based on                     
              specific root traits is seldom undertaken.  While the citrus                   
              rootstock trial serves as an excellent model system with which to              
              examine basic relationships between root characteristics and root              
              turnover rates, the information gained also has direct practical               
              applications, since the rootstocks in the study are all of                     
              economic importance.  Additionally, this information will be                   
              valuable for ecosystem models that are being used to help                      
              estimate global climate change, since root turnover is a major                 
              source of carbon dioxide efflux into the atmosphere.
