Title       : Economic Geography and International Trade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9111380

Award Number: 9111380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Krugman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This research will develop and empirically test models of the                  
              location of production within countries, as a way of shedding                  
              light on the forces driving international trade and investment.                
                                                                                             
              The theoretical part of the research will use models of                        
              imperfectly competitive markets in which there are increasing                  
              returns to scale to analyze the processes leading to geographical              
              concentration of production.  This will involve modeling both                  
              concentration at an aggregate level - the division of countries                
              into densely populated "core" regions and less dense                           
              "peripheries" -and the emergence of high geographical                          
              concentration of the production of many manufactured goods and                 
              some services.  The models will borrow techniques from both the                
              new trade theory and the new growth theory.  Key themes will be                
              path dependence, i.e., dependence of eventual outcomes on initial              
              conditions, and the observation that the qualitative character of              
              economic geography depends in predictable ways on a few key                    
              economic parameters, such as transport costs, scale economies,                 
              and the nonagricultural share of employment.                                   
                                                                                             
              The empirical research will use US Census data and comparable                  
              data from other countries (especially Europe) to test these                    
              models and compare interregional with international                            
              specialization and trade.  A central project is to use US data to              
              compute indices of geographic concentration for a large number of              
              industries, and then to compare these indices with industry                    
              characteristics in order to discriminate between alternative                   
              explanations of concentration.  A second project will use                      
              historical evidence to test for the kinds of qualitative changes,              
              critical mass phenomena, and other nonlinear features predicted                
              by the theoretical models.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project is important because it attempts to integrate                     
              economic geography with international trade theory.  With this                 
              study, we will be better equipped to understand the likely                     
              effects of the 1992 economic integration in Europe and the US-                 
              Canada Free Trade Agreement.
