Title       : Documentation and Maintenance of Computer Programs for Computing Long-Wave Runup
               on a Coastline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9111827

Award Number: 9111827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nobuhisa Kobayashi nk@coastal.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan T. Grilli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This action is part of a coordinated project to document and                   
              maintain special-purpose computer codes which can be used                      
              to study different aspects of the runup of a tsunami (seismic                  
              sea wave) onto a coastline.  It involves a collaboration                       
              between Professor Philip Liu at Cornell University, and                        
              Professors Kobayashi and Grilli at the University of                           
              Delaware.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Quite a large number of special-purpose computer programs                      
              have been developed as part of student doctoral theses.                        
              Some of these codes were later found to have wider                             
              applicability, and are of interest to other researchers.  At the               
              time that they were developed, the substantial investment in                   
              effort and time needed to document them for general usage                      
              was not made.  There is now a growing recognition of this                      
              need, but there are no agreed-upon standards for such                          
              documentation.  This project is intended as a pilot study for                  
              documenting and maintaining three existing computer                            
              programs.  The objective is to develop guidelines for                          
              documentation and maintenance of such large computer                           
              codes, thereby defining a standard which other code                            
              developers can follow.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This action is for the work by Professors Kobayashi and                        
              Grille at the University of Delaware's Center for Applied                      
              Coastal Research.  Professor Grilli's code solves the exact                    
              two-dimensional nonlinear potential flow equations, for                        
              arbitrary bottom geometry, and can be used for short                           
              wavelengths (e.g. wind waves) and long wavelengths (e.g.                       
              tsunamis).  Professor Kobayashi's code calculates the one-                     
              dimensional nonlinear long wave runup on an impermeable                        
              slope of arbitrary geometry and roughness characteristics.
