Title       : Compensation System Design, Employment and Firm Performance:An Analyis of French
               Microdata and a Comparison to the U.S.A
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9111186

Award Number: 9111186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174565             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Abowd john.abowd@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to develop a series of empirical                
              studies that implement existing models of efficient contracting,               
              labor demand, agency relationships, and investment in the presence             
              of rent-seeking employees.  A major innovation in this study is the            
              use of French microdata to be analyzed using a collection of                   
              computer files that allow for simultaneous analysis of individual              
              employees, establishments, and enterprises.  For the employees,                
              compensation information and skill measures are available.  For                
              establishments, employment and compensation levels in various                  
              occupations, industry, compensation and information on revenues                
              are available.  For enterprises, detailed financial, employment and            
              investment information are available.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide a detailed and              
              comprehensive summary of the relations among the various components            
              of compensation system design, employment at various skill levels              
              and fundamental measures of firm performance.  In addition, because            
              the PI has analyzed similar data for US and Canadian companies, an             
              effort will be made to estimate some models that are directly                  
              comparable.  This should contribute directly to the ongoing inquiry            
              as to the appropriate framework for modeling negotiated wage rates             
              and the resulting employment demand.
