Title       : Dissertation Research: Determinants of Host Range in Specialized Leaf Beetles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1991   
File        : a9111881

Award Number: 9111881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Keese  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                     The leaf beetle Ophraella notolata and Ophraella sp. nov.               
              (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) that specialize on the asteraceous                 
              plants Iva frutescens and Ambrosia artemisiifolia respectively,                
              offer a unique opportunity to examine the relative contribution                
              of the many factors that may act to restrict insect host ranges.               
              Results to date suggest that the species feeding on the derived                
              host plant (O. notulata) retains a greater ability (in terms of                
              behavior and physiology) to utilize the ancestral host than the                
              species (O. sp. nov.) feeding on the derived host.  Further,                   
              there exists significant genetic variation in both species for                 
              the ability to utilize the host of its congener.                               
                     These results will be expanded and complemented with a                  
              series of field experiments in Florida, where the two congeners                
              overlap, to examine the ecological selective pressures that may                
              be operating to restrict host range.  The main objectives will be              
              to: 1) test for tradeoffs in larval performance between hosts in               
              the field, 2) examine effects of competition between the two                   
              Ophraella species and between each Ophraella species and other                 
              phytophages of their host plants, 3) scrutinize the effects of                 
              generalist predators and parasitoids, and 4) investigate the                   
              behavioral and physiological responses of Ophraella to host plant              
              secondary compounds.  It is expected that this effort will yield               
              valuable information about how various intrinsic and extrinsic                 
              ecological factors (aspects of plant chemistry, competition,                   
              predation, and behavior/physiology) affect host plant                          
              utilization.  Such knowledge should prove valuable in enhancing                
              our understanding of the processes responsible for shaping                     
              patterns of insect host use.
