Title       : RIA: Communication Support for Collaborative, Multimedia Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9111323

Award Number: 9111323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajendra S. Yavatkar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4097,
Abstract    :
                  This project addresses the issues in providing communication               
              support for building collaborative, distributed applications that              
              involve a geographically dispersed group of users communicating                
              through multiple media (voice, video, text and image).                         
              Development of such applications requires support for coordination             
              and temporal synchronization of traffic over related streams.                  
              The investigator posits that the transport layer must provide                  
              communication abstractions so that a programmer can specify and                
              achieve the necessary concurrency control and temporal                         
              synchronization among related data streams.                                    
                  The research involves four components:  1) a token-based                   
              mechanism for concurrency control among participants of a                      
              multipoint connection.  2) a novel communication abstraction                   
              called a multi-flow conversation to allow temporal synchronization             
              among traffic over multiple, independent streams.  A conversation              
              may consist of one or more (two-party or multipoint) connections,              
              and enforced temporal synchronization in delivery of traffic over              
              participant connections.  3) incorporation of these abstractions               
              in a transport level protocol called Multi-flow Conversation                   
              Protocol (MCP).  Additional features of MCP include an out-of-band             
              signaling channel for exchanging control information and an                    
              asynchronous interface that allows an application to specify                   
              event-triggered actions.  4) demonstration of the viability of the             
              ideas by extending an existing, object-based, distributed group                
              editor to support interactive collaboration using multiple media.
