Title       : Velocity-Pressure Correlations and Lewis Number Effects in Turbulent Premixed
               Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9111921

Award Number: 9111921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Rutland rutland@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objectives of this project are to address two key issues                   
              in the modeling of premixed turbulent reacting flows:  (1)                     
              examine the effects of flames on turbulence, principally                       
              through the pressure-velocity gradient correlation, which will                 
              address a major weakness in current turbulence models of                       
              reacting flows; and (2)  study effects of differential                         
              diffusion of mass and energy on combustion, which will address                 
              a significant aspect of combustion modeling that is not                        
              considered in present flamelet models.  To meet these                          
              objectives, turbulent flame propagation will be studied using                  
              direct numerical simulations.  These are large computer                        
              calculations in which no models are used.  Thus, they can be                   
              used like laboratory experiments to study basic physical                       
              processes in turbulent flames.  The approach proposed is to                    
              use DNS to examine the issues listed above and increase our                    
              understanding of the fundamental mechanisms and processes                      
              involved.  This insight is then used to suggest improvements                   
              to existing models and develop new models.  The models are                     
              tested using the data generated in the simulations.                            
                                                                                             
              Combustion is a significant and widespread source of power in                  
              many important technological systems.  Requirements for                        
              increased efficiency and reduced emissions are placing                         
              increased demands on these systems.  To effectively meet these                 
              requirements will require accurate predictive computer                         
              modeling.  These models must represent the complex processes                   
              of gas flow turbulence, combustion, and the interaction of the                 
              two.  Current models in these areas are lacking in many                        
              respects and are limiting the widespread use of computer                       
              modeling as an engineering design tool.
