Title       : Interacting Signals and Cheap Talk Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9111249

Award Number: 9111249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This research is on communication and has two parts.  Part one                 
              concerns costly signaling by multiple parties.  With few                       
              exceptions, signaling has been modeled as a game with one informed             
              sender.  This is inappropriate for situations with multiple                    
              informed parties.  For example, industry insiders tend to have                 
              better information about their industry or each other's products               
              than do outsiders, and many of their actions, such as pricing,                 
              investment, or advertising choices, are separably observed by the              
              outsiders.  Such senders "compete" in the signaling domain to                  
              influence the beliefs of receivers.  This research will develop                
              models of signaling competition in correlated private information              
              settings.  A central focus will be on the conditions under which               
              signaling competition reduces asymmetric information losses.                   
                                                                                             
              Part two concerns communication which is not costly, "cheap talk."             
              Simple talking plays a large role in actual economic activity, but             
              it plays no role in most economic models.  The proposed research               
              will develop theoretical models of face-to-face communication                  
              without mediators, emphasizing the role of multiple rounds of                  
              message exchange.  Cheap talk refinement criteria for games with               
              multiple privately informed parties and multiple rounds of                     
              communication will also be considered.                                         
                                                                                             
              These analyses are important because they will help advance our                
              understanding in two issues in communication, namely, interacting              
              signals sent by agents, and face-to-face and costless communication            
              conveyed by people.
