Title       : Research Initiation Award: Parameter Estimation in Adaptive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9111346

Award Number: 9111346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantinos S. Tsakalis tsalkis@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research is to analyze and quantify                       
              the design of estimators with intended application in                          
              adaptive control systems.  Interest is mainly focused on                       
              certain aspects of closed-loop performance in the                              
              presence of uncertainty and, particularly, on preventing                       
              the closed loop signals from reaching excessively large                        
              magnitude for short time periods, commonly known as                            
              "burst" phenomena.  Such undesirable phenomena are                             
              of great practical significance, especially in cases of                        
              poorly excited systems where the true nonlinear nature                         
              of adaptive controllers is highly pronounced.  The plan                        
              is to investigate the properties of estimators whose                           
              design is performed via signal energy as well as                               
              amplitude criteria.  Although the minimization of the                          
              maximum amplitude of the estimation error typically                            
              leads to a linear programming problem of increasing                            
              dimensionality, recursive suboptimal solutions will be                         
              considered in order to alleviate this problem.  The                            
              preliminary investigations indicate that these                                 
              techniques allow for amplitude considerations in the                           
              design of adaptive systems and for a more efficient use                        
              of the available measurements.  Particular emphasis                            
              will be given to the extension of this approach to                             
              time-varying systems and the assessment of the                                 
              associated performance trade-offs.  It is expected that                        
              the results of the research will make a significant                            
              contribution in the design of practically acceptable                           
              adaptive controllers.
