Title       : The Unification of Physics and Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1991   
File        : a9111532

Award Number: 9111532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Barker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard R. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              "Unification" has been a paramount goal of science from its very               
              beginnings.  Thales proclaimed "All is water."  Contemporary                   
              science continues this pursuit of unification.  Maxwell, in the                
              19th century, unified the forces of electricity and magnetism and              
              showed that light is but an electro-magnetic phenomenon.                       
              Einstein's final efforts were to find a grand unification theory               
              of all forces.  Indeed this effort continues in current physics as             
              scientists try to complete the unification of the forces acting at             
              the atomic level: the electro-magnetic, strong, weak and                       
              gravitational forces.                                                          
                                                                                             
              While one can point to Thales and the other pre-Socratic                       
              philosophers as the first to attempt "unification" in science, the             
              practical efforts at unification in science did not begin until the            
              Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th Centuries.  This effort             
              culminated in Newton's theory of universal gravitation uniting the             
              force that governed the motion of celestial bodies with the force              
              that makes heavy bodies fall on Earth.  That Newton was successful             
              in this effort was due, in large respect, to the work of Johannes              
              Kepler in determining the laws by which planets circle the sun.                
              Under this grant, Professors Peter Barker and Bernard Goldstein                
              are examining Kepler's unification of astronomy and physics, and               
              his contribution to the norms of modern science, in the context of             
              16th century work on astronomy and astrology, rhetoric, and                    
              religious thought.  They are studying the availability and use of              
              these disciplines in books, letters, notes, and student theses by              
              Kepler and his contemporaries.  This setting illuminates Kepler's              
              presentation of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe, and his innovations             
              in the content and methods of science.   They present the                      
              development of Kepler's ideas from the Mysterium Cosmographicum of             
              1596 through the  Apologia pro Tychone contra Ursum of 1600 and the            
              De Fundamentis Astrologiae Certioribus of 1602 to the Astronomia               
              Nova of 1609.  Their examination of the context of Kepler's work               
              draws on the expertise of an international group of consultants.               
              This study will be the first presentation of Kepler's unification              
              of physics and astronomy in its 16th century context, treating the             
              portion of his work from 1596 to 1609 as a whole.  In addition to              
              yielding new knowledge about a major figure and a key episode, the             
              project's contextual approach will establish links from the history            
              of science to wider fields of Renaissance and Reformation studies,             
              especially history, philosophy, rhetoric and religious thought.                
              This study of Kepler's role in the development of the modern                   
              scientific methodology will also contribute to our understanding               
              of the historical process by which science differentiated itself               
              from the humanities and theology.
