Title       : Generalized Motor Programs in Writing, Drawing, and Aimed Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9111085

Award Number: 9111085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Theory posits that skilled human movements, from the simplest                  
              pointing movements to more elaborate multi-gesture movements, are              
              directed by "motor programs."  Although we are seldom aware of                 
              these programs, they act to structure commands to muscles so that              
              movements can be made with minimal reliance on slow, feedback-                 
              based, error-correcting processes.  The idea of motor-program                  
              generalization stems from the computer-program analogy and                     
              suggests that motor programs have formal parameters which take on              
              situation-specific values when a movement is made.  The focus of               
              this research is whether and how motor programs can be                         
              generalized so that a single representation is sufficient to                   
              control related, although perhaps novel, variations of a                       
              movement.  The research will address these issues in three                     
              empirical domains, handwriting, simple drawing movements, and                  
              aimed movements made with excess degrees of freedom.                           
                                                                                             
              The work on handwriting will examine changes in a highly                       
              overlearned skill when subjects are constrained to deviate from                
              normal performance conditions in one or more ways: e.g., size,                 
              speed, or effector.  This research will identify the type and                  
              magnitude of constraints that necessitate a shift from the motor-              
              program-based, control strategy to a feedback-based strategy of                
              movement approximation.  Using drawing of simple figures, the                  
              second line of research will  assess the nature and degree of                  
              transfer that occurs when people occasionally are asked to                     
              produce, under a particular set of constraints, a figure which                 
              they are learning to produce, by practicing with feedback, under               
              a different set of constraints.  The patterns of learning                      
              transfer in these experiments will provide evidence about motor                
              program generalization and will provide a way to explore the                   
              possibility that motor programs have a hierarchical structure.                 
              The third line of research will investigate the strategies and                 
              constraints used to resolve the planning ambiguity that occurs                 
              when excess degrees of freedom are available to perform aimed                  
              movements.  Unlike the first two lines of research, which assume               
              an analogy to motor-program generalization based on the                        
              modification of pre-existing information, in this research motor               
              programs and their generalization will be modeled as the result                
              of a process of dynamic constraint optimization.                               
                                                                                             
              The insights about the structure and function of motor programs                
              gained from this research have potential for application to the                
              training of skills requiring coordinated movement, the diagnosis               
              and treatment of movement disorders, and the planning and                      
              representation of movements in robotic systems.
