Title       : Residential Mobility in the Late Prehistoric Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9111680

Award Number: 9111680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76738              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clark M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Douglas Price and his colleagues will analyze strontium                    
              isotope ratios from the teeth and bones of prehistoric                         
              inhabitants of the Grasshopper.  Point of Pines, Turkey Creek and              
              Kinishba archaeological sites, all located in the Mogollon rim                 
              region of Arizona.  All date to ca. 14th century AD and mark a                 
              highpoint in the development of Southwestern Aboriginal American               
              culture.  The goal of the research is to determine the individual              
              migration patterns of residents over their lifetime.  The                      
              strontium isotope technique takes advantage of the fact that                   
              permanent dentition is formed early in life.  The strontium                    
              incorporated into the tooth enamel is not replaced over time.                  
              Bone strontium, however, is constantly replaced over the lifetime              
              of an individual.  Because the strontium taken into the human                  
              body is derived, via plants, animals and water, from the local                 
              soil, comparison between tooth and bone enamel from the same                   
              person can provide evidence on lifetime movement.  Luckily, in                 
              the Southwestern U.S., different geographical regions have                     
              distinct strontium isotopic signatures.                                        
                                                                                             
              The 14th century AD marks a high point in cultural development in              
              the Southwest.  Large ceremonial centers were constructed and                  
              extensive trade networks existed to minimize short-term                        
              geographical differences in production.  This implies the                      
              development of complex forms of social control and interaction.                
              Anthropologists want to know how large sites such as Grasshopper               
              developed and were maintained and several theories have been                   
              proposed.  One places a major emphasis on migration and the                    
              consolidation of groups from different regions while others focus              
              on in situ processes.  The work undertaken by Dr. Price will                   
              provide direct evidence against which to evaluate these theories.              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of how complex societies develop and are                     
              maintained.  It will shed new light on the prehistory of the U.S.              
              Southwest and finally it will assist in the development of an                  
              extremely promising analytic technique.  It is the first instance              
              in which strontium isotope analysis is applied to an                           
              anthropological question.
