Title       : Settlement Systems and Sea-Level History in the Central Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1991      
File        : a9111566

Award Number: 9111566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57327              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jeffrey Clark and                
              his colleagues will conduct one field season of archaeological                 
              and geological research on Tutuila Island, American Samoa.                     
              Archaeological research will focus on the 'Aoa and Leone valleys               
              and combine survey with excavation of known sites.  The data                   
              collected will, hopefully, permit the culture history of the                   
              region to be reconstructed.  Changing lifestyle and settlement                 
              pattern over time will be studied.  The central goals of the                   
              geological part of the project will be to determine how relative               
              sea level changed over time and how landforms were modified by                 
              human activity.  To accomplish this, ancient shorelines will be                
              located and mapped.  Geological cores will be extracted and                    
              analyzed to determine geomorphological changes.  Palynological                 
              data will also assist in this process.  The results will be                    
              generalized to other islands in the Pacific.  Through integration              
              of both aspects of the research, it should be possible to                      
              reconstruct the mutual interactions between changing human                     
              practices and landforms.                                                       
                                                                                             
              In recent years, archaeologists have come to realize that Pacific              
              islands provide a excellent context to study complex human-                    
              landform interactions.  On the one hand, changes in relative sea               
              level due to local tectonism altered the landscape available for               
              human subsistence.  On the other hand, the felling and burning of              
              forests by local populations also had a major effect because of                
              the erosion which resulted.  The response by these groups in many              
              instances led to the rise of the complex chiefdoms observed by                 
              early Western explorers.  Archaeologists, however, disagree on                 
              the specific interaction mechanisms and this study should provide              
              new insight.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              basic geological information on changing sea levels which,                     
              hopefully, can be generalized to other islands in the region.  It              
              should yield new insight into human-land relationships and shed                
              new light on the rise of cultural complexity.  Finally, it will                
              help to strengthen the scientific infrastructure at North Dakota               
              State University.
