Title       : Electron Spin Resonance Spectrometer to Probe Microstructures at Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1991   
File        : a9111909

Award Number: 9111909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Gryte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Turro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purchase of an Electron Spin Resonance Spectrometer is                     
              requested.  The system will consist of a basic console, an                     
              analog recorder and display, appropriate microprocessor                        
              systems for the superheterodyne and field controller and data                  
              handling systems.  It will be used to develop a full                           
              understanding of the process of adsorption of various                          
              surfactants an polymers and the effect of different parameters                 
                                                                                             
              on the structure of the adsorbed layers.                                       
              Adsorption of surfactants and polymers at the solid/liquid                     
              interface modify the surface properties of the solid.  Such                    
              modifications are used in many industrial processes such as                    
              flocculation, enhanced oil recovery and flotation.  In                         
              addition, the adsorbed layers, particularly self-assemblies                    
              such as hemimicelles have potential use in novel applications                  
              such as catalysis and isotope separation.  Hence,                              
              understanding of the adsorption phenomena is of great                          
              importance.  Earlier work focussed on understanding the                        
              physico-chemical mechanisms of adsorption of surfactants and                   
              polymers by measuring adsorption density, zeta potential,                      
              wettability and adsorption enthalpies.  Such studies have                      
              helped in generating a mechanistic picture of the structure of                 
                                                                                             
              the adsorbed layer.  However, it has become clear that a                       
              molecular level understanding of adsorption is essential for                   
              the full utilization of it in various processes.  Recently,                    
              EST has been used probe absorbed layers on solids on a                         
              molecular level.  These studies have demonstrated the                          
              potential of ESR Spectroscopy to elucidate the mechanisms of                   
              formation of adsorbed layers and hence of adsorption.  ESR                     
              spectroscopy is also the technique which recently proved very                  
              useful for us in examining the orientation of surfactants on                   
              solids in non-aqueous medium.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Future research plans using the equipment will includes                        
              conformational changes of polymers with flocculation and                       
              dispersion of fines.  Polymers labelled with nitroxide type                    
              probes will be used for such studies.  Another important area                  
              of investigation is to elucidate the role of surfactant
