Title       : Plural-Soar: Towards the Development of a Cognitively Motivated Theory of
               Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9111804

Award Number: 9111804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Carley kathleen.carley@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Prietula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research investigates how artificial intelligence can be                  
              applied to the study of organizations.  The authors construct a                
              full artificial intelligence model of a small organization of                  
              cognitive agents communicating and cooperating to accomplish a                 
              task in which the interdependencies between agents can effect                  
              organizational performance.  Each artificial agent is represented              
              on its own computer using an extremely sophisticated software                  
              architecture, called Soar, that is capable of serving as a basis               
              for general intelligence and can learn from experience.                        
              Concurrently with these studies, the researchers conduct studies               
              in which human subjects participate in a "real world" version of               
              the task.  The task involves retrieving units at various                       
              locations from a warehouse.  The research question under                       
              investigation is:  "Given an organization of intelligent agents                
              that are capable of learning, what coordination schemes are most               
              effective and under what conditions?"  The specific conditions                 
              examined are:  the level of training, the type and amount of                   
              information shared, and the complexity of the task.  A prototype               
              version of the system, called Plural-Soar, has demonstrated the                
              feasibility of this approach.  The researchers intend to:  1)                  
              extend and refine the Plural-Soar modal to include all aspects of              
              the task; 2) realize the model on multiple machines that can                   
              communicate; 3) conduct a series of human studies to be used to                
              test, refine, and extend the set of Plural-Soar models; 4)                     
              compare the results of the simulation and human experiments; and               
              5) work toward the development of a computationally based theory               
              of micro-organizational behavior.
