Title       : Loosely-Coupled Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9111912

Award Number: 9111912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayadev Misra misra@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Large-scale distributed programming, where processes communicate          
              via messages, is a reality whereas large-scale shared variable                 
              programming remains an ill-understood activity.  It is postulated that         
              the distinction between these two classes is the type of                       
              communication-it is disciplined in the former case and arbitrary in            
              the latter case.  Furthermore, implementations of shared-variable              
              systems on multiprocessors with individual caches pose several                 
              problems, including cache-coherence.  This work attempts to impose             
              certain disciplines on shared variable programming so that large-scale         
              system design becomes feasible and the implementations avoid most of           
              the issues associated with cache coherence.                                    
                   The plan of research is to identify a substantial class of                
              shared-variable systems that enjoy some of the advantages of                   
              distributed (i.e., message-passing) systems.  The systems will be              
              constrained to a class called loosely-coupled, in which the                    
              computations of different processes are largely non-interfering even           
              though they share variables.  Loosely-coupled systems will acquire             
              certain properties-such as absence of "race conditions" -normally              
              associated with distributed systems.  Designs of loosely-coupled               
              systems will be accomplished without extensive analysis of scenarios           
              based on execution sequences, process interactions or deadlock.                
              Compositional proof theories for such systems will be developed and            
              the efficient implementation of such a system on multiple-memory               
              multiprocessor architectures will be indicated.
