Title       : Elastic Strain Waves in Single Muscle Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9111999

Award Number: 9111999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Daniel danielt@zoology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Muscle contraction is driven by  conformational changes associated             
              with portions of myosin molecules when they are attached to actin              
              filaments.  This shape change results in a sliding motion between              
              these two muscle proteins and thus, shortening of the entire                   
              muscle.  Attempts to understand the dymamics of this system have               
              relied on two approaches:  (1) experiments that employ rapid                   
              mechanical transients applied to activated muscle and (2) mass                 
              action models that treat these proteins as independent chemical                
              species.  Our research re-examines these two approaches with a                 
              combination of theoretical and experimental approaches.  From a                
              theoretical standpoint, we will show that rapid mechanical                     
              perturbations applied to single muscle cell preparations                       
              lead to propagating waves of internal strain and that these waves              
              may account for the behaviors that have been incorrectly attributed            
              to mysosin kinetics.  Using recent experimental methods that employ            
              high - speed laser diffractometry, we show such waves occur and we             
              use such data to corroborate our theoretical predictions.  We will             
              also develop a new theoretical approach for modelling thedynamics              
              of interacting proteins.  In this new approach, we relax the                   
              assumption that each myosin molecule acts independently.  Instead,             
              we argue that the kinetics of each molecule can be represented as              
              an oscillator whose behavior depends on the kinetics of its                    
              neighboring myosins.  This system of coupled oscillators can yield             
              kinetics of an ensemble of molecules that is vastly different from             
              the kinetics of each individual.  These two approaches challenge               
              the classic views of muscle as a system of slow, independent                   
              molecules whose kinetics can be extracted from experiments                     
              employing rapid mechanical perturbations.//
