Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for III-V/II-VI Heterovalent Molecular Beam
               Epitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1991     
File        : a9111781

Award Number: 9111781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek K. Furdyna Jacek.K.Furdyna.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nitin Samarth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Dobrowolska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Funds are requested for setting up a hybrid molecular beam epitaxy             
              (MBE) system consisting of two growth chambers, with an ultrahigh              
              vacuum channel for transporting wafers from one chamber to the                 
              other. Specifically, this proposal requests funds for a second MBE             
              growth chamber for III-V layers, and a transfer channel, which will            
              be added on to an existing MBE growth chamber for II-VI compounds              
              and alloys.  The individual growth chambers will be devoted to                 
              epitaxy and doping of III-V and of II-VI semiconductor compounds.              
              The UHV transport channel will permit epitaxial deposition of II-VI            
              layers and heterostructures directly on III-V epilayers.                       
                                                                                             
              The research program includes studies of the interface to                      
              understand mechanisms which determine nucleation of heterovalent               
              growth; studies of II-VI material growth on III-V epilayer alloy               
              substrates and lattice matching for particular II-VI compounds or              
              short-period superlattices; exploration of injection of carriers in            
              heterovalent heterojunctions from the III-V into the II-VI region;             
              and exploration of the magnetic proximity effects which may occur              
              at the interface of a III-V material with a II-VI based diluted                
              magnetic semiconductor (DMS) as a result of electron wavefunction              
              penetration from the III-V into the DMS region.  Structural,                   
              optical, electronic, and neutron scattering studies on the proposed            
              materials will be conducted.  About 8 grad students, 2 undergrad               
              students, and 1 post-doc will be directly involved in the program.             
              The instrumentation is to be maintained and operated by the                    
              university and the research group.  The university is providing                
              significant matching funds (48%).
