Title       : Physics of Plasma Confined by a Dipole Magnetic Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9111396

Award Number: 9111396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Mauel mauel@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akira Hasegawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed work is to conduct and analyze two specific                       
              experiments using the newly assembled Collisionless Terrella                   
              Experiment (CTX).  The results from these experiments  will                    
              significantly expand our understanding of collisionless particle               
              transport in planetary magnetospheres.  They will be used to test              
              basic theories of chaos and transport induced by dynamic and                   
              static non-axisymmetric perturbations to a dipole magnetic field.              
              For the first experiment, energetic electrons trapped within the               
              dipole magnetic field will be generated by operating our                       
              microwave plasma source so as to directly heat the high-field                  
              regions of the dipole.  As seen elsewhere, these electrons will                
              become unstable to a spectrum of low-frequency interchange                     
              instabilities and induce collisionless radial transport.  We will              
              measure the amplitude, frequency, and wavelength of the                        
              fluctuations, the condition for the onset of chaos, and the                    
              magnitude of the resulting transport.  We will also be able to                 
              observe marginally-stable pressure profiles and test theories of               
              adiabatic transport.  For the second experiment, we will impose a              
              multipolar static perturbation to the energetic electron plasma                
              breaking azimuthal symmetry and destroying conservation of                     
              angular momentum.  By measuring the decrease in the confinement                
              of the trapped electrons as the magnitude of the perturbation is               
              increased, we will be able to document the conditions leading to               
              three-dimensional chaos.  These experiments will be guided and                 
              interpreted by numerical and theoretical analysis.  By making                  
              correlations between laboratory and numerical simulations, we                  
              will demonstrate how magnetic fluctuations can induce transport                
              and heating of energetic particles in dipole fields and establish              
              models for similar processes occurring in planetary                            
              magnetospheres.
