Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Southern Wisconsin Logic Colloquium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1991  
File        : a9111849

Award Number: 9111849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steffen Lempp lempp@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The University of Wisconsin - Madison has a long tradition                
              in logic and the foundations of mathematics, starting  with                    
              Stephen Kleene in 1936.  Currently, there are five faculty                     
              members in logic and foundations:  H. Jerome Keisler, Kenneth                  
              Kunen, Steffen Lempp, Terrence Millar, and Arnold Miller; as well              
              as Mary Ellen Rudin, who works in set-theoretical topology.                    
              Together they supervise the theses of more than a dozen graduate               
              students, and their logic colloquium has an average attendance of              
              over twenty, not only faculty and graduate students from                       
              the University of Wisconsin but also logicians from                            
              nearby universities  and colleges, including Paul Bankston, Wim                
              Ruitenburg, and John Simms from Marquette University, Milwaukee;               
              Donna Carr from the University of Wisconsin-Parkside; and Philip               
              Steitz from Beloit College.                                                    
                   The purpose of the logic colloquium is threefold:  to allow               
              the logic faculty of the University of Wisconsin and of                        
              nearby universities and colleges to present their work to                      
              their colleagues and students; to give graduate students at                    
              the University of Wisconsin a chance to talk about their thesis                
              work in logic and foundations; and to provide a forum for outside              
              visitors to speak.  It currently meets every other week for two                
              one hour talks, with additional times scheduled for outside                    
              speakers, who last year included:  Menachem Magidor of Hebrew                  
              University , Jerusalem; Chris Laskowski of the University of                   
              Maryland-College Park; Sergio Fajardo of the University of the                 
              Andes, Bogota; and Ali Enayat of American University, Washington               
              D.C. In each case, the outside speakers happened to pass through               
              Madison or Chicago and agreed to speak.  In order for the                      
              organizers to function more effectively, NSF funds are being                   
              provided to invite one speaker a month for each of the nine                    
              months of the next three academic years.
