Title       : Research Initiation Award: Enhanced Adsorption of Heavy Metals in Hazardous
               Waste Incinerator Effluent Through the Addition of Inorganic Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1991       
File        : a9111281

Award Number: 9111281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the post-flame gases of an incinerator metal vapors begin                   
              to condense as the temperature drops.  The more volatile meals                 
              tend to be concentrated in smaller particles or aerosols which                 
              can also be the most difficult to control.  The objective of                   
              the proposed research is to study the morphology of metal                      
              emissions in the effluent of a research incinerator and                        
              determine if controlled seeding of the flow with inorganic                     
              particles of a specific size and composition can accelerate                    
              nucleation and condensation of lead, cadmium, and mercury onto                 
              these particles.  The particles will be of size that can be                    
              removed using current effluent treatment technologies.  In                     
              this experimental study, liquids containing metals will be                     
              incinerated.  Inorganic particles will be added to the post-                   
              flame combustion gases downstream of the flame zone.  A                        
              portion of the particulates will then be trapped further                       
              downstream and the metals concentrations measured using an                     
              atomic absorption spectrometer.  The adsorption                                
              characteristics of each metal onto the particulates will be                    
              determined as a function of the particle composition, the size                 
              of the injected particles, and the loading.                                    
                                                                                             
              Public and governmental concern is increasing over emissions                   
              of heavy metals from municipal and hazardous waste                             
              incinerators.  The rates of metal recovery found in this                       
              research program may point to a promising commercial recovery                  
              technique.
