Title       : Low Temperature Depositions and Growth of Dielectric Films Using Electron
               Cyclotron Resonance Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9111968

Award Number: 9111968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stella W. Pang pang@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              For devices with submicrometer dimensions and                                  
              densely packed integrated circuits, low processing                             
              temperature is essential.  While most of the                                   
              fabrication steps can be carried out at low                                    
              temperature, the only exception is the formation of                            
              dielectric layer.  To obtain low temperature                                   
              dielectric materials for different applications, we                            
              propose using electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)                               
              source for deposition and growth.  The high                                    
              efficiency for gas dissociation and excitation                                 
              provided by ECR source allows the activation                                   
              energy to be lowered and high density of reactive                              
              radicals to be generated.  There are two additional                            
              new thrust for the proposed work.  The effect of                               
              selective excitation and dissociation will be studied                          
              by adjusting the gas injection to the two gas inlets:                          
              one by the ECR cavity and one around the sample                                
              stage.  The second focus is on controlling the                                 
              surface reaction by timing the arrival rate of the                             
              reactive species.  By providing control of these                               
              parameters, high quality films, new dielectric                                 
              materials, and effective step coverage for high                                
              aspect ratio features can be obtained.                                         
              There are three objectives of this proposed project:                           
              (1) deposition and growth of low temperature gate                              
              dielectric, the focus is on high electrical quality and                        
              reasonable deposition rate for single wafer                                    
              processing; (2) deposit planarized dielectric for                              
              multilevel interconnections, a major issue is on high                          
              degree of global planarization and good electrical                             
              properties; (3) reaction time control for conformal                            
              step coverage of high aspect ratio features with                               
              uniform thickness.
