Title       : The Structure and Evolution of Midlatitude Cyclones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9111011

Award Number: 9111011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford F. Mass cliff@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The descriptive cyclone model originated by the Norwegian                 
              school of meteorologists in the second decade of the 20th century              
              has long served as a cornerstone of weather forecasting in the                 
              middle latitudes. In this paradigm, a word-girdling boundary zone              
              between polar and tropical air (the polar front) is the focal line             
              of action, with waves on this front forming, evolving and dying;               
              producing typical weather patterns and changes during their                    
              lifetime. The later development of observational networks extending            
              through the troposphere, dynamical theorys of jet streams and                  
              planetary scale waves, and the advent of Numerical Weather Predic-             
              tion models have both complicated and overshadowed the frontal                 
              cyclone model. This is due, in part, to the fact that in each case,            
              the treatment is too coarse-meshed in the horizontal to capture the            
              narrow frontal zone. More recently, radar and satellite-image                  
              depiction of mesoscale features associated with cyclones, and the              
              development of numerical research models with mesoscale resolution,            
              offers the possibility of describing mid-latitude frontal cyclones             
              in much finer detail. Mass proposes to use a widely-used mesoscale             
              model (the MM4 model), together with conventional coarse-grained               
              operational data sets, to generate detailed quantitative four-                 
              dimensional descriptions of a sample set of five or six cases of               
              such cyclones (explosively developing and normally developing                  
              marine cyclones, a continental cyclone over level terrain, and                 
              cyclones moving across and to the lee of the Rocky Mountains).                 
              Analyses of these data sets will include  air trajectory                       
              computations and sophisticated three-dimensional graphics. Mass                
              expects that these analyses will contribute to the establishment of            
              a new paradigm to modify the useful, but incomplete, Norwegian                 
              model. This will contribute to the improvement of short-range,                 
              local weather forecasts and to the development of operational                  
              versions of numerical mesoscale models.
