Title       : Ballistic Electron Optics in Two Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9111149

Award Number: 9111149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Spector   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a program of research                                  
              which builds upon work done while the principal                                
              investigator was a postdoctoral member of the                                  
              technical staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories.  In                                 
              previous studies it was demonstrated that within the                           
              ballistic mean free path, electrons in two-                                    
              dimensional electron systems can be controlled in a                            
              manner similar to the manipulation of photons in                               
              optical systems.  This field of research can aptly be                          
              labeled ballistic electron optics.  The low                                    
              temperature electronic mobilities in the devices of                            
              the previous studies were extremely high (>                                    
              5x106cm2/Vs), corresponding to elastic mean free                               
              paths of many tens of micrometers.  This enabled                               
              the manipulation of ballistic carriers over relatively                         
              long distances (>10um).  Since the characteristic                              
              electron wavelength is typically two orders of                                 
              magnitude smaller than this, the wave nature of the                            
              electrons did not play an important role, and                                  
              analogies with geometrical optics have been made.                              
              In order to further this field of research and to                              
              investigate whether ballistic electron optical devices                         
              have the potential for the creation of new types of                            
              switching systems and computer architectures, the                              
              present research is focused on the following areas:                            
              1) the investigation of how these devices can be                               
              scaled down in size and what role the wave nature                              
              of the electrons will play, 2) integrating two or                              
              more devices together, and 3) the development of                               
              new ballistic electron devices.  The equipment                                 
              necessary to carry out this research (3He cryostat                             
              with 11 Tesla magnet, and photolithography and                                 
              electron beam lithography facilities) are available                            
              within the Center For Solid State Electronics                                  
              Research of which the principle investigator is a                              
              member.
