Title       : Polarization Methods in Machine and Computer Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1991      
File        : a9111973

Award Number: 9111973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59653              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence B. Wolff wolff@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
                 This project extends the unique capabilities of polarization-               
              based visual sensing both in low-level machine vision and                      
              "higher-level" computer vision.  The doctoral thesis written by                
              the principle investigator has opened up a new subarea of vision               
              research utilizing reflected polarization analysis as a new                    
              sensory medium for object feature extraction which has been                    
              demonstrated to have key advantages over existing intensity and                
              color-based techniques for some important image understanding                  
              problems.  Utilizing the fundamental foundations for these                     
              methods the research explores the development of a variety of                  
              polarization-based techniques for inspection processes in machine              
              vision, and object recognition in computer vision.                             
                 Reflected polarization analysis has provided the first                      
              practical methodology in vision for distinguishing and                         
              classifying material surfaces according to different levels of                 
              electrical conductivity, with metals and dielectrics at the                    
              extremes.  For the more controlled environments of machine                     
              vision, polarization-based methods are studied that significantly              
              improve upon existing methods for accurate non-destructive                     
              inspection of materials in terms of their composition and defects              
              such as cracks and scratches.  One potentially very useful                     
              application is to inspection of VLSI chips.  The research will                 
              also study how material classification from polarization-based                 
              methods can be used in computer vision to augment object                       
              descriptions in terms of material composition of subparts for                  
              object recognition.  Polarization-based methods can be very                    
              simply used to extract shape constraints; the project examines                 
              how this can be used for object recognition.  Finally, the                     
              research explores the application of polarization-based methods                
              to color constancy, for simultaneous determination of object and               
              light source color.
