Title       : Genetic and Physiological Bases of Wheel-Running Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9111185

Award Number: 9111185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175975             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Kirsch jakirsch@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Garland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Animals frequently respond to changes in environmental conditions              
              by altering their behavior.  This common observation has led to                
              the hypothesis that behavior evolves first, prior to changes in                
              underlying aspects of morphology, physiology, or biochemistry.                 
              Artificial selection experiments will be used to test this                     
              hypothesis with respect to voluntary wheel-running behavior of                 
              randombred laboratory mice.  Replicated within-family selection                
              on amount of wheel-running during the 5th and 6th days of                      
              exposure to activity wheels will be used to produce two high- and              
              two low-selected lines, while maintaining two unselected control               
              lines, each of 10-12 breeding pairs.  As lines diverge                         
              genetically in wheel-running behavior, they will be compared with              
              regard to a series of possibly correlated locomotor behaviors as               
              well as physiological characteristics that are hypothesized to                 
              partly determine capacities for sustained locomotor activity.                  
              Possibly correlated behaviors to be tested include several                     
              components of open-field activity, maximal sprint running speed,               
              and swimming endurance.  Physiological traits to be measured                   
              include maximal (VO2max) and basal (BMR) rates of oxygen                       
              consumption, hematocrit and blood hemoglobin content, thyroid                  
              hormone levels, heart, gastrocnemius muscle, and liver masses,                 
              and key indicator enzymes for both aerobic (oxidative) and                     
              anaerobic glycolytic capacities at the cellular level.                         
              Correlated responses to selection will allow quantification of                 
              genetic correlations between behaviors and between behavior and                
              physiology.  Results will have significance for the understanding              
              of animal and human behavior, genetics, evolution, and                         
              physiology, including the interrelationships of health and well-               
              being, voluntary activity patterns, and innate exercise                        
              capacities.
