Title       : Social Stratification in Eastern Europe After 1989
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9111722

Award Number: 9111722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan Szelenyi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Treiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The central question addressed in this research is how the                
              1989 political and economic transformation of Eastern Europe has               
              changed the structure of social stratification in Hungary,                     
              Czechoslovakia, and Poland.  The study will examine how the                    
              emergence of private ownership, a multi-party system, and a market             
              economy has affected the social hierarchy in these countries.  It              
              does so by examining the emergence of the new elite and by studying            
              the pattern of status attainment in the three countries.  It is                
              evident already that party membership has lost its central role as             
              a basis for recruitment to the elite and that ownership of economic            
              capital has become a distinct advantage.  It remains an open                   
              question, however, whether the new elite largely will be recruited             
              from the old cadre elite or from the old 'pre-communism' elite.                
              This is one of the central questions addressed by the research.                
              The second question addressed is how the opportunities for                     
              educational and occupational attainment for the general population             
              are affected by the political transformation.  The occupational                
              structure remains largely unchanged but there is some evidence of              
              fewer constraints on opportunities for social and economic                     
              advancement.  Economic entrepreneurship is now possible and access             
              to higher education is no longer intimately tied to party                      
              membership and political connections.  The research will examine               
              whether there is indeed an opening of opportunities in the sense               
              that occupational attainment is less dependent on family background            
              and political connections than on educational attainment and                   
              individual aspirations and entrepreneurship.                                   
                                                                                             
                   The investigators will collect survey data in all three                   
              countries which will allow them to investigate these important                 
              questions.  The abrupt social and economic changes in Eastern                  
              Europe provide a unique opportunity for studying how the structure             
              of inequality in a society is affected by its political and                    
              economic institutions.  The study will also become an important                
              source for understanding what has happened in Eastern Europe and               
              the data will provide very valuable baseline data for future                   
              research.
