Title       : Wavelet Based Representations for Matching Problems in Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9111375

Award Number: 9111375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew F. Laine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9264,
Abstract    :
                 The goal of the research is to identify efficient                           
              (nonredundant) representations for correspondence problems in                  
              vision.  This research investigates the efficacy of new                        
              multiscale representations obtained from both classical wavelet                
              and best-adapted wave packet bases applied to three matching                   
              problems:  stereo matching, texture discrimination and pattern                 
              recognition.  Multiresolution and orientation selectivity, known               
              biological mechanisms in primate vision, are ingrained in wavelet              
              representations and inspire the techniques presented in this                   
              proposal.                                                                      
                 The multiresolution decomposition of wavelet transforms                     
              provides a natural hierarchy in which to embed an incremental                  
              stereo matching strategy.  In place of traditional hierarchical                
              (coarse-fine) matching, a novel incremental strategy for stereo                
              matching strategy is proposed, where matching is accomplished by               
              selecting bands of wavelet channels, constrained by orientation,               
              scale and geometry (space).  The approach to texture                           
              discrimination investigated the method of best-adapted wavelet                 
              packets for computing textural signatures.  The scale, frequency               
              and location (spacial) indices of the most energetic wave packet               
              coefficients will be analyzed.  Unique signatures shall be                     
              characterized by their links through 3-D scale space using the                 
              method of best-adapted wavelet packets.                                        
                 Finding practical solutions to such fundamental problems will               
              have significant impact in the field of machine intelligence and               
              foster the development of applications in the areas of navigation              
              systems, robot vision, machine inspection, and image                           
              understanding.
