Title       : Development and Testing of a Wave-Driven Artificial Upwelling Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1993  
File        : a9111878

Award Number: 9111878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark C. Liu liu@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the conceptual formulation, design,                      
              fabrication, and testing of a wave-driven artificial upwelling                 
              device that can draw nutrient-rich deep ocean water (DOW) to the               
              ocean surface as a precursor to commercially-viable, open-ocean                
              mariculture.  The device will ba a 1:20 scale model of the                     
              prototype that will eventually be constructed and deployed in the              
              open ocean in subsequent research and development efforts.  This               
              project is part of a larger research effort of the University of               
              Hawaii, the ultimate goal of which is to develop the technology                
              for open ocean mariculture.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The research task of this project will be conducted in three                   
              phases.  The first phase includes the design of hydraulic                      
              experiments and the construction of the hydraulic model.  A                    
              laboratory-scale, wave-driven artificial upwelling device will be              
              designed and fabricated at the University of Hawaii's Look                     
              Laboratory.  Wave energy conversion theories will be examined,                 
              and modifications of existing formulas may be made to make them                
              compatible with the special physical environment conditions                    
              related to artificial upwelling.  A series of hydraulic modeling               
              experiments will then be designed based on theoretical derivation              
              to investigate the upwelling depths and flow rates as functions                
              of various design parameters.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The second phase covers the actual hydraulic modeling                          
              experiments.  In this phase, the calibration of the hydraulic                  
              model and instrumentation will first be conducted to test the                  
              hydrodynamic performance of the device and make necessary                      
              modifications to the original design.                                          
                                                                                             
              The final phase is the analysis of experimental data and the                   
              design of a prototype wave-driven artificial upwelling device.                 
              Experimental data will be analyzed and compared with the                       
              theoretical results.
