Title       : Engineering Growth Factor/Receptor Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9111940

Award Number: 9111940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $704044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Lauffenburger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will combine approaches of biochemical                            
              engineering, cell biology, and molecular biology to                            
              increase quantitative understanding of how binding and                         
              trafficking aspects of growth factor/receptor interactions                     
              influence mammalian cell proliferation, and to exploit                         
              this increased understanding to suggest design principles                      
              for paracrine and autocrine cell culture systems.                              
              Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) and its receptor (EGFR) on                       
              fibroblastic cell lines will serve as the system of focus.                     
              Mathematical models which describe EGF/EGFR trafficking                        
              and its effect on cell growth regulation by exogenous EGF                      
              in terms of mechanistic ligand/receptor parameters have                        
              been recently developed and experimentally validated.                          
              These models will now be used to investigate strategies                        
              for perturbation of cell culture systems, and will be                          
              extended to paracrine and autocrine EGF sources.  The                          
              extended models will be critically tested by constructing                      
              artificial paracrine and autocrine systems using cells                         
              transfected with genes encoding EGF and/or EGFR.                               
              Modification of these genes by site-directed mutagenesis                       
              will allow key rate parameters of the system to be                             
              directly varied.  These studies will identify parameters                       
              that can be usefully manipulated to regulate cell growth                       
              for biotechnological purposes.
