Title       : Collaborative Research on Adjustment Costs and Information in Aggregate
               Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9111094

Award Number: 9111094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107730             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Leahy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Caplin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project studies the aggregate consequences of the interaction             
              between the adjustment costs faced by individual agents and the                
              transmission of information in the economy.  Adjustment costs                  
              provide a natural reason for information to be imperfect in a                  
              multi-agent economy.  When action is costly, individuals will not              
              find it in their interests to respond to every change in their                 
              circumstances, thereby preventing the transmission of individually             
              held information to others through market data.  In turn, the                  
              information problem creates a reason why, even in a competitive                
              setting, equilibrium may be suboptimal.  When individuals weigh                
              the costs and benefits of action, they ignore the value to others              
              of the information revealed by their action.  The goal of this                 
              study is to show that the extent of our ignorance can play a key               
              role in determining both the average level of business activity and            
              the pattern of fluctuations.                                                   
                                                                                             
              To accomplish this task many difficult modelling problems, such as             
              aggregation in the face of adjustment costs and the partial                    
              revelation of information in general equilibrium models, must be               
              solved.  A preliminary theoretical model which overcomes many of               
              the difficult modelling problems and allows a complete analysis of             
              the steady state interactions between information and adjustment               
              costs was completed.  Non-steady state extensions in which the                 
              importance of information dynamics is readily appreciated will be              
              developed.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The idea that information may only be released through action and              
              that adjustment costs limit action has important consequences for              
              economic fluctuations.  In particular, the interaction of                      
              information and adjustment costs may result in the bunching of                 
              individual decisions.  The failure of others to act may lead all               
              agents to hesitate, while action by others may promote responses.              
              This may lead to increased market volatility.  This study takes us             
              down the path to a better understanding of possible causes and                 
              consequences of incomplete information on the behavior of the                  
              economy.
