Title       : Research Initiation: Sculptured Surface Model Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1994  
File        : a9111122

Award Number: 9111122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Oliver oliver@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research is to develop techniques for               
              the automatic generation of sculptured surface models in a                     
              spatially constrained environment, subject to specified intrinsic              
              shape properties.  Spatial constraints will be characterized by a              
              distance metric relating surface points to polyhedral models which             
              represent either components in the vicinity of the surface, or the             
              boundaries of regions that the surface must avoid.  The shape of               
              the surface will be governed by constraints based on intrinsic                 
              properties such as tangency and curvature, which will be derived               
              from general characterizations of design intent.  To simultaneously            
              address the independent goals of global obstacle avoidance and                 
              local control of intrinsic shape properties, surface synthesis will            
              be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem to be solved             
              via simulated annealing (SA).  Preliminary experiments with this               
              technique are very promising.                                                  
                   Some of the research issues to be addressed include:                      
              synthesis of general non-uniform rational B-spline surfaces;                   
              derivation of analytical surface design constraints based on                   
              objective characterizations of manufacturability and functional                
              requirements, and from subjective measures of surface aesthetics;              
              optimal estimation of parameters associated with the SA algorithm              
              for surface synthesis; problem formulation for multiple spatial                
              obstacles; possible hybrid SA/classical optimization techniques;               
              performance oriented variations of the SA algorithm; and, user                 
              interface design and implementation.  Automated surfacing                      
              capabilities will facilitate simultaneous engineering and provide              
              product designers with a rapid analytical prototyping facility.                
              Given the wide spectrum of potential applications, this research               
              may have a profound impact on the efficiency of the development                
              process for many products.
