Title       : Significance and Consequences of Avian Vocal Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9111666

Award Number: 9111666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Kroodsma kroodsma@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Much current literature, covering a variety of sensory modes and               
              animal groups, focuses on identifying cues that individuals use                
              to assess one another and on the evolution of those cues.  Such                
              cues may be used during either interactions between animals of                 
              the same sex or interactions between animals of opposite sex.                  
              How animals perceive one another during these interactions has                 
              important implications for evolution of traits.  Understanding                 
              how animals may use vocal cues has been hampered, however, by the              
              difficulty of establishing cause and effect, rather than just                  
              correlation, between the vocal behavior and its possible                       
              consequences.  By taking advantage of the vocal learning                       
              abilities of songbirds, Dr. Kroodsma will be able to                           
              experimentally "assign" different vocal behaviors to different                 
              individuals.  With cues assigned at random and therefore                       
              irrespective of other male qualities, hypothesis testing can                   
              proceed.  Initial studies will focus on song repertoire size in                
              marsh wrens, and study of other vocal behaviors in other species               
              will follow.  Individuals with "assigned behaviors" become                     
              invaluable in other experiments that test for cause-and-effect                 
              relationships between behavior and brain characteristics;                      
              correlations have been discovered between song repertoire size                 
              and the volume of song control centers in the avian forebrain,                 
              for example, but until either the behavior (as in Dr. Kroodsma's               
              experiments) or the brain is manipulated experimentally, one                   
              cannot determine the direction of causation.
