Title       : Topics in the Economic Analysis of Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1991     
File        : a9111947

Award Number: 9111947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Shavell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the last decade there has been substantial progress in                    
              understanding the role and functions of law through the economic               
              analysis of legal rules.  Especially in the areas of contractual               
              relations and torts, theoretical modelling under various conditions            
              of information and uncertainty has added to our knowledge about the            
              effects and potential effects of differing rule structures,                    
              sanctioning systems, and regulatory regimes.  Dr. Shavell has been             
              a leading scholar studying such problems.                                      
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Shavell continues that work through focusing              
              on three different topics.  The first two, which relate to contract            
              law, address (1) rules governing disclosure of information at the              
              time of contracting, and (2) rules governing a party's ability to              
              withdraw an offer after the party to whom the offer has been made              
              has relied on the offer by gathering information about the offer's             
              value.  The final topic addresses (3) rules governing a corporate              
              employee's personal liability for torts or crimes committed by the             
              corporation.  Each of these topics frames issues of theoretical and            
              practical importance for law.  Also, the work being pursued models             
              situations with increased realism.  While there are already models             
              to analyze sellers' incentives to disclose information, none has               
              studied the effects of ordinary contract law.  Similarly, there has            
              been no rigorous economic analysis of contract law dealing with                
              offer and acceptance.  Finally, while there are models of                      
              deterrence generally, Dr. Shavell adds important realism by                    
              conceptualizing a business firm as a bundle of actors (each with               
              their own private incentives) rather than as a single unified                  
              actor.  This attention to law and to operational context is                    
              important in its own right and in opening up lines of research for             
              others to follow.
