Title       : Cyclic and Polycyclic Polystannanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1992   
File        : a9111861

Award Number: 9111861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Sita   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Sita, who                  
              recently moved from Carnegie Mellon University to California                   
              Institute of Technology, will study the synthesis and chemistry                
              of cyclic and polycyclic polystannanes. Syntheses will be                      
              pursued in each case by delineating the steric and electronic                  
              factors which govern a proposed series of reactions that lead                  
              to the target cyclic and polycyclic organostannanes. Once each                 
              synthesis has been achieved, the new organostannane will be                    
              studied by using a variety of spectroscopic methods in order to                
              confirm its molecular structure and to investigate the nature                  
              of bonding to tin in the new molecular system. The data thereby                
              obtained will be correlated with existing theoretical models.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Dr. Sita's research program is concerned with elevating the                    
              level of understanding of the cyclic and polycyclic chemistry                  
              of organotin compounds to that which is presently enjoyed by                   
              carbocyclic systems. Dr. Sita's research on the synthesis and                  
              chemistry of these new systems is expected to provide new                      
              insight into: (i) the ways in which steric strain is expressed                 
              and, ultimately, accomodated structurally in cyclic and                        
              polycyclic organotin compounds, (ii) the development of new                    
              organotin-based materials, and (iii) the development of                        
              synthetic strategy in organotin chemistry. Dr. Sita's research                 
              is likely to lead to improved understanding of the various                     
              factors which govern structure/bonding/physical property                       
              relationships and chemical reactivity in systems that contain                  
              heavy elements (such as tin). His work in this area is likely                  
              to be of interest to organic and main group organometallic                     
              chemists as well as to structural chemists.
