Title       : Laser Flash Studies of Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9111599

Award Number: 9111599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Parson parsonb@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a continuation of experimental and                     
              theoretical studies of photosynthetic bacterial reaction                       
              centers.  Reaction centers are pigment-protein complexes that                  
              carry out the photochemical electron-transfer reactions plants                 
              and photosynthetic bacteria use to capture the energy of                       
              sunlight.                                                                      
              In the experimental work, reaction centers from several species                
              of purple photosynthetic bacteria will be excited with flashes                 
              of light.  Transient states created by the excitation will be                  
              probed by measuring the optical absorption spectrum and                        
              stimulated emission with a second pulse of light at various                    
              times after the excitation.  These studies will focus on the                   
              rate and temperature dependence of the initial electron-                       
              transfer steps in reaction centers that have been modified by                  
              directed mutagenesis.  Amino acid substitutions that are likely                
              to alter the energies of various radical-pair states will be                   
              chosen on the basis of theoretical calculations.  The transient                
              states formed by excitation of reaction centers in which the                   
              initial electron acceptor is already reduced or the donor                      
              already oxidized will also be examined.                                        
              The theoretical studies will include calculations of the free                  
              energies of radical-pair states in native and mutant reaction                  
              centers, starting with the crystal structures of the native                    
              proteins and using a microscopic treatment of dielectric                       
              effects.  Time-dependent fluctuations of these energies will                   
              be examined by molecular-dynamics simulations, and will be                     
              reacted to the kinetics of the electron-transfer reactions.                    
              The goal of this work is to understand how the structure of the                
              protein determines the mechanism, kinetics, and temperature                    
              dependence of the first two electron-transfer steps in the                     
              photosynthetic process.
