Title       : Collaborative Research on Topological Relationships at Alpine Treeline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9111852

Award Number: 9111852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31405              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Walsh swalsh@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Concerns about prospects for changing climatic conditions across the        
              globe have given new impetus to inquiries that would identify zones            
              where the impacts of such changes can be readily monitored and analyzed.       
              One such set of zones are alpine treeline ecotones, where montane              
              forests gradually give way to barren slopes or alpine tundra.  Previous        
              studies have shown these areas to be locales where even minor climatic         
              changes can induce profound changes in vegetation patterns.  This              
              collaborative research project will conduct intensive analyses of              
              patterns of treeline species and will explore relationships among              
              various factors that affect the number and location of species.                
              Research will focus on sites in Glacier National Park of Montana.  Data        
              will be gathered from satellite images and field observations of               
              climatic variables and soil and bedrock conditions.  Data from digital         
              elevation models and tree rings also will be used to construct and test        
              statistical and path models that represent how treeline distributions          
              respond to interactions among different variables over time.                   
                 This collaborative project will provide new data and models that            
              enhance knowledge about interactions among different factors in alpine         
              treeline zones, both at the study site and in many other mountainous           
              environments.  This project may provide new metrics for identifying the        
              impacts of changing climatic conditions, and it also will explore new          
              methods for monitoring and evaluating the use of remote sensed data and        
              geographic information systems in vegetation modelling.
