Title       : Collaborative Research on Divided Government
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1991    
File        : a9111112

Award Number: 9111112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto F. Alesina aalesina@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In western democracies and, in particular, in the United States,               
              policy outcomes are functions of the interaction of the separate               
              executive and legislature.  Policy decisions are reflections of the            
              partisan and ideological composition of the two branches.  In this             
              context, divided government occurs as a result of voters' desire               
              to create checks and balances by moderating an executive controlled            
              by one party or point of view against a legislature dominated by               
              another party or perspective.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This sophisticated research explores several theoretical and                   
              empirical issues with respect to the growing trend toward divided              
              government both in the United States and in various other                      
              democratic nations.  First,  the research will examine the effects             
              on presidential candidates of knowing the policy composition of the            
              legislature.  Second, the study will consider the effects of                   
              divided government on the propensity toward and success of third               
              parties.  Third, the possibility that voter turnout may be used as             
              a moderating devise will be explored.  Finally, the robustness of              
              the results will be evaluated by examining the dynamics of divided             
              government in other countries, specifically in france.                         
                                                                                             
              When completed this research should greatly increase our                       
              understanding of the causes and consequences of divided government             
              in the United States.  It also should and provide valuable                     
              information on the operation of institutional checks and balances              
              that will be of use not only in the United States but especially               
              in new democracies as they make decisions about the types of                   
              institutions to develop.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This is collaborative research with Howard Rosenthal (SES-9111059).
