Title       : Behavioral Diversity and Ontogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1991     
File        : a9111387

Award Number: 9111387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon M. Burghardt gburghar@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The chemical senses are little understood in mammals and                       
              especially in humans, yet they are increasingly implicated in                  
              feeding, social, emotional, and sexual behavior, and even in                   
              disorders of these systems.  Yet it is hard to disentangle the                 
              genetic, developmental, and experiential factors underlying the                
              role of the chemical senses in these behaviors.  Of all the                    
              amniote vertebrates, snakes rely on the chemical senses the most               
              in all phases of their behavior.  Because snakes are independent               
              at birth, the three kinds of factors can be readily studied.                   
                                                                                             
              In this research project, Dr. Burghardt will investigate the role              
              of genetics and dietary experience in the sensitivity of                       
              responses to food cues and food preferences, using litters of                  
              garter snakes and their mothers.  Young snakes will be tested                  
              with food odors of various concentrations as newborns and after                
              being raised on a given diet.  Their ability to handle and ingest              
              the food represented by the odors will also be documented before               
              and after the dietary experience.  Questions this research should              
              answer include whether or not the sensitivity to normal prey                   
              odors is heritable, whether or not the ability to improve                      
              performance with feeding experience is heritable, whether or not               
              there is a relationship between perceptual and motor abilities in              
              feeding, and whether or not the variability among litters is                   
              greater than that within litters.  Answers to these questions in               
              animals from the same wild population should set lower limits to               
              the expected range of variation in animals with behavioral                     
              repertoires that are more complex but less dependent on the                    
              chemical senses.
