Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Unique Continuation, Regularity of Solutions to Linear
               and Nonlinear Equations of Nonelliptic Type, Symmetry for PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9404358

Award Number: 9404358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9404358  Garofalo       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in the field of partial differential equations.  The work  is concerned
              with three main projects.  The first concerns unique  continuation for a class
              of subelliptic operators modelled on the  Baouendi-Grushin operator and absence
              of embedded eigenvalues for  such operators, or for the sub-Laplacian on the
              Heisenberg group  or, in general, on a nilpotent homogeneous Lie group.  The
              second  line of investigation will study optimal regularity of solutions  of
              nonlinear subelliptic equations which arise as Euler equations  of the Sobolev
              functional in the nonquadratic case,  isoperimetric and Sobolev inequalities,
              reactions between  harmonic and surface measure for Lipschitz domains on the 
              Heisenberg group and Wieners criterion of Kolmogorov's equation.   Work will
              also be done on symmetry for partial differential  equations and the Pompieu
              problem, on a conjecture of DeGiorgi  connected with flow by mean curvature,
              extremal functions in the  Sobolev or the isoperimetric inequality for the
              Baouendi-Grushin  operator or the sub-Laplacian on the Heisenberg and the 
              generalized torsion problem.   Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
