Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computation and Analysis of Invariant Manifolds and Their
               Bifurcations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9404124

Award Number: 9404124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jens Lorenz lorenz@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In many areas of the applied sciences one is led to study dynamical systems
              depending on one or more parameters.  The state vector often approaches a
              low-dimensional invariant manifold that determines the dynamical behavior,
              except for an initial transient.  The investigator develops and analyszes
              methods for the  direct numerical computation of such invariant manifolds in a
              path-following process.  Also, we studies how to detect and classify potential
              bifurcations.  So far, well-developed algorithms for path following and for
              detection of bifurcations exist only when the invariant manifold is a fixed
              point or a periodic orbit.  The next interesting cases are branches of
              invariant 2-tori, corresponding typically to quasiperiodic motion with two
              frequencies.  In previous work the investigator and his collaborators have
              developed a reliable code to compute such  branches of 2-tori, but the
              numerical study of their bifurcations has just begun.  This project extends the
              previous work in several directions, the most important being the following. 
              First, indicators are added to the code that can tell if a bifurcation is
              possible, and -- ideally -- can tell the nature of the bifurcation.  Second, to
              represent the invariant manifold, local charts are used instead of one global
              chart.  This extension makes local mesh refinement practical and greatly
              enhances the performance and applicability of the existent code.               
                During the last four centuries scientists have developed equations to
              determine the time evolution of a great variety of systems.  Newton wrote down
              the equations for planetary motion.  Euler, Navier, and Stokes developed
              equations to predict the flow of water and other fluids.  The equations
              governing meteorology, oceanography, or the phase changes of materials were
              developed  more recently.  Though the equations determine the evolution in
              principle, supercomputers are usually necessary to actually evaluate the
              predictions.  The reason is, of course, the great complexity of th e processes
              involved.  In fact, even the fastest computers are often insufficient for a
              full modeling.  Then it is necessary to ask for sensible simplifications. 
              These are possible if the state vector (which describes the state of the system
              at a given instant of time) settles to a low-dimensional object in state space
              as time progresses.  It is one aim of the proposed research to understand when
              such a behavior occurs.  There are many  known examples, ranging from applied
              mechanics to chemistry to material sciences.  Another aim is the direct
              numerical computation of the low-dimensional geometric object that is
              approached by the state vector.  The project helps understand dynamical systems
              better.  In turn, this leads to better algorithms for predicting evolutions and
              makes a wider range of processes and phenomena amenable to modeling by
              supercomputers.
