Title       : GRGC: Collaborative Project: A Reference Section at Cismon, Italy for the
               APTICORE Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9404423

Award Number: 9404423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58278              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Herbert timothy_herbert@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9404424   Herbert    This proposal coordinates  the efforts of four American
              groups, in conjunction with Italian investigators, to core and analyze a 125
              meter-long  section of  Aptian-Barremian age strata near Cismon, Italy.  The
              core site has been selected to recover an expanded pelagic section  recording a
              time  of large-scale global change,  namely  the time of transition into the
              mid-Cretaceous "greenhouse" climate.  The study is part of a large program
              called APTICORE, and will  define a "reference section" for this major period
              of global climate change.  The cores and logs will be studied by a team of
              investigators from the Universities of Florida, Michigan, Brown, and Rhode
              Island (who request support with this proposal) and the Universita de Milano,
              whose investigators are funded by the Consiglio  Nazionale delle Ricerche.  The
              Florida investigator will study the magnetostratigraphy and rock magnetic
              properties of the cored section to define the essential timeframe  for other
              studies and to determine the magnetic mineralogy of the section.  The Michigan
              investigators will study the carbon isotope stratigraphy (both as carbonate and
              organic carbon) and strontium isotope stratigraphy to determine the manner in
              which carbon is partitioned in the oceanic system during global climate change,
              and to determine the initial timing and relative magnitude of the volcanic
              pulse using Sr-isotopes as markers.  The Brown investigator will study the
              cyclostratigraphy of the cored  section by digital colorimetry and associated
              chemical analyses to determine the detailed sedimentary history of the section
              and the absolute time spans of the Selli Level "black shale" episode and
              various preceding magnetic chrons.  The Rhode Island investigator will co-mange
              the field program and will study the chemostratigraphy and cyclostratigraphy of
              the section with chemical and microresistivity logs.  He will determine the
              chemo-sedimentary history of the section and independently measure
              cyclosratigraphy with microres istivity for time resolution studies as
              described above.  The Universita di Milano investigators will define the
              biostratigraphy of the section, interpret the ecologic responses of the biota
              to climate change, and have responsibility for archiving and curation of the
              cores.  It is expected that these studies will all compliment each other and be
              published in various joint  formats in attempts to extract the causes and
              effects that link various geologic processes during a period of major global
              climate change.
