Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Theory of Statistical Estimation and Stochastic Models
               for Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9404114

Award Number: 9404114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucien M. Le Cam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Sodium channels are large proteins that traverse the membranes of nerves.
              They are responsible for controlling the motion of sodium ions into the nerve
              cell and thereby play a major role in generation of nerve signals. With
              adequate, sophisticated, apparatus, one can take recordings of the successive
              passages of a ionic channel into open or closed position. Stochastic models
              have been suggested to explain the pattern of open and closed periods. They
              contain a number of adjustable parameters, which can be varied to obtain a good
              fit to experimental data. The methods of fit used up to now require extensive
              computer use. Also, they are unstable. We intend to taylor to this problem a
              simpler method described in 1990 by L. Le Cam and G.L. Yang The problem of
              assessing the uncertainty in the fitted equations is part of a general problem
              on which we are making some progress. The project has two parts. One is a
              detailed study of certain integrals that occur naturally in the evaluation of
              the performance of statistical estimates when one uses quadratic los functions.
              The integrals involve a denominator that is a convex combination of the
              probability measures attached to the experiment. One will study how the
              integrals vary when these convex combinations change. The second part is about
              statistical procedures to be used for the study of sodium channel in nerves.
              Various stochastic models for the functioning of these channels have been
              proposed. Standard statistical analyses proceed through the method of maximum
              likelihood, which, in this case is computationally cumbersome and unstable.
              Another procedure, due to Le Cam, is just as efficient and computationally much
              simpler. It is proposed to taylor it to the sodium channels situation and study
              what it can achieve there.
