Title       : RIA: Extensions of Learning Models and Applications to Signal Processing and
               Geometric Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9209577

Award Number: 9209577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev R. Kulkarni kulkarni@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              Recently there has been a great deal of work on formal models of               
              machine learning such as the probably approximately correct (or                
              PAC learning model.  This model is a precise framework attempting              
              to capture the notion of learning from examples.  Recent progress              
              in machine learning and statistical inference on paradigms such as             
              the PAC model has provided fundamental results on the amount of                
              data needed for function approximation in a completely                         
              nonparametric setting.  The applicability of these paradigms is                
              limited by the assumptions on the data gathering mechanisms and the            
              performance criteria.  Some of these assumptions will be relaxed               
              to allow the extended learning paradigm to be applied to areas such            
              as signal/image processing and geometric reconstruction.  The                  
              approach is to place mild assumptions on the function classes while            
              allowing more flexibility in the sampling and error criteria.                  
              Specifically, the extensions proposed are to allow deterministic               
              sampling strategies, sampling over noncompact domains, and learning            
              with respect to general performance criterion.  The extended model             
              will be applied to a variety of problems in signal processing and              
              geometric reconstruction to provide information complexity results             
              for some classical and new reconstruction/estimation problems.  In             
              the area of signal processing, the framework will be applied to                
              problems dealing with tomographic image reconstruction,                        
              multiresolution signal processing, and classical sampling theorems.            
              In the area of geometric reconstruction, applications to stochastic            
              geometry and shape form probing problems.  The approach will                   
              provide results on the fundamental capabilities and limitations of             
              reconstruction as well as sample size bounds for these                         
              applications.
