Title       : RIA: Alternate Representations of Stochastic Processes and Perturbation Analysis
               of Discrete-Event Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9209902

Award Number: 9209902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104984             (Estimated)
Investigator: 
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to extend the method of                           
              infinitesimal perturbation analysis (IPA) to large                             
              new classes of discrete-event dynamic systems                                  
              (DEDS), and thus make it a practical tool for                                  
              analysis and control of DEDS.   The current                                    
              consensus of the research community is that IPA is                             
              an effective tool, but quite limited in the range of                           
              systems to which it can be applied.  For example, it                           
              is generally inapplicable to systems with multiple                             
              classes of customers or systems with finite-capacity                           
              buffers.  But these features are central in many                               
              applications.  Thus IPA is widely regarded as an                               
              interesting technique, but not practically useful.  We                         
              claim that this is incorrect and that IPA can be                               
              applied quite generally.  We have developed                                    
              theoretical support for this claim;  the purpose of                            
              this research is to translate this theory into a                               
              practical "machinery" for implementing IPA.  Our                               
              approach is based on constructing continuous                                   
              measure-changing mappings on the sample path                                   
              space using an appropriate representation                                      
              (construction) of the process.  A key element is that                          
              we require continuity only for the performance                                 
              measure of interest, rather than an entire class of                            
              performance measures.  This allows a substantial                               
              weakening of the existing conditions for the                                   
              applicability of IPA.  The success of this research                            
              will represent a breakthrough in the performance-                              
              oriented analysis and control of DEDS, and                                     
              contribute substantially toward practical success in                           
              this area.
