Title       : Understanding Dispersal Polymorphisms in Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9209693

Award Number: 9209693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Denno rd12@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Ott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1176,
Abstract    :
              Dispersal polymorphism (the occurrence of migratory and flightless             
              forms in the same population) is a widespread phenomenon among                 
              insects.  For most insects including planthoppers (Homoptera:                  
              Delphacidae), there is a reproductive cost associated with                     
              dispersal ability as evidenced by the reduced fecundity and delayed            
              oviposition of migratory compared to flightless females.                       
              Corresponding information for males on the relationship between                
              dispersal ability and reproductive success is virtually absent.  As            
              a result, our understanding of the evolution, maintenance, and                 
              population consequences of variation in dispersal capability is                
              based almost exclusively on females.  Failure to establish fitness             
              differences between male wing forms challenges our current                     
              knowledge of the ecological and evolutionary basis for the                     
              existence of dispersal polymorphisms.  Several characteristics of              
              planthopper mating systems suggest the presence of costs associated            
              with migratory ability in males and that migratory and flightless              
              males contribute differentially to population dynamics at different            
              densities.  The research outlined herein seeks to elucidate                    
              intrinsic differences between migratory and flightless males of the            
              planthopper Prokelisia dolus in their 1) competitive ability (male             
              / male interactions, ability to locate mates, attractiveness to                
              females, 2) survivorship, propensity to disperse, ability to                   
              inseminate mates, and 3) mating success and contribution to                    
              population growth across a range of density conditions.  This                  
              research will supply the empirical basis for the development of                
              more general hypotheses (which include both male and females) to               
              examine the widespread phenomenon of dispersal polymorphism in                 
              insects.
