Title       : Segment- and Target-Related Embryogenesis of Identified Motor Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9209237

Award Number: 9209237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260183             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Jellies   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A pivotal issue in developmental neuroscience pertains to the                  
              mechanisms regulating the choice of the correct target by a nerve              
              cell.  This issue will be addressed by examining the embryonic                 
              assembly of a functional neural circuit in the medicinal leech,                
              Hirudo medicinalis.  The stereotyped adult circuitry of the leech              
              heart excitor motor neurons that drive precisely coordinated                   
              rhythmic contractions of the heart tubes is particularly well                  
              understood.  However, this stereotyped circuitry arises as result              
              of initial axonal projections to several target regions followed by            
              a retraction of the incorrectly positioned axons.  The processes of            
              initial outgrowth and later retraction of these axons will be                  
              investigated using light, laser and electron microscopic                       
              visualization, as well as intracellular electrophysiology.                     
              Parallel experiments will determine the developmental time course              
              of functional synaptic connectivity between central interneurons               
              that ultimately drive the coordinated behavior and the heart                   
              excitor neurons.  The simplicity of this system will allow                     
              exploration across several levels of analysis, from morphology to              
              behavior, of the developmental interactions that occur during the              
              assembly of a simple, but behaviorally relevant neural circuit.  It            
              is expected that an understanding of the principles that underlie              
              the development of specificity in this system will pertain to more             
              complex systems, since the developmental strategy of initial axonal            
              exuberant growth followed by retraction is commonly used by                    
              embryonic neurons in higher species as well.
