Title       : Experimental Studies on Primate Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9209004

Award Number: 9209004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack T. Stern   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall L. Susman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jungers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this research is to determine the adaptive            
              significance of muscular and bony features distinguishing humans               
              from nonhuman primates, and distinguishing one primate from                    
              another. This will enable a more accurate reconstruction of the                
              lifestyles of ancient primates, particularly the ancestors of                  
              humans. Most of the influential theories about ancestral primate               
              ways of life and the adaptive significance of features                         
              distinguishing humans, apes, and monkeys have relied on the                    
              determination of structural differences between living primates                
              that differ in their behaviors. But, the link between structure and            
              behavior remains tenuous without the missing element of function.              
              The approach of the investigators provides this missing element by             
              concentrating on the in vivo physiological technique of telemetered            
              electromyography (combined, when appropriate, with force-plate and             
              motion analyses). Studies conducted on nonhuman primates and humans            
              during regular locomotor and voluntary behaviors will establish the            
              actual roles of individual muscles in these behaviors and provide              
              data necessary to explain many of the muscular and bony                        
              specializations of primates, including humans. Explanation of bony             
              features will promote more accurate reconstruction of fossil                   
              lifestyles; explanations of uniquely human muscular traits will                
              point to those behaviors that led to the major anatomical                      
              reconstruction characterizing our species.
