Title       : Improving Expert Elicitation Through Studies of Climate Change and Its Possible
               Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9209783

Award Number: 9209783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105002             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Granger Morgan granger.morgan@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The science of global climate change and its impacts is dominated              
              by uncertainty.  Public policy decisions require near term                     
              scientific judgments, since the scientific facts will not be                   
              known for years.  This study conducts research on the elicitation              
              of expert judgment in the context of the global ecological                     
              impacts of climate change.  The study generalizes elicitation                  
              methods by asking experts to structure the issues, propose a                   
              model, and the give judgments about the important parameters of                
              their model.  This approach gives the experts more latitude to                 
              express their views compared to prior work in expert judgment.  A              
              two-stage elicitation process is used to elicit the expert's                   
              views about: (1) the structure, the metric(s), and the value of                
              key uncertain coefficients that should be used in framing the                  
              problem; (2) the reliability of key findings in their field of                 
              expertise and in other fields upon which their work depends                    
              (including the reliability of consensus reports); (3) their                    
              sensitivity to and ability to identify the potential sources of                
              surprise; and (4) the amount of reduction in uncertainty (in                   
              their field of expertise and in other climate change related                   
              issues) that could be achieved with various amounts of research                
              investment.  These elicitations will help us to define the                     
              character of uncertainties dominating climate change issues                    
              better, shed light on how the reliability of knowledge and                     
              research is gauged within the scientific community, and provide                
              guidance on research allocations.
