Title       : Population Genetics of DNA Polymorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1997   
File        : a9209262

Award Number: 9209262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn B. Jorde lbj@odin.genetics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah Med
	      
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84132    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Geneological records are an important resource for the study of                
              human genetic change over short periods of time.  The primary                  
              objective of this research is to utilize the archival records of               
              the Aland Islands, Finland, for such two such analyses.  First,                
              excellent archival records are available for the past 250 years,               
              facilitating long-term demographic studies as well as the                      
              construction of multigenerational pedigrees.  Second, this                     
              population has high frequencies of several genetic diseases that               
              are very rare in other populations.  The investigators are                     
              interested in determining the evolutionary forces responsible for              
              these disease frequencies.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The initial goal of this project is to complete the computer                   
              entry of archival records from Aland so that they can be used in a             
              computerized construction of pedigrees for the entire population.              
              This will allow the analysis of inbreeding levels, nonrandom                   
              mating, the degree of genetic isolation, and the extent to which               
              individual ancestral founders may have made disproportionate                   
              genetic contributions to the current generation. These studies will            
              have evolutionary significance, and they will help to explain why              
              the Aland Islands population has a high incidence of some genetic              
              diseases.
