Title       : Intelligent, Robust Self-Tuning Control of Interactive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9209808

Award Number: 9209808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89917              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay H. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There is a rising need for high-performance, multi-variable                    
              control in the chemical process industries to enable                           
              corporations to maintain a competitive edge during rapidly                     
              changing market conditions and increasing concerns for energy                  
              conservation and environmental protection.  These new                          
              controllers will have to deal with the following factors:  (1)                 
              more control problems involving highly interactive processes                   
              with a large number of inputs and outputs will result from                     
              increased plant integration; (2) more control problems will                    
              involve constraints since the economic optimization forces the                 
              plant to be operated close to the intersection of constraints;                 
              and (3) control problems will embody more nonlinear/time-                      
              varying aspects because of frequently changing operating                       
              conditions and increased number of sensors and actuators.                      
              Three serious issues arise for designing control systems for                   
              large-scale, interactive processes subject to constraints:                     
              ensuring robustness to model uncertainty, minimizing the                       
              effects of constraints and monitoring and maintaining                          
              performance of the control system in the face of a changing                    
              plant environment with minimal human intervention.                             
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to develop an integrated                      
              recursive-identification/control technique that is needed to                   
              generate high-performance, multi-variable controllers with the                 
              capability of adapting to changes in the environment.  A                       
              recursive identification algorithm that provides a family of                   
              possible models and a predictive control algorithm minimizing                  
              the "worst-case" error for all possible models are to be                       
              developed.  The recursive identification algorithm is to be                    
              equipped with the intelligence to reset the model parameters                   
              and uncertainty bounds appropriately from on-line data when a                  
              sudden change in the plant dynamics occurs.  Together they                     
              comprise a multi-variable, self-tuning control algorithm that                  
              can maintain high and robust performance despite little a                      
              priori information on the plant dynamics and changing                          
              operating conditions.  A novel model uncertainty                               
              quantification method based on the "finite impulse response                    
              (FIR)" model structure is to be employed.  The research effort                 
              will span a wide array of system and control technology                        
              including identification, robust control, predictive control,                  
              robust control and artificial intelligence, and involve a                      
              comprehensive blend of theory, experimentation and simulation.
