Title       : Implicit Learning of Sequential Inputs: Developing a Computational Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9209432

Award Number: 9209432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Elman jelman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many of the most important things people learn are learned without             
              explicit instruction; often, people are not even aware that they               
              are learning something.  One of the most dramatic examples of this             
              phenomenon is language.  Virtually all speakers of a language learn            
              to speak and understand before formal instruction even begins, and             
              the learning process seems to be largely unaffected by attempts of             
              adults to guide it.  This style of learning contrasts with the more            
              explicit learning which also occurs when people consciously attempt            
              to master a domain, and which typically involves explicit                      
              formulation and testing of hypotheses.  Although considerable                  
              research has been carried out on explicit learning, implicit                   
              learning has been investigated only recently.  Furthermore, most of            
              this research has been experimental, with relatively little work               
              focussed on developing theories or computational models.                       
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to develop both a theory and a                 
              testable computational model of implicit learning of sequential                
              behaviors.  The research will use experimental techniques to ask               
              the following questions:  Under what conditions is implicit                    
              learning triggered?  Are there domains in which implicit learning              
              is more effective than explicit learning?  What are the constraints            
              on the types of things which can be learned with implicit learning?            
              A second component of the research will focus on trying to                     
              understand the possible mechanism for implicit learning by                     
              developing a computational model.  This model, based on an                     
              artificial neural network architecture proposed by Elman, has been             
              shown to have interesting properties which resemble the behaviors              
              of humans engaged in implicit learning tasks.                                  
                                                                                             
              Elaboration of this model should allow for better understanding of             
              the circumstances which facilitate learning of domains such as                 
              language and might make it possible to structure training                      
              environments in order to maximize learning.  This work should also             
              provide a foundation for the construction of machine-based systems             
              for learning domains currently only well-mastered by humans.
