Title       : Cellular Receptor(s) for Herpes Simplex Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9209999

Award Number: 9209999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Oveta Fuller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the process of fusion between cells               
              and Herpes simplex virus (HSV). This is a pH-independent mechanism             
              and is different from pH-dependent endocytosis. The cells to be                
              used are human embryonic lung (HEL) cells, which are highly                    
              susceptible to HSV infection, and X cells ?mammalian, non-human                
              primary epithelial cells!, which produce low yields of infectious              
              HSV. It is postulated that two types of attachment by the virus to             
              the cell may be necessary for successful fusion. Heparan sulfate               
              has been shown to be important in attachment and infection of HSV;             
              its presence in X cells will be determined. HEL cells may contain              
              another molecule necessary for fusion which is lacking in X cells;             
              fusions will be made at various cell ratios to see whether levels              
              of infectivity are altered. Additionally, genomic DNA from HEL                 
              cells will be transfected into X cells along with a selectible                 
              marker, to see if the X cells then become susceptible to HSV.                  
              Antibodies which inhibit infection of human cells by HSV will also             
              be prepared.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Herpes simplex virus is a human pathogen; other members of the same            
              family are major animal pathogens. Not all cell types are equally              
              susceptible to HSV infection. This proposal is to study the                    
              mechanism by which HSV and cells undergo fusion and allow the virus            
              to enter and infect the cells. Two types of attachment sites may be            
              needed for the virus to infect successfully. One component (heparan            
              sulfate) is known to be important in cell-virus attachment; its                
              presence on a cell type which is not very sensitive to the virus               
              will be determined. If a second type of molecule is present on                 
              susceptible cells and not on resistant cells, it should be possible            
              to fuse these cells in different ratios by known techniques, then              
              see what level of HSV infection results. DNA from susceptible cells            
              will be inserted into resistant cells, to see whether they become              
              susceptible to infection. Antibodies which block HSV entry into                
              cells will also be prepared. The information will add to knowledge             
              of the general properties which allow membranes to fuse in many                
              cellular processes.
