Title       : Conductance of Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate/calcium Polyphosphate Complexes in Planar
               Bilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9209364

Award Number: 9209364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosetta N. Reusch RNREUSCH@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9294,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the properties of complexed poly-                 
              hydroxybutyrate/calcium polyphosphate and non-covalently associated            
              proteins in planar lipid bilayers. There is preliminary evidence               
              that this membrane domain may be involved in calcium regulation,               
              based on spectrofluorometric studies in cell cultures and single               
              cells. The complex is widespread in prokaryotes and may be present             
              in mitochondria of eukaryotes. It is hypothesized to act by                    
              solvating polyanionic salts and forming ion-conducting complexes               
              which could result in the removal of calcium from the cell, with               
              simultaneous removal of phosphate. The voltage-dependent calcium               
              conductance of the complex from E. coli will be studied in planar              
              lipid bilayers. The cation selectivity and the action of channel               
              blocking agents will also be determined.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Bacteria contain large amounts of a complex of polyhydroxybutyrate             
              and calcium polyphosphate. The composition of this complex suggests            
              that the polyhydroxybutyrate could solvate polyanionic (negatively             
              charged) complexes and allow them to move through the helical                  
              channel which is thought to be formed, thus removing calcium and               
              polyphosphate from the interior to the exterior. This possibility              
              can be examined by putting the complex into a planar lipid bilayer,            
              which can be used as a model of the plasma membrane of cells, and              
              changing the conditions in the environment. The ionic composition              
              and the electrical charge applied will both be varied, and the                 
              effects of these variations will be assessed. It seems likely that             
              this complex is also present in higher organisms, and may function             
              in regulation of calcium. Since calcium concentration is very                  
              important in cellular function, these studies should be useful in              
              understanding a new mechanism for varying intracellular calcium.
