Title       : Studies on De Novo Purine Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9209885

Award Number: 9209885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Caperelli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to study the enzymes involved in de novo purine               
              biosynthesis and their regulation. There is now genetic evidence               
              that three enzyme activities of de novo purine biosynthesis reside             
              on a single polypeptide chain. The protein has been isolated from              
              a murine lymphoma cell line in low yield and characterized as to               
              size, formyl group donor, trifunctionality, and kinetic mechanism              
              of glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase (GART). The studies               
              will now be extended to use molecular biology techniques to prepare            
              the human trifunctional protein in high yield from bacteria, to                
              prepare an expression vector to obtain only the GART domain from               
              bacteria and then do site-directed mutagenesis of it, and to try to            
              crystallize both the trifunctional protein and the GART domain to              
              do structural studies in the presence of substrate analogs which               
              are dead-end inhibitors. These carbocyclic nucleotide analogs are              
              being synthesized at present, and will be used to analyze the                  
              mechanism of conversion of IMP, the product of the de novo purine              
              synthesis, to AMP and GMP. The activity of AMP and GMP analogs and             
              their 2-deoxy analogs will be used to study the mechanisms of                  
              ribonucleotide reductase, RNA polymerase, and DNA polymerase.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Synthesis of purines de novo is very important metabolically. While            
              most enzymes catalyze only a single reaction, it appears that three            
              successive reactions, involving transfer of two formyl groups, are             
              catalyzed by the same protein. This protein has been isolated from             
              mouse lymphoma cells, but the yield was very low. Molecular biology            
              techniques will be used to prepare both the trifunctional protein              
              and the GART domain. Residues thought to be important in the GART              
              catalytic activity will be changed to other, known residues, to see            
              their importance. Attempts will be made to crystallize both the                
              entire protein and the GART domain, and studies using substrate                
              analogs will be carried out to determine what the protein and                  
              protein fragment look like when they are in their active forms.
