Title       : A Laboratory Experimental Investigation of Institutional Influences on Political
               Economic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9209441

Award Number: 9209441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Plott cplott@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project continues the development and application of                      
              laboratory experimental methods in the broad field of political                
              economy and on the principles that govern the behavior of                      
              interdependent and changing systems begun under earlier NSF                    
              grants.  There will be an intensified focus on the                             
              interdependence and dynamic behavior of complicated systems, and               
              on new institutional arrangements that facilitate the efficient                
              use of information and the reduction of uncertainty.  This                     
              project will play a leadership role in using experimental methods              
              as testbeds for the types of institutional changes currently                   
              under consideration as a response to the challenges posed by                   
              global environmental change.  This project will also contribute                
              to our understanding of the way decisions are made under                       
              uncertainty with irreversibilities and potentially catastrophic                
              consequences for future generations.                                           
                                                                                             
              Research projects can be grouped into five categories: 1) those                
              that focus primarily on the interdependence of activities of                   
              economic processes; 2) those in which information plays a central              
              role; 3) those that focus more narrowly on the properties of                   
              equilibria that occur in markets; 4) those that involve the                    
              "testbedding" of new institutions; and 5) experimental technology              
              development.  The research on experimental technology development              
              is especially exciting because it will make a sophisticated                    
              experimental system capable of supporting a very wide range of                 
              experiments freely available for a broad audience of researchers.              
              Under the previous grant a manual and diskette were produced and               
              disseminated for a computerized laboratory market system.  The                 
              package included programs for creating and executing experiments,              
              programs for viewing and processing data, and programs for                     
              training subjects.  The technology development effort will now                 
              turn to processes with political elements.  Since politics is                  
              frequently about the choices of institutions and processes, any                
              new software should be capable of facilitating experiments in                  
              which institutional evolution can take place.
