Title       : Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1994   
File        : a9209940

Award Number: 9209940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60662              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Atman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Effective risk management often requires effective risk                        
              communication.  Risk communicators cannot afford to assume that                
              those who receive their communication do so with a tabula rasa.                
              Readers use their prior knowledge to organize and understand new               
              information. Both the contents and organization of readers' prior              
              knowledge affect how they interpret new information.  Therefore                
              risk communication should be more effective if it (1) addresses                
              prior misconceptions, and (2) takes into account the readers'                  
              goals, prior knowledge, and cognitive limitations in processing new            
              information.  In the context of risk communication, these                      
              propositions have not been adequately evaluated.  This project                 
              attempts to fill this gap.                                                     
              The first study examines several designs for dispelling                        
              misconceptions about global climate change and 60 Hertz electric               
              and magnetic fields.  The second study examines the influence of               
              text structure and text comprehension aids on risk communication               
              effectiveness.  The third study integrates the results of the first            
              two into two complete risk communications that differ structurally.            
              Multiple measures are proposed to evaluate risk communication                  
              effectiveness in all studies, including performance on recall,                 
              recognition, and problem-solving tasks.                                        
              The project will produce empirically tested documents and                      
              evaluation instruments as well as practical guidelines for risk                
              communicators.  Contributions to risk perception, risk                         
              communication and risk communication evaluation research are                   
              anticipated.
