Title       : Neural Basis of Contextual Fear Conditioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9209646

Award Number: 9209646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymon Glantz                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. LeDoux ledoux@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              When exposed to a painful or threatening stimulus, our brains form             
              neural associations that link the painful or threatening stimulus              
              to other innocuous environmental cues that are present and that                
              might later serve as warning signals.  The process of forming such             
              associations is referred to as fear conditioning.  Some of the                 
              innocuous cues that get conditioned are in the foreground and are              
              closely associated with the pain or threat, whereas others are in              
              the background.  The neural system underlying the conditioning of              
              fear responses to specific foreground cues, such as a tone paired              
              with footshock, is well understood and involve the amygdala.                   
              However, until recently, little was known about how fear reactions             
              come to be coupled to background or contextual stimuli.  In recent             
              studies Dr. LeDoux found that lesions of hippocampus or amygdala               
              interfered with contextual conditioning.  The purpose of the                   
              proposed studies is to use state-of-the-art anatomical,                        
              physiological, and behavioral methods to understand how neural                 
              interactions between amygdala and hippocampus might contribute to              
              contextual fear conditioning.  Specifically, Dr. LeDoux will                   
              explore the anatomical connections (afferents and efferents)                   
              underlying the contribution of the hippocampal formation to                    
              contextual fear conditioning.  These studies are likely to be                  
              important in understanding a host of complex emotional learning                
              phenomena.***                   //
