Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Several Questions in Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9209586

Award Number: 9209586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiangang "Jim" Dai   (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore P. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research involves the mathematical theory of                         
              probability and its application, and consists of largely                       
              independent investigations by two principal investigator,                      
              Professors Dai and Hill.  Professor Dai's research will mainly                 
              focus on queueing networks, which arise from computer networks                 
              and manufacturing systems.  It includes justification of the                   
              Brownian approximation for multiclass queueing networks,                       
              understanding network performance when it is heavily loaded, and               
              computation of stationary distribution of a reflected Brownian                 
              motion.  The ultimate goal is to develop a robust set of computer              
              software tools that can accurately and efficiently predict the                 
              performance of a wide class of queueing networks.  Professor                   
              Hill's research includes: optimal stopping problems, especially                
              order selection and minimax rules; partitioning or fair-division               
              problems in probability and statistics; one-sided limit laws and               
              probability bounds, especially for means and quantiles; and                    
              fusions of probabilities and their relationship to dilation,                   
              convex domination and martingales.                                             
                   The principal investigators will carry out research in both               
              theoretical and applied aspects of probability.  The more applied              
              topics include investigating the performance of queueing networks              
              (inter-connected service facilities populated by randomly                      
              arriving customers with random amounts of service requirements)                
              which arise from computer networks and manufacturing systems, and              
              investigating optimal stopping theory (sequential analysis of                  
              time dependent random processes such as pollution levels in a                  
              city or stock prices).  At one extreme, this research is aimed at              
              developing practical computer software tools that can accurately               
              and efficiently predict the performance of a wide class of random              
              systems, and at the other extreme it is aimed at discovering new               
              basic mathematical theorems in abstract spaces and settings.
