Title       : Petrology of Impact Breccias from Manson Drill Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1992  
File        : a9209818

Award Number: 9209818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark K. Reagan mark-reagan@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1575,1581,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Cores drilled into the central peak region of the K-T                     
              boundary-age Manson impact structure have encountered three major              
              impact breccias.  The shallowest is a sedimentary clast breccia                
              with rare crystalline, melted or shocked clasts.  This is underlain            
              by a crystalline clast breccia with a glassy matrix followed by a              
              crystalline clast breccia with a sandy matrix.  Shock-metamorphosed            
              and shock-melted materials are common in both crystalline breccias.            
              This study will investigate the petrology of these  breccias and               
              related breccias encountered by new drilling, and will develop                 
              models for their emplacement and subsequent deformation.  It will              
              be conducted by University of Iowa personnel in conjunction with               
              the Iowa Department of Natural Resources-Geological Survey Bureau              
              (IDNR-GSB).  This study promises to enhance understanding of                   
              cratering processes at the Manson site as well as provide                      
              information about the nature of ejecta that may have been                      
              incorporated into K-T boundary sediments worldwide.  Thin-sections             
              used in this study will be cut from core allocated to the IDNR-                
              GBS and petrographically examined to determine clast types, sizes,             
              and shapes as well as the nature of matrix materials.  Optically               
              obscure clasts and matrix materials will be identified using SEM-              
              EDS and XRD techniques.  Changes in clast and matrix abundances                
              with depth will be quantified by point-counting.  Electron                     
              microprobe analysis will be used to characterize changes in mineral            
              and glass phase compositions with depth.  These data will be                   
              stored, manipulated and graphically displayed using standard soft-             
              ware running on IBM-PD2 computers.  It will be made available to               
              other Manson researchers when it is compiled.
