Title       : Studies in Cognitive Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9209741

Award Number: 9209741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rochel Gelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will focus on the acquisition of knowledge underlying            
              understanding of mathematics and science.  One set of studies will             
              develop further Gelman's commitment to achieving a good description            
              of the kinds of understandings that children have when they start              
              their school math and science lessons.   A second set of studies               
              will pursue the fact that these early understandings sometimes do              
              and sometimes do not facilitate further learning about mathematics             
              and science.  The research will be concerned especially with the               
              conditions under which early knowledge acts more like a barrier to,            
              as opposed to a support for, further learning.  To illustrate, many            
              elementary school children read fractions as if these kinds of                 
              symbols are novel ways of writing whole numbers; for example when              
              asked to read 1/2, they say  "one and two" or "one plus two, that              
              is three", or even "12."  Similarly, they will say that 1/4 is more            
              than 1/2 because "four is more than two" or 2.09 is more than 29               
              because 209 is more than 29.  The research will investigate ways to            
              build understanding of why rational numbers are different from                 
              count numbers, that is that fractions are governed by different                
              rules of mathematics than are the positive count numbers.  There               
              are several reasons to look forward to these efforts.  First,                  
              understanding of fractions is related to understanding of a range              
              of important ideas, including division, measurement, and the notion            
              of equal units, and so on, just the kind of concepts one would                 
              expect to be included in a definition of mathematical literacy.                
              Second, it is well known that fractions are a watershed for                    
              students; those who do master them mathematically go on to learn               
              more mathematics, while those who do not have special trouble even             
              with algebra.  Additionally, these studies will offer insight into             
              the more general need to understand how conceptual change can take             
              place.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research's focus on the contrast between initial learnings                
              that lead readily to further concept acquisition and those that                
              take special efforts to surpass the boundaries of what is already              
              known will offer important insights on the kind of environments                
              that are needed to encourage and support a learner's advance to                
              scientific and mathematical literacy, a knowledge state that                   
              reflects the ability to understand and use the relevant concepts as            
              well as their related symbols and terms.  Already, Gelman's                    
              progress with these research questions has led to the development              
              by others of a curriculum that embeds science instruction into a               
              High School English as a Second Language program.  As a result,                
              students are acquiring understanding of scientific terms they will             
              encounter when they start science classes.
