Title       : The U.S. GLOBEC Office: The Coordinating Office of the Scientific Steering
               Committee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1993      
File        : a9209223

Award Number: 9209223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $768524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              U.S. GLOBec (GLOBal Ocean ECosystem--a part of the U.S. global                 
              change program) is a scientific effort designed to evaluate the                
              consequences of global climate change, and the concomitant changes             
              in physical transports in the sea, on the sustainability of animal             
              production in the ocean.  The program seeks to understand how                  
              physical processes influence the success of individual animals in              
              the sea--their feeding, growth, reproduction, and survivorship.                
              Models of global climate can then be used to relate global change              
              to changes in regional ocean physics and, subsequently, changes in             
              regional physics to modifications at the spatial scales that                   
              influence individual organisms.  Effects on zooplankton life stages            
              will be emphasized because so many marine animals undergo at least             
              one planktonic life stage and because the planktonic size classes              
              are most at the mercy of the physics of their fluid environment.               
                                                                                             
              This project seeks to maintain a U.S. GLOBEC Coordinating Office to            
              carry out the many functions necessary for such a large inter-                 
              disciplinary program.  The tasks of such an office fall into                   
              four broad categories.  First, planning and coordination activities            
              associated with the efforts--largely meetings--of the Scientific               
              Steering Committee (SSC).  Second, specifics of logistics and                  
              support for the SSC.  Third, communications with the large and                 
              diverse GLOBEC community in the U.S. (and overseas)--involving both            
              physical and biological oceanographers, as well as fisheries                   
              specialists.  Finally, a new endeavor, planning and coordination               
              with the recently-formed international program.                                
                                                                                             
              Professor Thomas M. Powell will assume the chairmanship of the U.S.            
              GLOBEC SSC before 1 May 1992.  The Coordinating Office will move to            
              its new home, at Powell's institution, in the Division of                      
              Environmental Studies at the University of California, Davis.
