Title       : Conference on Bootstrapping from Speech to Syntax, Providence, RI, January
               15-17, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1992       
File        : a9209461

Award Number: 9209461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20377              (Estimated)
Investigator: James l. Morgan MORGAN@BROWNCOG.BITNET  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Demuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Acquiring the syntactic code that mediates between sound and                   
              meaning is one of the primary tasks that children face in                      
              learning language.  In inducing such a code children must use                  
              information available in the speech that they hear and the events              
              that they witness in combination with preprogrammed constraints                
              on syntactic hypotheses.  The process of induction has come to be              
              called "bootstrapping" in the acquisition literature.                          
                                                                                             
              Previously, the speech streem has been largely overlooked as a                 
              potential source of information about linguistic structure.                    
              Recently, however, an increasing number of scholars in a range of              
              disciplines have begun to investigate the relationship between                 
              input speech and the acquisition of syntax.  These researchers                 
              include theoretical and computational linguists, acousticians,                 
              speech pathologists, and psychologists and cognitive scientists                
              specializing in speech perception and language acquisition.                    
                                                                                             
              Unfortunately, most of these researchers work in relative                      
              isolation, having little opportunity for contact with those from               
              other disciplines.  It is time to bring them together, that they               
              might share insights and chart directions for future research in               
              this vitally important new area of research.  PIs Morgan and                   
              Demuth are therefore organizing a working conference on                        
              bootstrapping from speech to syntax.  The proceedings of the                   
              conference will be published.
