Title       : Neurobiology of Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9209437

Award Number: 9209437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio A. Nunez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mammalian suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus is the               
              anatomical substrate for a circadian biological clock that controls            
              many overt rhythms in physiology and behavior.  The mechanism(s)               
              responsible for the generation of circadian rhythmicity by the                 
              suprachiasmatic nucleus is (are) unknown.  It is known, however,               
              that the ability to generate action potentials is not necessary for            
              the workings of the circadian clock.  Therefore, other forms of                
              intercellular communications must mediate circadian-rhythm                     
              generation.  Dr. Nunez will examine the possibility that the                   
              interaction between neurons and glial cells of the suprachiasmatic             
              nucleus is critical.  Using electronmicroscopy, he will determine              
              whether plasticity in glial cell morphology over the circadian                 
              cycle impacts on inter-neuronal communications and, thus, impose               
              circadian rhythmicity on the neural outputs of the suprachiasmatic             
              nucleus.  The concept of biological timing rivals that of                      
              homeostasis as an organizing principle in contemporary biology.                
              Understanding the basic neural mechanisms may lead to treatments               
              that could help solve problems caused by jet lag, shift work and               
              sleep disorders in the elderly. Indeed, in so far as circadian                 
              rhythm studies will ultimately have an impact on virtually all                 
              areas of human endeavor distributed across the seasons and phases              
              of the day, this work may have a direct effect on the nation's                 
              scientific and engineering research, education and human resources             
              bases.
