Title       : Forming Coherent Impressions of Personality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9209986

Award Number: 9209986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah E. Hampson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Research Inst
	      
	      Eugene, OR  97401    /   -

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              The impressions we form of other people affect our interactions                
              with them.  Previous research has suggested that people strive to              
              form impressions of others that are uniform and consistent.  It                
              seems that our impressions of others tend to be black or white,                
              and gray areas make us so uncomfortable that we work hard to                   
              reinterpret or ignore information that is contrary to our                      
              monochrome perception.  However, when people rate the                          
              decriptiveness of traits for themselves and other, they make                   
              inconsistent trait attributions.  The goal of this research is to              
              understand the paradox that coherent impressions of personality                
              nonetheless contain inconsistencies.  These studies will                       
              establish how the use of different kinds of inconsistent traits                
              is affected by familiarity and liking for the target, and by the               
              domain of personality being described.  Inconsistencies in self-               
              descriptions will be compared with inconsistencies in                          
              descriptions of others.  A series of principles of coherent                    
              impression formation will be tested for how perceivers retain                  
              inconsistent beliefs in coherent impressions of targets'                       
              personalities, including their own.  The research will contribute              
              to knowledge about impression formation, test basic theories of                
              how social concepts are combined and examine differences between               
              personality descriptions of the self and others.  The research                 
              will result in a theory of impression formation that reflects the              
              complex reality of the way we perceive ourselves and other                     
              people.  This has implications for the effectiveness of                        
              interactions in the workplace, at school, and at home.
