Title       : Marine Species Protection Policies, Consequences for Trade and the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1992  
File        : a9209305

Award Number: 9209305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92553              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Bockstael   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              Societies in many developed nations are exhibiting strong                      
              preferences, through domestic legislation and international                    
              conventions, for the protection of marine mammals and endangered               
              marine species.  The effectiveness of these policies is unclear                
              given that other parts of the world, notably the developing                    
              countries and Japan, have quite different valuations for these                 
              global environmental resources relative to income.  The                        
              consequences of effective protection policies are also not well                
              understood.  Policies that protect these species at the expense                
              of considerable restrictions on the commercial harvest of fish                 
              have secondary implications.  Substitution to terrestrial-based                
              protein sources can have severe environmental effects.                         
              Additionally, many developing countries rely heavily on fish for               
              protein and foreign exchange.  Restrictions in their harvests                  
              could have serious welfare implications for poor coastal nations.              
                                                                                             
              This project has two objectives.  The first is a qualitative                   
              assessment of the effectiveness of U. S. and international                     
              policies regarding marine mammals and endangered marine species                
              that ultimately restrict commercial fishing for other non                      
              threatened species, with the objective of determining the impact               
              both on the protected species and on commercial harvests.  The                 
              second is a quantitative analysis of consumption and                           
              international trade in commercial fishery products potentially                 
              affected by the above policies, and their interrelation with                   
              consumption and trade in substitute protein sources.  The purpose              
              of this analysis is to determine the magnitude of the secondary                
              effects on the environment and the welfare of poor coastal                     
              nations.
