Title       : Stress Estimation to Mid-Crustal Depth in the KTB Drillhole and In Situ Stress
               and Heat Flow Measurements in Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9209120

Award Number: 9209120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Zoback zoback@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Knowledge of the magnitudes of stresses in the earth's crust              
              is fundamental to a broad range of problems of lithospheric                    
              mechanics.  This is a project to make in situ stress measurements              
              to ~10 km depth in the KTB scientific drillhole in cooperation with            
              the University of Karlsruhe.  It has never before been possible to             
              measure in situ stress at nearly mid-crustal depth.  If such                   
              measurements are successful, it will provide the opportunity to                
              test such fundamental concepts as the hypothesis that stress levels            
              in the brittle crust are in equilibrium with frictional strength               
              as defined by simple faulting theory and laboratory-determined                 
              values of the coefficient of friction.                                         
                                                                                             
                   In a related collaboration with the University of Karlsruhe               
              (and Geoforschung Zentrum (GFZ), in Potsdam, Germany and the U.S.              
              Geological Survey), the Principal Investigator will implement a new            
              research program in eastern Europe to measure in situ stress                   
              orientation and heat flow (as well as other geophysical                        
              measurements) in boreholes in eastern Europe and the former Soviet             
              Union.  The basic idea of this research is to utilize a nearly-                
              new (and nearly fully-outfitted) geophysical logging system                    
              acquired by GFZ for use in existing boreholes.  In situ stress                 
              orientation will be determined from detailed analysis of borehole              
              televiewer measurements.  Over time, these measurements will help              
              fill an extremely large gap in knowledge of stress orientations                
              and relative magnitudes.  The U.S. Geological Survey will                      
              collaborate in this effort as will investigators from the countries            
              in which the holes are located.
