Title       : Human Capital, Social Partitions, Cities and Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9209267

Award Number: 9209267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland J. Benabou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will study how human capital externalities lead                   
              individuals to coalesce into groups and will show that this self-              
              partitioning sheds light on a number of important issues: economic             
              segregation, the effectiveness and costs of education, the                     
              organization of cities, ghettos, labor productivity and long term              
              growth.  The project consists of three parts.                                  
                                                                                             
              The first one will develop a model of a city composed of several               
              communities, formalizing the links between residential choice,                 
              skills acquisition, and overall productivity.  It will show how                
              local externalities in human capital investment induce self-                   
              segregation by occupation, and how this affects the composition of             
              the labor force.  In particular it can lead other areas to drop out            
              of the labor force and become unproductive "ghettos."  The analysis            
              will show that underemployment is more extensive, the easier it is             
              for high-skilled workers to isolate themselves from others, but                
              that at the same time their attempts to do so may be self-                     
              defeating.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The second part will extend the analysis to two other issues                   
              concerning the structure and productivity of cities.  The first is             
              the value of local diversity in land uses and its tendency to self-            
              destruct under market pressures.  The second is the recent exodus              
              of firms, hence jobs and taxes, out of central cities into suburbs,            
              and its implications for employment and income distribution.                   
                                                                                             
              The third part will study the implications of group formation for              
              long term macroeconomic growth.  It will add to recent models of               
              endogenous growth by recognizing that individuals can choose the               
              group from which they receive human capital spillovers (school,                
              neighborhood, city, state), although at a price: land and other                
              rents on non-reproducible factors reflect the quality of the                   
              externality which group membership confers.
