Title       : Context and Memory in Associative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9209454

Award Number: 9209454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Bouton mbouton@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Memories often require the pulling together of different elements              
              of information.  "Associative learning" is the process by which                
              humans and other animals learn to connect, or associate,                       
              different elements, events, or concepts.  A fundamental form of                
              this process is classical conditioning.  Rats will learn that one              
              stimulus, such as a tone or a light, is associated with the                    
              occurrence of another stimulus, such as a food pellet or a mild                
              footshock; the tone or light will come to evoke behavior, such as              
              a mild fear, provided the subject has learned to associate that                
              stimulus with footshock and then remembers the stimulus-footshock              
              association.  This project will investigate memory and behavior                
              when stimuli are associated with conflicting events or stimuli                 
              (e.g., shock and food, or food and no food).  Previous research                
              has shown that memory and behavior in this situation is strongly               
              determined by the current "context," stimuli that are present in               
              the background, which can select between competing associations.               
              Behavior evoked by stimuli associated with multiple events can                 
              also change as the memories age over time.  The project will                   
              investigate how time and context influence memory and                          
              performance, and also how the effects of time and context might                
              interact.  By studying the effects of time and context on                      
              behavior over a range of related situations, the research will                 
              provide insight into how ambiguous information is stored,                      
              retrieved, and then expressed in behavior and emotional                        
              performance.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The research will have its primary impact on theories of                       
              learning, memory, and acquired motivation.  It will also be                    
              relevant to research on the neurobiology of learning and memory,               
              which has recently begun to identify biological processes in                   
              cells of the brain that may correspond to the learning and memory              
              processes investigated here.  The results will also have                       
              implications for cognitive-behavioral therapies of human behavior              
              disorders (e.g., drug dependence and anxiety), which often                     
              introduce new learning designed to conflict with cognition and                 
              behavior based on previous learning.
