Title       : Preferences, Beliefs and Behavior Under Subjective Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9209012

Award Number: 9209012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Machina mmachina@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project concerns the applicability of the classical theory of             
              choice under subjective uncertainty to individuals.  Two distinct              
              behavioral properties are implied in the classical paradigm.  The              
              first is the property of probabilistic sophistication, i.e., acts              
              are evaluated solely on the basis of their implied subjective                  
              probability distributions to an individual over outcomes.  The                 
              second property, expected utility maximization, maintains that                 
              these implied probability distributions over outcomes are ranked               
              by means of a von Neumann-Morganstern utility function and concerns            
              only the individual's attitudes toward risk.                                   
                                                                                             
              This research looks at individuals who are not probabilistically               
              sophisticated in that their choice behavior is neither derived from            
              nor observationally consistent with the existence of an underlying             
              subjective probability distribution over uncertain events.  Two                
              distinct but compatible analytical approaches to this problem are              
              studied.  The first characterizes probabilistic sophistication in              
              the absence of the expected utility hypothesis.  The second                    
              develops the notions of a local probability distribution and local             
              risk preferences and examines the extent to which these concepts               
              can be used to characterize the global properties of non-                      
              probabilistically sophisticated preferences.                                   
                                                                                             
              These analytical tools will then be used to explore the general                
              robustness of the concepts and results of the classical paradigm               
              to departures from probabilistic sophistication, and to study cases            
              of induced violations of probabilistic sophistication.  For                    
              example, group decision making with heterogeneous beliefs and                  
              behavior under incomplete information such as the problems of moral            
              hazard and adverse selection will be investigated.  This research              
              is very important because it tackles problems in an area central               
              to theoretical and practical research in economics and management              
              science.
