Title       : SGER: Laser Beam-Pulse Characterization Using Phase-Space Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9209081

Award Number: 9209081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Goldberg                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23068              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Siegman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory                              
              Research is to improve and generalize the present                              
              characterization and description of laser beam                                 
              properties or laser beam figures of merit to cover a                           
              broader range of laser beams and pulses, and to                                
              describe their propagation through ideal and real                              
              optical systems.  The new point of view is to use the                          
              phase-space approach for describing the beam                                   
              completely in both space and time, and to derive                               
              important figures of merit for the beam from this                              
              phase-space description.  This language relates                                
              different characteristics to each other, leading to a                          
              few overall measurable quantities for characterizing                           
              even a pulsed beam.  It follows that a description of                          
              the laser beams and pulses in phase-space will                                 
              provide new, more general overall information.  The                            
              experimental objective is to design and develop a                              
              device for measuring the overall laser beam                                    
              characteristics in a new fashion by providing direct                           
              access to phase-space characteristics, using suitable                          
              optical transforms and digital acquisition of phase-                           
              space information.  Such a device would present more                           
              complete information about either a pulsed or cw                               
              laser beam.  The main significance of the project is                           
              that:  it will provide a better description than                               
              presently available for laser beams, laser pulses and                          
              their propagation; it will generalize to beams with                            
              lower symmetry and also to pulsed laser beams the                              
              existing results for cw symmetric beams; and it will                           
              provide an experimental set-up for measuring the                               
              beam factors of merit directly in phase-space terms.
