Title       : Perceptual and Cognitive Processes in Identification and Categorization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9209411

Award Number: 9209411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190556             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Gregory Ashby ashby@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will study the perceptual and cognitive processes                
              involved in the identification and categorization of sets of visual            
              stimuli that vary on two or more physical dimensions.  The research            
              is motivated by decision-bound theory, which assumes there is                  
              variability in the perceptual information associated with repeated             
              presentations of every object or event.  The theory assumes that               
              the perceptual information obtained from any one presentation can              
              be described by a set of coordinate values along each of the                   
              relevant perceptual dimensions.  When learning to identify                     
              unfamiliar objects or events or when learning new categories,                  
              humans are assumed to construct decision boundaries that partition             
              the perceptual space into regions.  Each region is associated with             
              an object or event name or with the name of a category.  When a new            
              object is encountered, the person determines in which region the               
              percept has fallen and then identifies or categorizes the object by            
              the name associated with that region.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research will consist of four projects.  The first will                   
              measure the distribution of information available in a visually-               
              presented stimulus along the experimenter-defined stimulus                     
              dimensions.  The second will test for possible interactions between            
              different functional units in the visual cortex.  When incorporated            
              into decision-bound theory, the results of these two projects might            
              be used to construct machines that identify or categorize visual               
              stimuli as well as do humans.  The third project will study how                
              humans learn categories, by focusing on a number of alternative                
              descriptions of how category boundaries are learned.  The final                
              project will study the time it takes humans to make categorization             
              judgments.  In particular, the project will try to elucidate the               
              relation between response time and the positioning of the stimulus             
              representation in perceptual space and, specifically, on its                   
              relation to the exemplars of contrasting categories.  This                     
              knowledge will increase our understanding of how children learn to             
              read and name objects in their environment.
