Title       : Software Development Environment Supporting Formal Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9209873

Award Number: 9209873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty H. Cheng chengb@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9218,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Research into the development of software tools that support              
              formal methods is aimed at simplifying and providing assistance during         
              the development of correct software.  Using a formal specification             
              language to describe a problem facilitates the verification of                 
              software correctness through automated reasoning techniques.  In               
              earlier work, the principal investigator developed the SEED system             
              that used formal methods to synthesize a correct program from a formal         
              specification.                                                                 
                   The objective is to develop tools to support the use of formal            
              methods in all phases of software engineering including design,                
              specification, implementation, and maintenance.  In order to address           
              the correct development of complex and large systems, the project              
              focuses on the development of object-oriented software using formal            
              methods.                                                                       
                   The project comprises three parts.  First, developing a tool that         
              decomposes an informal problem description into formal specifications          
              with user assistance.  Next, investigating the development of a                
              graphical browser that applies algorithms to formal specifications to          
              determine reuse.  Finally, addressing the issues of incorporating the          
              benefits of formal methods to existing code through the development of         
              a tool that abstracts formal specifications from program code.  The            
              tools will be integrated into a software development environment  that         
              supports formal methods, thus, facilitating the construction of large,         
              correct software systems.
