Title       : Rational Machine Learning for AI Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9209394

Award Number: 9209394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald F. DeJong dejong@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This research seeks to build a theoretical framework for when             
              to learn.  Machine learning, which studies the automatic                       
              acquisition of new concepts, has largely focussed on developing                
              mechanisms for learning.  Questions such as "How can an AI computer            
              system come to form a general concept in response to a relatively              
              few observed training examples?"  and "What prior knowledge is                 
              required to support such concept acquisition?"  have dominated the             
              field.  However, it has become clear that the unbridled acquisition            
              of concepts (even correct concepts) can degrade the performance of             
              the AI system that they are intended to help.  In sophisticated                
              applications, such as arise in AI planning, a performance penalty              
              for learning can be the rule rather than the exception.  Thus,                 
              machine learning mechanisms cannot be successful unless suitably               
              restrained.  Unfortunately, the judgement of when to learn is                  
              itself complex.  The benefit of a new concept depends on features              
              of the performance system as well as the machine learning                      
              mechanism.  It can also be strongly influenced by the expected                 
              profile of tasks to be given to the performance system and by the              
              concepts that have previously been acquired.                                   
                                                                                             
                   The proposed research is intended to produce a fist theory of             
              rational learning.  The learning component of an AI system is a                
              rational learner if the AI system's behavior is guaranteed, on                 
              average, to be improved by the acquisition of any new concepts.                
              Such a theory must provide a general framework for the interactions            
              between a machine learning system, the performance system that                 
              employs the acquired concepts, and characteristics of the estimated            
              distribution of tasks.  The research will explore both empirical               
              and analytic approaches to estimating expected concept utility.                
              The area of planning will serve as a vehicle for the work, but the             
              results will likely be applicable to other performance systems.                
              Explanation-based methods form the nucleus of learning methods                 
              since it, more than the inductive approach, seems liable to the                
              phenomenon of detrimental learning.  The benefits of the research              
              will include an enumeration and taxonomy of the types of rational              
              learning.  It will shed light on which machine learning mechanisms             
              may be most useful to which type of AI systems, and represents some            
              first steps towards making machine learning a service area for the             
              rest of AI.
