Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9209327

Award Number: 9209327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid Daubechies   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                   Wavelet analysis is based on the existence of single                      
              functions whose dilations and translates form bases for function               
              spaces used in various areas of mathematics.  The theory as                    
              developed over the past decade has proved its worth through                    
              important applications to problems in signal processing, data                  
              compression, and seismic exploration, to name a few.  The                      
              advantages of wavelet decompositions of functions over more                    
              traditional harmonic analysis techniques lies in the ability of                
              properly chosen wavelets to remain local in time and frequency: a              
              function and its Fourier transform have representations whose                  
              coefficients depend only on the values of the function in small                
              neighborhoods distributed throughout space.  Most wavelet                      
              analysis focuses on the representation or approximation of                     
              functions defined on the entire line or throughout space.  There               
              is a need to develop wavelet analyses for functions restricted to              
              intervals.  That is one of the primary goals of this project.                  
              One cannot take a wavelet theory and simply restrict it to an                  
              interval.  The end points create obstacles which preclude the use              
              of a single wavelet.  At issue then is how efficiently can a                   
              wavelet theory be built on intervals in the sense of using the                 
              minimal number of auxiliary functions and maintaining the same                 
              qualities of the wavelet theory.                                               
                   One drawback of wavelets is their lack of symmetry.  This                 
              shortcoming can be overcome by using a construction of dual Riesz              
              bases of symmetric wavelets (one forfeits the use of a single                  
              wavelet to do all the work and replaces it by two).  The                       
              adaptation of wavelets to finite intervals also opens the                      
              possibility for the construction of dual bases in this context.                
              Very little work has been done in this direction to date,                      
              although applications to image processing appear to be very                    
              promising.  One simple approach to this dual basis construction                
              is to consider truncations of existing infinitely supported                    
              wavelets used in various applications and truncating them.  These              
              may provide interesting dual bases but they will only be of value              
              if their conditioning numbers can be held close to unity.  Work                
              will be done investigating various examples.
