Title       : A Study of Markets for Controlling Environmental Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9209370

Award Number: 9209370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Hahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Enterprise Inst
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              For many years, economists have speculated on the potential cost               
              savings that could accrue from applying market-based approaches,               
              such as emissions taxes and marketable emission rights, to                     
              controlling environmental risks.  Only recently, however, have                 
              regulatory agencies in developed countries begun to experiment                 
              with these approaches.  Most new applications are aimed at                     
              limiting a particular set of environmental hazards, such as air                
              or water pollution.  The implementation of these regulatory                    
              reforms provides a unique opportunity to examine how different                 
              market-based institutions perform in practice.  The research has               
              three main objectives: (1) to examine the evolution and                        
              performance of new market-based approaches for managing                        
              environmental risk critically; (2) to provide a more realistic                 
              framework for comparing alternative instruments for controlling                
              environmental risk; and (3) to develop rules that would help                   
              increase efficiency in environmental markets.  The research                    
              effort collects new data on the performance of environmental                   
              markets and uses these data to understand factors affecting the                
              performance of these markets better.  More realistic models of                 
              the impact of different regulatory approaches on environmental                 
              quality and control costs are expected to result from this                     
              analysis.
