Title       : Application of Adaptive Control Techniques to Intelligent/ Smart Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9209969

Award Number: 9209969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grazyna A. Pajunen pajuneng@acc.fau.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the application of                              
              adaptive control techniques in the development and                             
              analysis of structures imbedded with                                           
              intelligent/smart materials.  For example, structures                          
              such as a cantilever beam embedded with a bulk                                 
              material having "smart" properties will be                                     
              considered; and, the distributed actuator such as                              
              current, voltage and/or applied magnetic field will                            
              be used to control the properties of the smart                                 
              material so as to control/suppress the vibrations.                             
              We propose to use an embedded distributed sensor                               
              in conjunction with embedded distributed actuators                             
              to achieve the total internal sensing and motion                               
              control tasks.  By this, the spillover phenomena                               
              associated with a "truncated" model due to                                     
              neglected modes can be minimized.  Possible                                    
              applications of this work are in the fields of                                 
              aeronautics, space and atomic energy development.                              
              Materials for use under severe environmental                                   
              conditions not only should have high reliability, but                          
              functions such as self-diagnosis, damage resistance,                           
              self-repair, or notification of residual life should be                        
              provided to avoid accidents.  The project will                                 
              consist of the following steps:  Modeling and                                  
              analysis comprising the development and                                        
              implementation of parameter estimation algorithms,                             
              development of control policies concerning passive                             
              and active control of structures and updating                                  
              periodically material characteristics (smartly) to                             
              adjust the controller parameters (for adaptive                                 
              control).  Some new and novel techniques in the                                
              parameter estimation and adaptive control of                                   
              parameter-distributed system will be evolved on the                            
              basis of distributed actuators and sensors                                     
              measurements.
