Title       : Hetero Epitaxial Growth of Layered Metal Chalcogenides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9209652

Award Number: 9209652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fumio S. Ohuchi ohuchi@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a 1992 RIA Award.  It is proposed to                                   
              develop a new concept for fabricating hetero-                                  
              interface systems using van der Waals surfaces                                 
              of layered metal chalcogenide materials.  This                                 
              will be studied experimentally by growing                                      
              different kinds of layered metal chalcogenides                                 
              on top of each other by means of molecular                                     
              beam epitaxy, a process that has been referred                                 
              to as "van der Waals epitaxy".  Of particular                                  
              interest of this method is the ability to                                      
              fabricate atomically and electronically abrupt                                 
              hetero-interfaces without regard to their lattice                              
              matching requirement.  The epitaxial                                           
              conditions will be investigated in detail for                                  
              improving the quality of the thin films, and                                   
              the fundamental nucleation and growth of the                                   
              epitaxial layers will be investigated.  Due to                                 
              the sensitivity of the layer stacking sequence                                 
              to the properties of transition metal                                          
              dichalcogenides, we will develop a technique                                   
              to determine the "polytpism" of the growing                                    
              thin film using Reflection High Energy                                         
              Electron Diffraction oscillations.  The unique                                 
              nature of the hetero-interfaces fabricated by                                  
              this method will allow the investigation of the                                
              fundamental aspects related to the electron                                    
              transfer between metals and semiconductors,                                    
              from which rational design of Schottky device                                  
              structure will be explored.  Finally the growth                                
              of selected semiconducting layered metal                                       
              chalcogenide on GaAs will be investigated in                                   
              a view toward the development of newer                                         
              material systems.  The potential flexibility for                               
              constructing complex layered heterostructures                                  
              containing different materials selected for their                              
              specific material properties will constitute a                                 
              substantial breakthrough in heteroepitaxy                                      
              technology.
