Title       : SBIR Phase I: Phase Locking of High Power Fiber Laser Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9960029

Award Number: 9960029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99685              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Cheo p.cheo@att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anping Liu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PC Photonics Corporation
	      64 Windward Way
	      Waterford, CT  06385    203/443-4356

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I  proposal introduces an
              innovative idea to generate a very high brightness laser beam from a
              clad-pumped multicore fiber laser array embedded in a common low loss cladding
              with a unique 'isometric' structure. In a very low-loss cladding region, very
              strong evanescent-wave coupling among the fiber cores can provide the highest
              modal gain for the fundamental supermode. A technique has been introduced to
              reliably manufacture the isometric multicore fiber arrays. A computer model has
              been developed to calculate the far-field radiation patterns emitting from
              multicore fiber laser arrays arranged in isometric rings. Results indicate that
              a high brightness, diffraction limited laser beam in the far-field with an
              amplitude 40dB greater than the side lobes, can be obtained from isometric
              multicore phase locked fiber laser array in uni-phase with a V-value of <2 and
              a core separation of 1.5 times the core diameter. However, the remaining issues
              that need to be addressed in Phase I, are the conditions under which a stable
              oscillation can be maintained in uni-phase. Under the Phase I-SBIR, four tasks
              have been identified for the purpose of determining quantitatively all laser
              parameters and operating conditions for the establishment of a stable laser
              oscillation at the fundamental supermode from a hase-locked, clad-pumped fiber
              laser array. The results of this Phase I are crucial for the Phase II follow-on
              to construct and demonstrate a phase-locked fiber laser array with a high
              degree of confidence.

