Title       : SBIR Phase I: Band-gap Sensor for Wafer Temperature Mapping During Epitaxial
               Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9960363

Award Number: 9960363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99894              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Craig Info@stratonics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stratonics Inc
	      23151 Verdugo Drive Ste 114
	      Laguna Hills, CA  926531340    949/461-7060

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
              imaging instrument to measure the temperature distribution in epitaxial wafers
              grown on Galium Arsenide, GaAs, or Indium Phosphide, InP, substrates during
              Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) processing. Many world class companies are
              involved in GaAs manufacturing to target the wireless satellite and fiber optic
              communication market.  As fabrication facilities incorporate larger (6') and
              multiple wafer processing technology, the importance of temperature uniformity
              control becomes an increasingly critical issue.  High temperature uniformity is
              required to achieve electrical and optical quality of the epilayer and
              substrate temperature is one of the key process parameters during epitaxial
              growth. Models will be developed of the instrument and its application to GaAs
              temperature monitoring.  A prototype will be designed and constructed.  The
              response of the instrument will be examined in a furnace.  Additional
              requirements related to the detailed design of MBE chambers will be identified
              to establish a preliminary assessment of the feasibility of system integration
              as a monitor for real-time process control.  This technology will provide MBE
              and Metal-Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy (MOVPE) process developers with a tool to
              determine the temperature uniformity produced in new process chambers. 
     
              Over the past three decades, compound semiconductors have evolved from research
              laboratories and niche military applications to high volume commercial
              applications in wireless, satellite and fiber optic communications.  As a
              result of the rapid increase in demand in the 90's, the wafer size has
              increased from 2' to 4', and currently 6' wafer fabrication lines are being
              introduced in a number of facilities across the world.


