Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Functional Object Oriented Stochastic Modeling Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960937

Award Number: 9960937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Stern stern@sandiaview.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SandiaView Software
	      1009 Bradbury Drive SE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871064302    505/245-7400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1269,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a new
              framework for writing and executing stochastic programs. The work expands and
              generalizes the stochastic functional language originally proposed by Koller,
              McAllister, and Pfeffer at Stanford University. The goal is to implement a
              functional object oriented stochastic language for expressing probabilistic
              relationships over variables and objects. The output includes both joint and
              conditional probability distributions. The language provides a compact
              representation of Bayesian Belief Networks as well as a larger class of
              stochastic models. It enhances the power of Bayesian Belief Networks in several
              respects. It is more expressive, providing mechanisms for representing abstract
              relationships as well as functions for expressing model composition and model
              transformation. The language also supports an inference algorithm that is more
              efficient than standard Bayesian Belief Network algorithms. It achieves
              efficiency through lazy evaluation, context-sensitive inference, and compact
              factorization of conditional probability tables. This new language is an
              evolutionary step forward from Bayesian Belief Network formalisms in both
              expressive power and inference and will support stochastic modeling in entirely
              new domains of science and engineering. 
     Stochastic modeling and
              stochastic inference are useful in design, simulation and diagnosis, as well as
              in multiple aspects of decision support. If successful, this new generation of
              stochastic programming tools will have potential applications in: advanced
              engineering design; clinical data interpretation and diagnostic systems in
              medicine; diagnosis and predictive monitoring in industrial control systems;
              Market trend analysis and prediction for financial institutions; decision
              support for business, government and other organizations; scientific modeling
              of stochastic systems, and; genealogical analysis.

