Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reconfigurable and Scalable Fiber-Optic Ultra-High-Speed
               Multi-Media Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9960870

Award Number: 9960870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behzad Moslehi bm@ifos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Fiber Optic Sy
	      650 Vaqueros Avenue, A
	      Sunnyvale, CA  940853543    408/328-8610

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4090,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Intelligent Fiber
              Optic Systems (IFOS) addresses the next generation data networks which will
              require terabit information handling capability.  Future networks must be
              reconfigurable, highly secure and easily upgradable in both bit rate and number
              of nodes.  IFOS proposes to apply its extensive fiber optic expertise and its
              proprietary wavelength-division multiplexed (WDM) technology to the development
              of a reconfigurable high-speed fiber-optic backbone structure that supports the
              transmission of multiple data protocols between multiple network stations.  The
              approach is based on IFOS's all-fiber static and dynamic WDM network access
              designs, which offer high efficiency, compactness and low cost.  The strong
              multidisciplinary team for this project includes leading experts in fiber-optic
              devices, optoelectronic systems, and terabit networking.  In Phase I, the
              investigative team will construct a three-node, two-wavelength system with
              static access modules to demonstrate the feasibility of simultaneously
              transmitting different protocols such as ATM and Ethernet.  Phase I will form a
              basis for Phase II where dynamic access modules will be employed and the
              network will be expanded to more than 10 nodes and over 6 wavelengths to
              demonstrate network reconfigurability and scalability.  The ultra-fast IFOS
              approach will enhance efficiency in secure, ultra-high-capacity networking
              systems including Next Generation Internet (NGI) operation with gigabit and
              terabit bandwidths.

The market for fiber-optic networks is growing about 19%
              per year and will be reaching $18 billion in 2001.  Multi-protocol fiber
              backbones have applications in commercial platforms, such as enterprise
              networks, ships, airliners, automobiles and integrated manufacturing equipment.
               Each optical fiber can replace hundreds of wires resulting in substantial drop
              in costs and increase in performance.  The IFOS project will mesh well with the
              Internet-II and SuperNet (Tbps data rates) programs for the government-wide
              Next Generation Internet (NGI).

