Title       : SBIR Phase I: Microwave-Induced Non-Thermal Plasma for Volatile Organic Compound
               Emission Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9960175

Award Number: 9960175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Czeslaw Golkowski cg18@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Super-Pulse
	      1452 Hanshaw Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/255-6474

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Emissions of hazardous air pollutants (HAP's), specifically volatile organic
              compounds
(VOC's), are an increasing concern because they are major
              contributors to the predominant 
environmental problems facing us today such
              as: global warming, ozone depletion, and
photochemical smog.1-3 With the
              passage of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA),
which require increased
              levels of control for specific organic compounds, the
understanding and
              significant development of technologies for controlling these waste
streams
              have been mandated. Responding to the need to decrease VOC emission
              from
different technological processes, we propose the development of an
              innovative method for
an effective, low cost destruction and removal of VOC's.
              Unlike other conventional
methods which burn VOC by raising the temperature of
              the contaminated gases, the proposed
method uses properties of non-thermal
              plasma to generate free radicals to oxidize the VOC
directly in the exhaust
              gas. The potential of the approach for VOC oxidation presented
here stems from
              the fact that free radicals react with VOC molecules in a way
              normally
associated with a very high temperature. The free radicals will be
              generated in the
contaminated gas. The proposed device will cause a minimal,
              if any, pressure drop in the
exhaust stream; moreover, its only energy
              requirement is the relatively low average power 
supply to its magnetron. It
              is expected that this device will operate in a wide range of 
temperatures,
              and will be maintenance free.   The proposed project is expected to result 
in
              the development of a new technology for removing undesirable VOC's from exhaust
              gases. 
The proposed method can be conveniently combined with virtually any
              other pollution-control 
measure. Due to the 'end-of-pipe' approach, only
              minor, if any, modifications in the operation 
of the existing exhaust system
              and in the system itself will be required to accommodate the 
new technique.

