Title       : STTR Phase I: Manufacturing Technology for Fiber Lasers Using MicroOpto Electro
               Mechanical Systems (MOEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9960992

Award Number: 9960992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane D. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coherent Technologies, Inc
	      655 Aspen Ridge Drive
	      Lafayette, CO  800269341    303/604-2000

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Project that addresses new
              materials and manufacturing techniques for fiber lasers.  Fiber lasers have
              emerged as the most energy efficient, diode-pumped, solid-state lasers
              demonstrated to date. There have been concomitant advances in fiber laser
              spectral coherence and power scaling. However, less effort has been directed
              towards developing an integrated manufacturing process for wavelength tuning
              and spectral coherence control, both of which are crucial to applications such
              as laser spectroscopy, rugged industrial optical sensors and optical
              communications.  Coherent Technologies, Inc. and Cornell University propose to
              jointly develop innovative Micro-Opto-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MOEMS)
              devices to provide these capabilities in fiber lasers.  When compared to
              competing optical technologies, these devices achieve unprecedented wide-band
              tuning, variable outcoupling, longitudinal mode selection and optical phase
              control with servo bandwidths >100 kKhz.  Stringent wavelength requirements
              inhibit large scale manufacturing with conventional technology.  The MOEMS
              tuners relieve the issues of process yield.

The Phase I theory and
              proof-of-principle demonstrator will establish technical viability for the
              Phase II program.  The Phase II goal is to build a first-of-kind
              frequency-agile phase-locked fiber laser oscillator/amplifier that is suitable
              for commercialization.  The devices developed with this technology will operate
              in hostile environments, as might be encountered in industrial process plants
              and telecommunications, in programmable wavelength division multiplexing and in
              reconfigurable optical drop/add switches.

