Title       : SBIR Phase I: Imaging Subsurface Fluid Flow with Time-Lapse Seismic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9960275

Award Number: 9960275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99848              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Lumley david.lumley@4thwaveimaging.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fourth Wave Imaging
	      850 Glenneyre Street
	      Laguna Beach, CA  92651    949/916-9787

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 1266,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns the development
              and implementation of geophysical inverse techniques and computer algorithms to
              image subsurface fluid-flow properties from time-lapse seismic data. In recent
              years, there has been exponential growth in time-lapse seismology project
              activity. These projects have produced seismic difference anomalies that arise
              from monitoring time-variant changes in the earth's subsurface. However, these
              anomalies, even when determined to be real signal, have so far been only
              indirectly useful and often ambiguous - what causes the anomalies, and what do
              they mean? The proposed innovation will estimate the 3D distribution of
              subsurface fluid pressure, multi-phase fluid saturation, or temperature change
              that causes the seismic anomalies, by using wave-equation seismic imaging
              techniques coupled with rock physics analysis. The research consists of three
              parts: amplitude preserved seismic imaging and impedance estimation, robust
              rock physics inversion, and optimized software and computational design.
              Uncertainty estimates will be quantified in each step of the process and
              propagated to the final pressure, saturation and temperature change estimates. 
              This software will be valuable to help oil companies target new wells and
              optimize reservoir management decisions in the 50+ field areas world-wide that
              are current active seismic monitoring projects.

Potential applications of
              this project include petroleum industry mapping of bypassed oil, monitoring of
              costly injected fluids, and imaging flow compartmentalization and the hydraulic
              properties of faults and fractures. Non-petroleum applications include
              monitoring groundwater reserves, subsurface monitoring of contaminant plumes
              and environmental clean-up projects, and applications in geothermal and
              hydroelectric energy.  Academic applications include improvements to earthquake
              prediction, and the monitoring of methane hydrate deposits to determine their
              role in global climate change.
