Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a Differential Long-Path Spectrophotometer for
               On-line Measurements of Controlled Halogenated Organic Compounds in Potable
               Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9960701

Award Number: 9960701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yogesh C. Agrawal yogi@sequoiasci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sequoia Scientific, Inc.
	      9725 SE 36th Street, Suite 308
	      Mercer Island, WA  98040    206/230-8166

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is concerned with the
              development of a Differential Long-path Spectrophotometer (DLS) for on-line
              measurements of halogenated organic species that are formed when potable water
              is disinfected (disinfection by-products, or DBPs).  The instrument to be
              developed will eliminate major difficulties that water utilities currently face
              in their efforts to monitor and control DBPs.  Specifically, whereas at present
              the analyses of interest are extremely costly and time-consuming, the new
              instrument will provide inexpensive and virtually instantaneous data, allowing
              utilities to monitor DBP formation in real time and to respond rapidly if DBP
              concentrations exceed acceptable bounds.  The key technical feature of the DLS
              will be its ability to measure, with high precision, the relatively small
              changes in light absorbance by natural organic matter (NOM) caused by addition
              of chlorine to potable water (the differential absorbance).  These changes will
              be correlated with the concentration of individual DBPs formed and of a
              composite parameter characterizing the total chlorinated
DBP concentration in
              solution, the total organic halogen (TOX).  The key concept behind DLS is the
              extremely strong correlation, first identified by sub-contractors of this
              proposal, between the differential absorbance and the concentration of the
              target compounds.  The DLS measurements needed to quantify the formation of
              DBPs are fast and inexpensive.  They do not involve the use of any toxic
              chemicals or organic solvents.  Thus, the DLS instrument will address social,
              engineering and analytical needs and will fill an existing niche in the market
              of analytical instrumentation.  The Phase I project will include the design and
              assembly of one or two working DLS prototypes and initial testing of the
              prototype(s) under laboratory and field conditions.

Phase II will involve
              full development and tests of the prototypes and extensive evaluation of the
              performance parameters (e.g., sensitivity, dynamic range, stability), and will
              result in a tested and calibrated prototype device.  Sequoia intends to carry
              out the transition to market.
