Title       : SBIR Phase I: Hydrocarbon Sensor for Oil Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9960744

Award Number: 9960744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin L. Price price@physitron.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theron G. Henderson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Physitron
	      3304A Westmill Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/534-4844

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1059,5371,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research project will apply CVD (chemical
              vapor deposition) diamond chemical sensor technology to petroleum exploration.
              This project will be performed by Physitron, in conjunction with Vanderbilt
              University, Microsensor Systems Inc. (MSI), and New Paradigm Exploration, Inc.
              (NPE),    NPE is currently using an MSI developed hydrocarbon sensor to detect
              single and multi-ring aromatics in soil samples from 30 inches below the
              surface to locate oil reservoirs. It has been demonstrated that these
              hydrocarbons are also present immediately above the surface in somewhat reduced
              concentrations.
Physitron and Vanderbilt have previously developed solid state
              chemical sensors, which detect minute quantities of hydrogen, oxygen, and
              carbon monoxide. With modifications these detectors can be tailored to detect
              aromatic hydrocarbons and used as the detecting element in the MSI system. The
              resulting system will be much more sensitive and faster to respond and recover
              than the current system.  During Phase I, Physitron and Vanderbilt will
              fabricate test structures, perform experiments, and conduct analyses to
              demonstrate the sensitivity and responsivity of our technology. Meanwhile, NPE
              will be completing the verification of the correlation between subsurface
              measurements and surface measurements. Near the end of Phase I, MSI will place
              a hydrocarbon sensor into a gas chromatograph to demonstrate the applicability
              and operability of the detector. 

The most obvious application of this
              technology is the identification of oil reservoirs by making surface
              measurements of the aromatic hydrocarbon density. This would be done by driving
              a vehicle across the surface while taking measurements. The major oil companies
              expend more than $3 Billion annually to locate oil reservoirs using 3D seismic
              techniques.  Other applications of this technology include detection of
              explosives, detection and mapping of chemical warfare agents, mapping of
              chemical contamination, measurement of
spraying density for fertilizer, weed
              killer, and insecticide and monitoring indoor and outdoor air quality.

