Title       : SBIR Phase I: Combinatorial Approach to Combustion Catalyst Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2000  
File        : a9960921

Award Number: 9960921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco J. Castaldi mcastaldi@precision-combustion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Carter  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Precision Combustion, Inc.
	      410 Sackett Point Road
	      North Haven, CT  064733106    203/287-3700

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
              development of a novel combinatorial technique for the discovery of natural gas
              combustion catalysts. The technique enables rapid parallel screening of
              multiple catalyst formulations in a realistic combustion environment, thereby
              greatly accelerating the speed and accuracy with which catalysts can be
              evaluated. Many existing combinatorial techniques are not suitable for
              combustion catalyst development because the catalyst screening element does not
              adequately mimic a combustion environment. The technique discussed in this
              proposal addresses this issue by using a catalytic reactor design that closely
              represents designs that are used in the practice of catalytic combustion in gas
              turbine engine applications. The aim of the proposed work is to demonstrate
              this technique and apply it to developing more durable, better performing
              natural gas combustion catalysts. If successful, this combinatorial approach
              could be used to aid in the discovery of catalysts for other high temperature
              applications. 

 Successful development of this technique could greatly
              accelerate the development of durable catalysts for high temperature catalytic
              combustion of natural gas. This would result in greater acceptance and
              application of this technology in areas such as gas turbines for ground based
              power generation. Catalytic combustion offers the promise for reduction of
              greenhouse gas and toxic gas (e.g. NOx) emissions. Other spinout applications
              would include application of this combinatorial technique to other areas of
              high temperature catalyst development.
