Title       : STTR Phase I: Low-Voltage Multi-Output Converters with Unity Power Factor for a
               New Generation of Computer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9960803

Award Number: 9960803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Vaidya jayvaidya@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EAI
	      409 Eastbridge Drive
	      Oviedo, FL  32765    407/977-1825

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Phase I Small Business Technology Transfer project aims to design
              advanced power conversion circuit schemes to meet the increasingly stringent
              power requirements for future computers. This includes development of optimized
              power system configurations, efficient power stage topologies and high
              performance control techniques. The design schemes will meet the industry
              requirements in terms of total harmonic distortion and power factor as well as
              EMI requirements. In Phase II, advanced packaging techniques and components and
              device optimization will be carried out. Using high-speed computers has become
              mandatory in all fields of application. The increasing desire for quick
              response, fast processing capability and for the multi-functioned features of
              computer systems drives the computer hardware design engineer to develop
              high-speed microprocessors. Meeting present and future power requirements for
              high-speed computers poses a real challenge to the technical community. Today's
              microprocessor technology enables the new generation processors operate as high
              as 500MHz. Designs for 800MHz and 1GHz are under way. The new generation
              integrated circuits are developed based on low-voltage (typically 2.6V to 3.3V)
              operation. Also the semiconductor companies are targeting chips running at 1.5V
              to 2V to operate at the GHz. speeds. The technical difficulties facing design
              engineers are numerous. As the voltage supply decreases, higher currents are
              needed to meet the required power rating, resulting in high power losses and
              thermal management problems. Due to the high load current requirements and wide
              current changes, technical challenges in designing fast dynamic response, low
              voltage ripple tolerance and short circuit current protection need to be
              addressed.
       Potential users of the new designs are computer
              manufacturers and low voltage IC manufacturers that are used in communication
              equipment, consumer electronics, etc. The new power supply conversion technique
              will impact the entire computer industry. The next generation of computer
              speeds will be in the MHz range with voltage power supplies as low as 1.5volts
              at 100A. Even in today's computers at 200-400Mhz speeds, power losses are
              significant and suffer from slow dynamic response. As a result, computer power
              supplies are inefficient, bulky and expensive. Unlike the existing power
              conversion methods that based on the conventional scheme that uses voltage
              regulator modules from a 5V out put to the desired low output voltage, the
              proposed conversion scheme will be based on new topologies that will directly
              step down the voltage from line to the desired levels. We believe the new
              system configuration and topology selection will lead to a low-cost and
              improved power quality power supplies.

