Title       : SBIR Phase I: Investigate and Quantify in Real Time (INQUIRE)- A Framework for
               Simulation Based on Real Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960990

Award Number: 9960990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Golladay bill@yaros.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yaros Communications, Inc.
	      1360 Regent Street
	      Madison, WI  537151255    608/238-0000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 7256,7355,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Young students in the U.S. who are learning qualitative descriptions of natural
              phenomena exhibit high levels of achievement in mathematics and science, but as
              the curriculum become more abstract and quantitative, achievement steadily
              decreases in older students relative to that in other countries as reported in
              various studies.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from
              Yaros Communications, Inc. addresses these recent trends in science and
              mathematics performance of U.S. students with a web based educational
              simulation with which students can INvestigate and QUuantify In REal-time
              (INQUIRE).  INQUIRE will use complex data of natural phenomena as inputs to a
              simulation that gives students visualizations related to concrete experiences. 
              The prototype system will use real time weather data as input to a balloon
              simulation.  In this way, students can connect the concrete image of a balloon
              moving through the air to the abstract concepts associated with atmospheric
              physics.  The INQUIRE system provides a framework for developing other
              simulations based on any real time data available on the Internet.  The INQUIRE
              system also contains provisions for students to collaborate or to compete over
              the Internet.  The Phase I research will develop (1) educational objectives,
              technical specifications and evaluation content; (2) a prototype object
              (balloon) simulator; (3) a prototype system to be evaluated by educators; and
              (4) objectives for additional scenarios and specifications for the final
              system.\

The primary commercial application for the INQUIRE system will be
              as an addition to the existing product line of Yaros Communications, including
              its nationwide Weatherschool project now licensed by more than 70 commercial
              television stations with more than 800,000 classrooms enrolled.  As a company
              providing no cost educational materials to classrooms through its partnerships
              with local television stations and corporate sponsors, the development of this
              unique real-time INQUIRE science 'engine' for middle schools offers an
              opportunity for efficient distribution and widespread use.

