Title       : SBIR Phase I: One-Step Silicon Wafer Manufacturing from Low-Grade Polysilicon
               for Photovoltaic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9960634

Award Number: 9960634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohan Chandra chandra@gtequipment.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GT Equipment Technologies
	      472 Amherst Street
	      Nashua, NH  03063    603/883-5200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes an innovative
              method for one-step silicon wafer production for the photovoltaic (PV)
              industry.  Starting directly from metallurgical grade silicon (MGSi), it is
              proposed to use molten metal as the purification media.  MGSi with its
              impurities will be dissolved in the molten metal, which will separate the
              impurities from MGSi through the impurity partitioning effect.  By manipulating
              the temperature, and taking advantage of the density difference, silicon can be
              separated from the molten bath.  Once the impurities are separated, silicon
              wafers will be drawn out from the molten bath.  This one-step method eliminates
              the use of chlorosilanes (normally used to produce polysilicon).  In addition,
              eliminates the steps of crystal growth and wafer slicing for the photovoltaic
              industry.  This process will meet the demands of PV industry to produce
              inexpensive solar wafers.
Phase I of the project will concentrate on the
              experimental and theoretical research for purification and characterization
              aspects of MGSi.  This will lead to a preliminary design of a one-step wafer
              manufacturing system.  During Phase II detailed research will demonstrate how
              this single step process can be reduced to practice, leading to
              commercialization in Phase III.

This project will lead to a new US-based
              technology for the photovoltaic (PV) industry.  The proposed technology can
              substantially reduce the cost of silicon wafers that the PV industry uses.  It
              is expected that with this technique, it will be possible to decrease the
              cost/watt of solar power into the range in which solar power can become
              competitive with standard utility power.

