Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultra High Definition Color Projection Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9960586

Award Number: 9960586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse B. Eichenlaub jbe@dti3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dimension Technologies Inc
	      315 Mount Read Boulevard
	      Rochester, NY  146111911    716/436-3530

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
              feasibility of a beam steering system that will enable each pixel on a light
              valve to become four color pixels thus doubling the light valve's resolution in
              both directions and adding color without banding effects.  The goal of any
              display device is the creation of a compelling illusion that the user is
              observing a real object.  This is particularly true in simulation applications
              where realism is paramount or where faithful and accurate reproduction of a
              physical object is required, as in medical imaging.  These applications require
              ultra high definition. DTI has conceived an optical technique that can use a
              state-of-the-art light valve with 1.3 million pixels and double its resolution
              in both directions to produce a display with 5.2 million pixel resolution.
              Research to date indicates that to be technically viable, an effective
              mechanism is needed to direct spot illumination to multiple well focused spots
              with the precision to optically increase the resolution of the light valve.
              This innovation will enable display products to achieve resolutions not
              possible though conventional means to meet the most demanding digital display
              requirements including those for digital mammography, simulators, HDTV and
              digital cinema. 

Ultra high definition product monitors resulting from this
              research can be commercialized in a number of markets demanding high quality
              images with fine details and improved realism. These include digital cinema,
              multi-media presentation, dome simulators, digital mammography and radiology
              and HDTV.

