Title       : SBIR Phase I: Nanotube Reinforced Polymeric Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960094

Award Number: 9960094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97459              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith R. Meiler fmipmo@gwi.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FMI
	      5 Morin Street
	      Biddeford, ME  04005    207/282-5911

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,5371,9146,9150,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will experimentally and
              theoretically investigate the development of a new class of electrically
              conductive and structural engineered polymeric matrix composites (PMC).  This
              will be preformed using single and/or multi-wall nanotubes as the reinforcing
              phase to provide or significantly augment their properties.  In addition to
              homogeneous PMC, the program will investigate nanotubes as a selective
              structural reinforcement in critical areas of a component.  Because of their
              dimensions, metallic character and electron emission properties, they could be
              effective at reflecting electromagnetic radiation particularly at high
              frequencies and high energy.  The program will investigate the effect of
              concentration and processing variables on the ability of these small structures
              to function in the dielectric polymeric matrix.  Because of their high elastic
              modulus, nanotubes could provide superior mechanical reinforcement at lower
              concentrations.  Discontinuous reinforcements (nanotubes and, where useful,
              synergistic reinforcements such as chopped carbon fibers) will first be
              homogeneously dispersed and then rigidized in this configuration.  The preform
              can be fully characterized before the polymer matrix is introduced allowing for
              superior quality control and assurance that design properties are achieved
              before the matrix is added.  The preform will then be filled with a polymeric
              matrix using vacuum assisted resin transfer molding.

Both military and
              commercial regulations require EMI shielding of every electronic component. 
              However, in comparison to metallic packaging, there is more part to part
              variability in PMC components made conductive by inclusion of conductive
              fillers,particularly at the low concentrations anticipated for nanotubes. 
              Automated manufacture and testing of fibrous preforms prior to introduction of
              the matrix will significantly reduce the potential for variability and thus
              hasten the acceptance of lightweight PMC components.  Inexpensive, reliable
              conductive plastic components can also be used in major electrically
              dissipative applications as electrostatic charge dissipation, electrostatic
              painting and conductive flooring.  In addition, lightweight homogeneous and
              selectively reinforced lightweight PMC's will find use in a wide variety of
              military and industrial applications.

