Title       : SBIR Phase I: Problem Solving Environment for Reduced Kinetic Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9960841

Award Number: 9960841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Montgomery montgomery@reaction-eng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reaction Engineering Intl
	      77 West 200 South, Suite 210
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84101    801/364-6925

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 5371,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will combine
              state-of-the-art techniques for automating the reduction of chemical kinetic
              mechanisms with advanced software tools for the creation of problem solving
              environments (PSE).  The result will be a user-friendly graphical interface for
              the automated development and testing of reduced chemical kinetic mechanisms. 
              The PSE will be demonstrated on the problem of development of reduced
              chemistry, and subsequently applied to computational fluid dynamic (CFD)
              simulations, of selective noncatalytic reduction (SNCR), used in the control of
              nitrogen oxides (NOx) in coal-fired utility boilers.  This research will use
              the Computer Assisted Reduction Method (CARM) software, an automated tool for
              generating reduced kinetic mechanisms based on steady state assumptions, and a
              newly developed scientific programming environment, named SCIRun, that allows
              the interactive construction, debugging and steering of scientific
              computations.  This new problem solving environment will equip the novice
              engineer with an extremely efficient tool for generating, testing, and
              validating reduced chemical mechanisms over a specified range of conditions. 
              The tool will have immediate use in any application requiring a reduced
              description of detailed chemical kinetics and provide important scientific
              insights into factors affecting the validity of reduce kinetic mechanisms under
              a variety of conditions.

Reduced chemical kinetic mechanisms are needed in a
              wide variety of combustion applications such as utility boilers and industrial
              process heaters, reciprocating and gas turbine engines, and fire, soot,
              explosive, and solid propellant modeling.  Many potential non-combustion
              applications exist also, e.g. chemical processing and surface and condensed
              phase reactions.  The target area in this phase I program is the examination of
              chemistry associated with the formation and destruction of nitrogen oxides in
              industrial boilers.

