Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Electric Field Probe for High-Speed Integrated Circuits and
               Semiconductor Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9960557

Award Number: 9960557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Kane djkane@swsciences.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Sciences Inc
	      1570 Pacheco Street, Suite E-11
	      Santa Fe, NM  875053993    505/984-1322

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              novel electro-optic method for noninvasively probing electric fields, and hence
              waveforms, in integrated circuits without external probes. The technique will
              work on any semiconductor regardless of its crystal structure, and can be used
              for both imaging and single point detection without degradation of temporal
              resolution. Because the technique is optically based, no parasitic capacitance
              is added to the device being measured. A femtosecond laser probes the device to
              be measured; thus the technique's temporal resolution is several orders of
              magnitude faster than the time resolution required to probe present devices.
              Since silicon MOSFET technology is the dominant technology used in logic and
              memory devices, it is important to develop noninvasive techniques that work on
              silicon-based devices. This method for measuring the electric fields present in
              semiconductor devices will be effective on silicon as well as any other
              semiconductor.  The benefit to industry, government, and academia will be
              enormous, allowing integrated circuits to be probed and p-n junctions to be
              studied and imaged.
       Commercial applications of the proposed research
              include the development of techniques for studying semiconductor devices, and
              the development of instrumentation to measure electronic waveforms in
              integrated circuits noninvasively. Such instrumentation could be used to
              diagnose problems in integrated circuits during development, on production
              lines, and in circuit boards.

