Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultrasonic Fluid Probe for Vibration Monitoring of Advanced
               Machine Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9960737

Award Number: 9960737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99658              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno F. Pouet bpouet@lasson.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lasson Technologies, Inc.
	      1331 Avenida de Cortez
	      Pacific Palisades, CA  90272    310/459-0101

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation  Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
              innovative approach for measuring vibration during characterization of advanced
              machine tools as well as during the machining process.  The approach uses a
              fluid jet as a probe that will make an accurate, robust, and low cost sensor. 
              The growing demand for high-speed milling, as well as increasing use of small
              size tools and difficult-to-machine advanced materials, call for improved
              characterization of machine tools and for controlling vibration and chatter
              during the machining process.  To do this, advanced machine systems must rely
              on accurate sensors to measure and to control vibrations.  Sensor requirements
              are: (1) accurate vibration measurements; (2) impervious to the machining
              environment; (3) dual use for characterization prior to operation and for
              monitoring during the milling process; and (4) small size and low cost.  To
              date, commercially available sensors  do not meet these requirements, whereas
              the Phase I sensor is expected to satisfy much of the need.

The fluid probe,
              as part of a machine control system, has the potential to reduce machine tool
              vibrations, thereby improving surface finish and increasing throughput.  The
              same sensor will be used both for characterization of the machine tools and for
              monitoring during machining.  The principal commercial market for the fluid
              probe is the machine tool industry.  Machining performance is critical in many
              industrial sectors, including automotive, aerospace, and rapid prototyping.
