Title       : SBIR Phase I: Holographic Disk Data Storage on a New Photochromic Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9960177

Award Number: 9960177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph DeMasi newspan@nsotech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto J. Varela  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New Span Opto-Tech Inc
	      9380 SW 72nd Street, B-180
	      Miami, FL  331733243    305/275-6998

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6855,9102,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from New Span
              Opto-Technology Incorporated studies holographic data storage in a new
              ion-exchanged photochromic glass disk.  It is well known that holographic data
              storage can significantly increase data storage capacity and reduce access
              time.  However, the technology maturity of holographic data storage is believed
              to be impeded by the lack of good holographic material that can be erased and
              recorded optically with almost unlimited rewriting cycles, with large index
              modulation for large capacity multiplexed data recording, and with long
              lifetime and immunity to destructive readout for archival applications.  The
              new ion-exchanged photochromic glass in this proposed study can potentially
              satisfy all of the above requirements.  UV and blue laser illumination on the
              glass can make the exchanged layer blue while red laser illumination can
              convert the blue layer to violet-red due to de-ionization and ionization in the
              ion-exchanged layer.  The associated refractive index change is the basis for
              the holographic data storage.  The recording media is room environment stable,
              erasable, re-writable, and does not require any follow-up processing. Phase I
              will demonstrate the feasibility of holographic recording on the new
              ion-exchanged glass.  Phase II will optimize holographic recording process and
              demonstrate a high-capacity holographic storage prototype using the
              glass.

This research will demonstrate the feasibility of erasable,
              rewritable, high-capacity holographic data storage on a new ion-exchanged
              photochromic glass disk.  The holographic recording does not require hologram
              fixing process and is suitable for on-line application. New Span
              Opto-Technology proffers technology that is expected to significantly improve
              the holographic data storage technology for commercial and military
              applications such as computer data storage, on-line storage, library archival
              applications, image storage for medical applications and for military fast
              access to its large intelligent database.

