Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Universal Protein Interaction Biosensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960856

Award Number: 9960856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia C. Bamdad monopole@rocketmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minerva
	      142 Church St
	      Newton, MA  02458    617/821-8773

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9102,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to extend a
              proof of concept result to a more generalized technology for the electronic
              detection of proteins and protein-protein interactions. The proposers will
              develop an electronic biosensor of high sensitivity and specificity that is
              based on electron tunneling and transition metal cross-talk effects that occur
              at electrodes derivatized with self-assembled monolayers.
Preliminary results
              show that the sensing technology is unaffected by common sample contaminants
              like whole blood and serum, suggesting that proteins could be detected from
              samples with little pre-processing. In a model system, sub-zeptomolar
              concentrations of streptavidin were detected. The system is made up of stable
              modular components that can be inexpensively produced and are easily customized
              by an end-user for a variety of applications. Because the sensing technology is
              totally electronic, it could be readily multiplexed on microelectrode arrays to
              create a low-cost, high-throughput MEMS (microelectronic and mechanical system)
              device.

Pharmaceutical companies would use this technology to identify
              families of proteins that are implicated in disease and construct data bases
              that define networks of interacting proteins to determine points of
              intervention and potential drug targets. This technology advances a major
              technology trend toward automated nanotechnology and multiplexing.  End-users
              will prefer to use the proposed technology because it is more cost effective,
              sensitive, faster, and flexible enough to be adapted to many user
              applications.

