Title       : SBIR Phase I: New Optoceramics for Advanced Electro-Optic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9960415

Award Number: 9960415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yalin Lu nzat@tiac.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Corning Applied Tech Corp
	      8A Gill Street
	      Woburn, MA  01801    617/935-2030

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9165,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Phase I SBIR proposal seeks to develop a new class of electro-optic (EO)
              materials that will have better properties and achieve higher transmission
              rates.  Many optical devices that use EO materials in their designs, e.g.
              tunable optical filters, spatial light modulators (SLMs), EO shutters, and beam
              deflectors, have recently received tremendous attentions due to their potential
              applications in telecommunication, laser countermeasure, and integrated optics.
               However, these applications have been limited by the availability of materials
              with high EO coefficient.  The high EO coefficient is required to ensure:  (1)
              the large index change needed to lower the operation voltage; (2) the
              polarization-insensitive light interaction required for coupling with optical
              fibers; and ( 3) the high mechanical performance needed for high frequency and
              heavy load operations.  Optoceramics are some of the better EO materials due to
              their large quadratic EO effect, optical isotropy, and cost effective
              fabrication process.  Studies on using lanthanum-modified lead zirconate
              titanate (PLZT) are well known.  They are the only optoceramics commercially
              available, in device applications.  There are known difficulties with these
              materials.  They include insufficient EO effect, poor temperature stability,
              and low mechanical toughness.  NZ Applied Technologies proposes to search for
              new material systems in the relaxor ferroelectric PMN-PT and PZN-PT families.
              These new systems have shown engineerable ferroelectric behavior and very large
              room-temperature dielectric constants, which are theoretically predicted to
              have much better EO performance, and improved mechanical strengths.

Success
              in the Phase I effort will identify the possible new electro-optic optoceramics
              systems.  The military and civilian applications are diverse, and include light
              modulators,
beam deflectors, and optical switches.

