Title       : SBIR Phase I: Anonymous Communication Protocol for Internet Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9960851

Award Number: 9960851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping W. Wong ping@idzap.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IDZAP
	      1443 Knowlton Drive
	      Sunnyvale, CA  94087    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4090,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from IDZAP, LLC seeks to
              investigate technologies for anonymous bi-directional communication, and
              explore the feasibility of using such technology in Internet applications.  A
              major problem in using the Internet resides in the protection of privacy of
              individuals.  Just about every activity that people perform (such as web
              browsing, news posting and email) is logged.  Commercial organizations
              frequently analyze the log to extract information to build profiles of users.
              Often this information is sold to third party marketers.  IDZAP is in the
              business of providing anonymous web services to protect privacy.  Anonymous web
              browsing and email services exist today.  However, there is still no practical
              way to provide bi-directional anonymous Internet services.  For example, one
              who sends an anonymous email to the consultant of a medical web site will want
              to hear back from that consultant. The problem is that the user may not want
              the consultant to know his/her identity.  There are many similar problems that
              require solutions that are not available today.  The proposed research on
              bi-directional anonymous communication will provide a basis for the solution to
              this type of problems.

Based on the importance of internet privacy as
              reported in the mainstream media as well as on the feedback that IDZAP receives
              in the course of providing anonymous and secure web access services (i.e.,
              anonymous one-directional communication) through its web browsing service,
              there is significant overall commercial potential for anonymous query and
              response communications.

