Title       : SBIR Phase I: Subgrade Repair and Stabilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9960065

Award Number: 9960065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Farrar lcfarrar@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      P. O. Box 4167
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1448,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore a
              novel subgrade stabilization process that injects readily available materials
              into the vitrification zone, eliminating subsidence concerns as the soils
              densify during vitrification. The problem of in-situ soil stabilization of poor
              to marginal foundation and slope materials is endemic throughout the
              transportation system. Localized subgrade failures in highway fill and around
              ancillary structures, like bridges and culverts, constitute a major maintenance
              problem in every highway and road system. Phase I will establish process
              feasibility by developing a robust and versatile technology that produces
              subgrade synthetic rock from soils. The vitrified material will have suitable
              strength for soil stabilization and for structural reinforcement purposes.
              Experiments will demonstrate a method to modify the parent soil-rock properties
              by the use of additives during processing.
A series of parametric tests will
              develop a  fundamental understanding of process operational variables upon
              geotechnic properties of the synthetic rock that is formed.

The commercial
              market for the technology includes highway departments (state and federal),
              airport authorities, municipalities, federal properties and national
              infrastructure agenciesm, and various industries.  Application of the
              technology is expexted in both maintenance of subgrade and new construction
              where 'local' subgrade instability issues are important. 

