Title       : SBIR Phase I: Understanding 'Construction/Deconstruction' and the Role of
               Resistance in Accelerated Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9960572

Award Number: 9960572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lia A. DiBello liadibello@msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WTRI
	      1425 Russ Blvd.
	      San Diego, CA  92101    619/232-8054

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 5371,6850,7178,7256,9102,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Workplace
              Technologies Research Inc. (WTRI) will explore the basic principles of learning
              revealed by one of the firm's more highly successful technology implementations
              in which user knowledge and performance with the system were found to be
              critical.  The data involved were collected on 3500 shopfloor personnel who
              were given an activity-based training exercise on a complex computer
              technology.  WTRI's training was based on research showing that experienced
              adults learn complex concepts in the context of solving problems at work.  The
              trainees' acceptance and rapid development as 'expert' users suggest that a
              particular set of principles used to design the training may be a key element
              in learning complex technologies.  Further,  the later high performance of
              highly 'resistant' workers may indicate an important role of resistance in
              innovation.  The project seeks to identify the important mechanisms of learning
              and to find ways to broaden their application.  In particular, the project
              seeks to provide the foundation for designing methods of accelerating learning
              that can be part of the context of the actual work activity and that will not
              require the considerable expense and lost productivity incurred with off-line
              training.  At the same time, the model also has significant potential for
              enhancing our understanding of 'construction/deconstruction' and the role of
              resistance in accelerated learning.

WRTI has conceived of a model, Iterative
              Technology Implementation Model (ITIM(TM)), to increase technology deployment
              success rates as measured by time to adoption by the workers and long term
              retention. The model has great potential for generalizing the facilitation of
              the process of technology adoption/ replacement, if the principles that have
              made the approach to training for change and technology adoption so successful
              can be distilled from the large, rich data set at hand.  This distillation can
              in turn facilitate appropriate training selection and design and faster
              implementation of change, thus making needed assistance more affordable to a
              broader spectrum of companies. 
