Title       : SBIR Phase I: Combustible Gas Microsensor from Self-Organized Nanoporous Ceramic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9960397

Award Number: 9960397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri Routkevitch droutkevitch@nrcorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanomat'ls Research Corp
	      2021 Miller Drive
	      Longmont, CO  805010000    720/494-8401

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop and
              commercialize new type of combustible gas microsensors with high sensitivity
              and low power consumption. The innovation is based on self-organized
              nanostructured ceramic with high thermal, mechanical, and chemical stability.
              Deposition of the catalytic material inside the network of high surface area
              nanoscale pores has a potential to enable high precision, better accuracy, and
              longer lifetime. Nanostructured sensor element will be integrated with a low
              power microheater by proprietary micromachining technology. The novel
              combination of nanoscale morphology and micromachining will be utilized to
              develop sensor arrays that can monitor concentration profiles of multiple
              combustible gases. The technology is compatible with mainstream
              microfabrication, and could be easily scaled up. The program will benefit from
              the infrastructure for the nano- and micro-scale engineering of materials for
              devices and sensors that is already operational at the Nanomaterials Research
              Corporation (NRC) and from day-to-day participation of a team that has
              extensive multidisciplinary experience including sensor product development and
               commercialization.

Proposed research could enable new types of low cost low
              power robust gas microsensors and sensor arrays with high sensitivity,
              selectivity, fast response, and possibility of regeneration. Potential
              applications of the technology include any area where portable gas sensors are
              used: mines, combustion and exhaust monitoring, air quality control, fire
              alarms, industrial processes monitoring, etc.
