Title       : SBIR Phase I: Information Extraction from Synthetic Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960429

Award Number: 9960429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99751              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul van Eikeren paul.van.eikeren@intellichem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IntelliChem
	      20310 Empire Avenue, Suite A-102
	      Bend, OR  97701    541/382-7043

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6856,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from is directed at
              demonstrating the feasibility of using Information Extraction, a computer
              technology based on Natural Language Processing, to selectively extract key
              information from the running text of synthetic procedures.  Synthetic
              procedures are batch recipes used in the creation and discovery of new chemical
              entities for drug discovery.  The ultimate aim of the project is to automate
              information extraction and place the information in a computer- understandable
              data structure that fully captures the content and semantics of the synthetic
              procedure.  Such data structures dramatically increase the value of synthetic
              procedures since they allow development and deployment of software applications
              that automate many common time-and labor-intensive tasks in chemical synthesis.
               The objectives of this Phase I research project are to design and prototype
              critical software elements of Information Extraction.  Feasibility of the
              approach will be demonstrated by using the developed elements to automatically
              perform some common tasks that currently require manual intervention by a
              chemistry expert.  Demonstration tasks will include the following: automated
              creation of synthetic procedure domain ontology; creation of list of materials;
              and automated text extraction rule induction.

There are recipes for more
              than 19 million unique chemical compounds reported in the public literature. 
              There are a comparable number in the archives of pharmaceutical companies. 
              Overwhelmingly, these procedures are maintained as unstructured running text. 
              IntelliChem's proffered extraction of synthetic procedure information into
              computer-understandable data structures enhances the value of a procedure,
              promotes information reuse, and provides a basis for automating many time- and
              labor-intensive tasks in chemical synthesis.  The proposed system will also
              provide insights into the automated linguistic analysis of semistructured text
              in other domains that are sufficiently narrow and well organized, and thus it
              would be generalizable for many other potential applications and uses.
