Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Intelligent World-Wide Web Agent that Learns User Profiles to
               Find Relevant Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9960113

Award Number: 9960113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armand E. Prieditis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Unconventional Wisdom
	      813 Villanova Drive
	      Davis, CA  95616    530/758-7156

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6855,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This SBIR Phase I project from Unconventional Wisdom aims to build a
              recommendation system for the World Wide Web (WWW).  Finding relevant
              information on the WWW is becoming increasingly difficult.  Most current search
              engines produce too much irrelevant information because they search
              syntactically.  This proposal shows how to produce more accurate and
              personally-relevant search recommendations through three key innovations: a
              method to learn and combine user information (e.g. demographics and ratings)
              with WWW source information  (e.g. web page features); a method to leverage the
              power of human-categorized information sources on the WWW; and a method to
              learn mega-features, that is, large sets of homogeneous features through
              running a machine-learning algorithm over the sets. In Unconventional Wisdom's
              framework, people implicitly assign semantics to web pages by their pattern of
              usage and machines act as the transporters of those semantics to other users so
              that retrieval can be based on semantics implicit in the user's interests. 
              This makes it possible to retrieve complex multimedia information based on the
              user's interests.

Unconventional Wisdom proffers a technology addressing a
              significant opportunity in e-commerce.  Since a web site can contain
              information such as text, audio, video or catalog items, the system envisioned
              by Unconventional Wisdom is flexible in its application to both the WWW and
              military or corporate Intranets. The area of research and development that this
              project treats has important implications for knowledge management in general,
              such as in developing packaged inference mechanisms to address information
              selection of many types and in systems to generate and support relationships
              among persons with related information requirements and values.

