Title       : STTR Phase I: Rapid, Low-Cost Processing of Continuous Fiber-Reinforced Ceramic
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9960985

Award Number: 9960985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart T. Schwab stschwab@twrol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thor Technologies, Inc.
	      7600 Jefferson, Suite 9-115
	      Albuquerque, NM  871094340    505/294-1770

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will demonstrate
              feasibility a rapid, low-cost method of manufacturing continuous
              fiber-reinforced ceramic composites (CFCCs). CFCCs are a class of material
              whose tremendous market potential has been thwarted by their excessive cost,
              resulting from the current, inefficient manufacturing methods.  Thor
              Technologies, Incorporated will team with Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
              to integrate three technologies into a single efficient manufacturing process: 
              (1) preceramic polymers; (2) high frequency microwave (HFMW) radiation;  and
              (3) polymer infiltration/pyrolysis (PIP) processing.  The HFMW-PIP process will
              produce CFCCs in a fraction of the time and at a fraction of the cost of
              current methods.  Preliminary studies have mitigated the technical risk, and
              the potential for greatly enhanced productivity over current methods mitigates
              commercialization risk.  The proposed effort will characterize the effects of
              HFMW radiation on the materials, will demonstrate process feasibility by
              manufacturing and testing coupons and simple shapes (tubes), and will assess
              the productivity and economic potential of the process.  The Proposed PI has
              substantial experience with preceramic polymers and the PIP process, while our
              collaborators at LANL have extensive experience with HFMW heating. Thor
              Technologies has the managerial and financial resources to develop the process
              to full-scale production.  A wide variety of industries, ranging from aerospace
              to the petroleum and chemical processing industry, would benefit from the
              availability of low cost materials that are stable under hot, oxidizing
              conditions, do not corrode, and weigh less than metals yet are strong and
              tough.  Although their price has relegated CFCCs to small, niche market
              to-date, reducing their cost to the point at which they compete with metals,
              such as intermetallics and superalloys, will open substantial new markets. 
              Applications in transportation and energy will result in increased productivity
              and a cleaner environment for the nation.

