Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integrated Reactor Scale and Topography Feature Scale Simulator
               for Plasma Enhanced Semiconductor Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9960600

Award Number: 9960600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip J. Stout pjs@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5371,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              statistical (Monte Carlo) software model and software simulation tool for the
              pre-sheath and sheath regions of low pressure plasmas used in IC fabrication. 
              The objective is to bridge the time/length scales between reactor scale
              phenomena and feature scale phenomena.  The sheath models will be integrated
              with an existing reactor scale software model (CFD-ACE+) and feature scale
              software simulators (SPEEDIE and CATS).  The work will fill a void currently
              faced by designers of plasma equipment and processes.  It will evaluate the
              influence of macroscopic reactor conditions on feature scale profile evolution.
               Stanford University Center for Integrated Circuits will be a sub-contractor on
              this project.  The Phase I effort will focus on an intermediate-scale model
              based on kinetic treatment of charged particle transport near the wafer
              surface. This model will be an interface between a hydrodynamic model in
              CFD-ACE+ and collisionless gas phase models in SPEEDIE and CATS for
              interstructure particle transport. The plasma-presheath model will provide
              spatially resolved distributions of ion flux, energy and angular distributions
              to SPEEDIE and CATS.  Both SPEEDIE and CATS require die level models to resolve
              the impact of circuit layout/topography on species generation/loss, charged
              particle collection and currents paths to the substrate.

In Phase II, the
              models will be refined and validated (against experiments conducted at
              Stanford) for silicon etch processes in Cl2 and SF6 systems.  CATS will be
              expanded to include the wafer charging circuit and will be merged with SPEEDIE.
                The commercial availability of the  capability will allow process engineers
              to design better processes and identify equipment/process deficiencies before
              physical prototyping.  The use of the model will enable the reduction of
              potential yield losses due to unsatisfactory gap/step coverage, film
              noncomformality and undesirable etch profiles.  According to industry
              observers, even a 2% improvement in the fabrication yield will provide
              significant savings to the industry.


