Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reference Electrode with an Invariant Liquid Junction Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1999   
File        : a9960665

Award Number: 9960665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott T. Broadley sbroadley@broadleyjames.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broadley-James Corporation
	      19 Thomas
	      Irvine, CA  92618    949/829-5524

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide a powerful
              tool for monitoring chemical, biological and environmental processes.  A major
              cost component and obstacle of using potentiometric sensors in these
              applications is the need for frequent calibration and maintenance of the
              sensor.  The foremost cause of periodic calibration and maintenance is due to a
              variation in the liquid junction, the interface between the reference electrode
              and the sample.  The liquid junction is unavoidable in potentiometric sensors,
              and is the major limiting factor in the accuracy and operational life of pH
              sensors and other ion-selective electrodes.  Recent developments in
              microfluidics and nanotechnology provide the means to develop long-lived,
              invariant, and reproducible liquid junctions that significantly reduce the need
              for sensor recalibration and maintenance.  Reference electrodes using this new
              liquid junction will find application in all potentiometric sensors.  The
              feasibility of developing an invariant and constant liquid junction will be
              demonstrated.

Improved process control and significant savings in
              operational costs will make this reference technology the new sensor design
              requirement. The potential is also great for using this new technology as a
              basic building block in microfluidic sensor devices that utilize potentiometric
              microsensors. Such microfluidic devices are estimated by many sources to be a
              multi-billion dollar industry in the next decade.
