Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Resolution In-Situ Energy Dispersive X-Ray Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9960183

Award Number: 9960183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ning Gao ngao@xos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : X-Ray Optical Systems, Inc
	      30 Corporate Circle
	      Albany, NY  12203    518/464-3334

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR Phase I proposal focuses on the development and characterization of
              in-situ energy dispersive x-ray diffraction (EDXRD) by using polycapillary
              x-ray optics and a newly developed superconducting microcalorimeter detector. 
              EDXRD is the method of choice if access to the sample is restricted or the
              diffraction data needs to be acquired quickly.  This applies to in-situ
              applications, since the sample is surrounded by processing equipment and data
              has to be acquired quickly to observe different intermediate states of the
              sample.  However, EDXRD is rarely used, since the energy resolution of
              available detectors is limited.  In addition, intense continuous parallel beams
              require high power x-ray sources.

The research team will use a
              superconducting microcalorimeter detector.  The energy resolution of this
              detector approaches the natural line width of characteristic x-rays and removes
              the energy resolution as a limitation.  The intense 'white' x-ray beam will be
              provided by a polycapillary x-ray optic.  It will collect and collimate x-rays
              from a low power source.  A second optic will concentrate the diffracted beam
              onto the detector.  With this system it will be possible to perform EDXRD at a
              resolution that has only been possible in wavelength dispersive systems.  The
              proposing team, the material scientists from X-Ray Optical Systems, will ensure
              that the research effort is focused on important thin film processing
              applications and the system will become rapidly commercialized once
              successfully demonstrated.

