Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Performance Laser Ultrasonic Receiver for Non-destructive
               Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9960346

Award Number: 9960346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin B. Klein mbklein@lasson.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lasson Technologies, Inc.
	      1331 Avenida de Cortez
	      Pacific Palisades, CA  90272    310/459-0101

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is intended to
              demonstrate the practical feasibility of photorefractive polymers for use in
              laser ultrasonic receivers.  Laser ultrasound can be used for remote
              measurements of parts in hostile environments where traditional
              transducer-based ultrasound techniques cannot be used. The primary component of
              most laser-based ultrasound receivers is some type of interferometer. One
              promising type of interferometric receiver uses real-time holography in
              photorefractive material. The photorefractive material functions as an adaptive
              beamsplitter, coherently combining a plane-wave reference beam and a probe beam
              which has been distorted while interrogating the test surface. Due to
              limitations in the photorefractive materials, none of the current
              interferometric receivers has performed near their theoretical capability.  The
              goal of this program is to implement a robust and highly sensitive laser
              ultrasonic receiver by combining heterodyne detection scheme with a
              photorefractive polymer as the real-time adaptive beamsplitter. We also seek to
              tailor the photorefractive polymer properties in order to reach the theoretical
              capability of the designed laser-based ultrasound receiver. 

Laser-based
              ultrasound has applications in wide range of industrial markets. It offers the
              capability to improve the inspection rate of conventional scanning systems and
              it will enable the inspection of many parts that cannot be tested with other
              techniques. It is particularly promising as an in-process diagnostic for
              components that are at high temperature and/or are moving at high
              velocities.



