Title       : SBIR Phase I: ILEAD: An Intelligent Interactive Learning Environment for
               Abstract Data Types and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9960319

Award Number: 9960319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sowmya Ramachandran sowmya@shai.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stottler Henke Assoc
	      1660 S. Amphlett Blvd
	      San Mateo, CA  944022520    650/655-7242

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 7256,7410,9102,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Stotler-Henke
              Associates, Inc. seeks to improve Computer Science education by developing an
              innovative Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) to teach computer data structures
              and algorithms.  Increasing class sizes and decreasing funding have led to a
              decline in the amount of personalized instruction available to undergraduate
              students.  Lack of confidence among students, especially women and minorities,
              deprives students of the opportunity to seek individual attention in a
              classroom setting.  This project seeks to address this problem by developing
              ILEAD, an intelligent interactive learning environment for abstract data types
              and algorithms, an ITS to provide students with individualized instruction in a
              risk-free environment.  The Phase I research objective is to design an ITS for
              teaching abstract data types and algorithms, and demonstrate its feasibility
              and effectiveness.  Phase I research will develop innovative techniques for
              representing knowledge about data structures and algorithms, for student
              modeling, for diagnosing a student's knowledge deficiencies, for customizing
              instruction based on this information, and for automatically generating
              remedial material.  Stotler-Henke will evaluate the effectiveness of the ITS by
              conducting controlled experiments with students a freshman-level course on
              Abstract Data Types and Algorithms.  Dr. Nell Dale, a renowned Computer Science
              educator, who has published a number of computer science textbooks, will serve
              as a consultant on the proposed effort.

The Intelligent Tutoring System
              (ITS) proffered by Stotler-Henke has substantial commercial potential. 
              Colleges, high schools, and the students enrolled in introductory Computer
              Science classes at these institutions form a substantial market.  The system
              can also be used by distance learning programs and by individuals for
              self-education.


