Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Tool for Local Stress Measurement of Patterned Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9960511

Award Number: 9960511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kuokai Shyu kkshyu@manifold-engng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manifold Eng
	      11480 6th Street
	      Rancho Cucamonga, CA  917304804    909/483-1648

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5371,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop
              specific innovations, relating to numerical etching procedure (NEP) and
              nonlinear sequential analysis (NSA), to analyze the local stress field of a
              patterned microstructure.  By step-by-step irreversible numerical etching, and
              closely coupled with experimental procedures, the proposed technology can
              directly correlate the stress state of a patterned microstructure to that of a
              blanket film.  Experimental results have proven that these innovative
              techniques can also solve highly geometric nonlinear problems, such as
              membranes.  The applications can include bond pads, interconnect lines,
              sensors, and mask distortion analysis in the IC and micro-electro-mechanical
              system (MEMS) industries.  Such technical innovations can act as a single
              package, or work as a module for current Technology Computer Aided Design
              (TCAD) bundles to support the reliability and performance analysis of patterned
              microstructures.  The impacts of the proposed innovations will make the
              following contributions: 
(1) Applications.  Perform mechanical reliability
              analysis of patterned microstructures;
(2) Performance.  Solve complex
              geometric nonlinear problems; 
(3) Efficiencies.  Advise on the correct
              experimental direction and reduce exploration time; 
(4) Cost.  Revise
              in-house design concepts instead of finding new material to fit an old design
              code, which can be costly. 

The numerical etching procedure (NEP) will be an
              indispensable tool for the semiconductor industry.  It will serve to predict
              the intrinsic stresses of patterned microstructures.  If the proposed research
              meets its goals, the resulting product can be integrated into Technology
              Computer Aided Design (TCAD) tools and software, which will have many
              applications in mechanical reliability and performance analysis in the fields
              of packaging bond pads, interconnect lines, MEMS devices, membranes, mask
              distortion analysis, and other future micro devices.

