Title       : STTR Phase I: Development of a Solar Air Conditioner for Small Cooling Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9960710

Award Number: 9960710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector M. Sanchez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : A/C Mechanical Services Co
	      Box 393
	      Mayaguez, PR  006810393    787/833-8050

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9150,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The need for the development of new technologies having minimum operational
              impact on the environment has increased consistently during the last few years.
              Due to the high cost of energy production, a need for these new technologies
              has become more critical for regions without conventional fuel sources. In
              Puerto Rico, for example, the combination of scarcity of conventional energy
              resources and a rapid economic development present major challenges to manage
              energy production. In response to these challenges the Government of Puerto
              Rico in their Public Energy Policy recommended the promotion and use of
              renewable energy technologies as a large component in the future energy
              infrastructure of Puerto Rico. This recommendation was based upon government
              commitments to develop a sustainable energy infrastructure and due to the
              Island's large current dependence of more than 98 percent on foreign oil for
              electric power generation. Furthermore, solar-assisted air conditioning systems
              are proven technologies which represent a true alternative for hot and humid
              climates such as that prevailing in the Caribbean. Estimates indicate that more
              than 25 percent of the
energy use in Puerto Rico goes for cooling and
              dehumidification in the industrial and commercial sectors, and a larger
              component in the residential sectors is expected in the years ahead. A team
              consisting of two small businesses and a research university and sponsored by
              the local and federal governments was formed in 1997 to address the
              commercialization of solar air conditioning technologies in the Caribbean
              targeting a niche
market requiring 10-50 cooling tons. This effort is well
              underway and a final product is expected by the end of the year 1999. However,
              in fast growing economic areas such as the Caribbean, the residential and light
              commercial sectors represent the largest market potential in the air
              conditioning industry.  The small usinesses are now focusing on the development
              of compact solar air conditioning system based on the heat driven absorption
              cycle. This is the main objective of this proposal. The capacity of the
              proposed system is
targeted within the range of 3-5 cooling tons which is
              typical of multi-residential and light commercial areas in the Caribbean. The
              main system's components will be a medium size thermal energy storage tank, an
              air-cooled compact absorption chiller that uses Lithium-Bromide as the working
              fluid pair, and a compact array of high performance collectors.
Building
              integration issues will be addressed to minimize energy and space consumption
              and maximize aesthetics of the product. This system will definitely represent
              the next generation of absorption machines. The research will draw from the
              more than four years of experience gained by the proponents in the development
              of commercial scale solar air conditioning systems in the Caribbean. The target
              payback period for the proposed product will be five years or less or at least
              twice the market price of conventional vapor
compression systems. The system
              will be reliable and of simple operation using state-of-the-art optimal control
              strategies. This project will specifically conduct a technical proof-of-concept
              effort based on: design specifications; mathematical simulations of the thermal
              and control processes; and availability of materials and manufacturing
              techniques.

