Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Novel High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Detector:
               Generating On-the-Fly Fluorescence Lifetimes Concurrently at Multiple Emission
               Wavelengths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9960728

Award Number: 9960728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Dvorak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota Technologies, Inc.
	      2201A 12th Street North
	      Fargo, ND  581021808    701/237-4908

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves construction
              and optimization of a novel high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
              detector that can resolve the chemically complex analyte mixtures encountered
              in environmental and pharmaceutical laboratories. Standard HPLC analysis of
              such complex mixtures is severely hampered by peak overlap.  Even under optimal
              separation conditions, which necessitate long elution times and drive up
              analysis costs, the species of interest are often only partially resolved. 
              Dakota Technologies, Inc. has patented a novel detection scheme that
              concurrently records fluorescence decay curves at four or more emission
              wavelengths and is ideally suited to HPLC fluorescence detection.  The scheme
              uses fiber optic delay lines to control the arrival of different wavelength
              fluorescence components at the single photomultiplier tube (PMT) detector.  The
              two dimensional detector (fluorescence wavelength and decay time) is simple,
              robust, and significantly less expensive than competitive detectors, which are
              limited to just the wavelength or decay time domain. Proof of principle has
              been established but further technical developments are needed to optimize the
              approach for analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).  In this Phase
              I SBIR project DTI will implement a flow cell that that employs total internal
              reflectance to deliver the excitation light, resulting in higher light fluxes
              at the PMT.  A new-to-the market 9-bit digital phosphor oscilloscope (DPO) will
              be incorporated to increase the accuracy and speed of data acquisition. The
              optimal emission wavelength sets for individual PAHs will be found by
              experiment and chemometric algorithms will be tested.

