Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integrated Planar Positioner with a Two-Dimensional
               Concentrated-Field Magnet Matrix for Flexible Manufacturing and Automation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9960653

Award Number: 9960653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Won-jong Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SatCon Technology Corp
	      161 First Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021421221    617/349-0861

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project presents a unique
              integrated planar positioner for flexible manufacturing and automation. 
              Next-generation intrabay and interbay automation in microelectronics
              manufacturing requires a compact, lightweight, and rigid structure for material
              handling and processing.  The proposed planar positioning technology is a
              significant advance and simplification of existing positioners that employ a
              two-dimensional concentrated-field magnet matrix.  In this positioner, only a
              single integrated motor is required for extended planar motion generation.  The
              other degrees of freedom can be controlled by feedback or made open-loop
              stable.  There is no mechanical contact between the single moving part and the
              machine frame, and no particulate contamination, which makes this technology
              suitable for clean-room operations.  In Phase I, we will design, fabricate, and
              demonstrate a prototype two-dimensional positioner in order to prove
              feasibility.

The semiconductor market is recovering from a recent recession.
               The long-term outlook for growth of the industry is extremely good.  As the
              complexity of the overall process and the size of the wafer grow, automatic
              material handling becomes ever more important in semiconductor fabrication. 
              Reliable low cost planar positioning for manufacturing processes for clean
              room, extreme-temperature, or vacuum environments will be a priority in
              microelectronics manufacturing, packaging, machine tool, and high-precision
              inspection stage industries.


