Title       : SBIR Phase I: Nano-Engineered Biosensors for Detection of Organophosphorus
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960139

Award Number: 9960139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuanjing Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amsen Tech
	      1684 South Research Loop
	      Tucson, AZ  857106740    520/546-6944

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
              nano-engineered biosensors for detection of organophosphorus (OP) compounds.
              The growing public concern about chemical warfare agents and the widespread use
              of the acutely toxic compounds in modern agriculture has required analytical
              tools for in-field and on-line monitoring of OP compounds. The existing sensor
              technologies have inherent limitations that are unsuitable for such
              applications. This program seeks to develop high performance biosensors with
              an
innovation that focuses on nano-engineering of the sensor structure that
              combines the advantages of nano-ring electrode transducers and enzyme micro-
              reactors. The proposed sensors are expected to have fast response, high
              selectivity, high sensitivity, and low detection limits. The research
              objectives of the phase I will include synthesis, processing, and
              characterization of nano-ring electrode ensembles; fabricating nano-engineered
              electrochemical biosensors; and testing the sensor performance. During Phase I,
              AMSEN Technologies will demonstrate the proof-of-concept of such a sensor.
              Phase II will build on Phase I success, optimize, build prototypes and field
              test the technology. Phase III will commercialize the technology and
              anticipated spin-off.

This program will result in miniaturized biosensor
              devices for in-field and on-line detection of OP compounds that is of
              importance to the nation for both civil and military applications. The general
              principles of the sensors would also have widespread applications in
              environmental programs, control and detoxification of pesticides and
              insecticides, and chemical manufacturing facilities.


