Title       : SBIR Phase I: Semi-Automatically Constructing Wrappers to Access Internet-Based
               Information Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9960536

Award Number: 9960536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Minton minton@fetch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fetch Technologies
	      326 Loma Vista St.
	      El Segundo, CA  90245    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5371,6855,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Dynamic Domain will
              enable computer users to create wrappers so that web sites can be queried as if
              they were databases.  The key innovation of this proposal is a method for
              semi-automatically generating wrappers from examples.  The approach combines
              supervised and unsupervised learning methods to minimize the amount of
              information required from users to generate wrappers.  As a result,
              unsophisticated users can rapidly create their own wrappers.  The research has
              the potential to make it vastly easier to access and integrate data to create
              large scale, virtual databases because it makes it possible for information
              users to create virtual databases, rather than relying on information providers
              to carry out this task.

Dynamic Domain proffers technology with the
              potential to transform the economics of information integration by giving
              ordinary users the power to integrate and query information sources.  While
              existing, commercially viable applications of this technology include tools for
              developing shopping agents and specialized search engines, new possibilities
              abound for Internet automations.  For example, consider a manufacturer who
              wants to integrate his production schedules with his business partners in a
              very fluid market where his partners frequently change.  Rather than requiring
              his partners to employ the same enterprise resource planning software that he
              uses or asking them to develop specialized interfaces, he can easily import
              data they make available via the web in whatever format they choose.

