Title       : SBIR Phase I: Earth Data Multimedia Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9960598

Award Number: 9960598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98157              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Caron bruce@planearthsci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Planet Earth Science, Inc.
	      30 West Mission, Suite 8
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931011401    805/569-1343

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5371,7256,7355,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Planet Earth
              Science (PES), Inc., the Earth Data Multimedia Instrument (EDMI), will be a
              software-based, client-side, data-visualization instrument that will bring to
              the K-12 science classroom much the same data visualization capabilities of
              advanced research laboratories:  the ability to acquire real-time data from the
              internet and to manipulate these data locally and display geographically-based
              information.  The EDMI will build upon Internet data access capabilities
              currently under development at Planet Earth Science, Inc.  The EDMI is an
              innovation in educational courseware authoring capabilities, an innovation that
              responds to the need for interactive courseware to enable secondary-school
              science students to discover and understand actual Earth-science data sets. 
              Embedded as a plug-in ('Xtra') to the run-time software products made with
              Macromedia Director and Authorware, the EDMI acquires the advanced interactive
              multimedia capabilities of these authoring platforms.  The EDMI adds the
              capability to visualize and manipulate the most up-to-date Earth data.  As
              such, the EDMI fully complements and extends the usefulness of the NSF
              sponsored WorldWatcher program and other data visualization programs available
              on the marketplace.  The initial user population will be America's
              middle-school Earth science classrooms, although the Instrument can also find
              application in a wide range of formal and informal instructional
              settings.

As the enabling technology for data discovery software in middle
              schools, the EDMI will pioneer a new level of pedagogy, where the ability to
              access and visualize large data sets becomes routine even for pre-teen
              students.  Whether included in the next series of Planet Earth Science's
              award-winning courseware, or sold as a Director/Authorware plug-in to other
              software developers, the EDMI realizes the potential of the Internet as a
              data-delivery network.

