Title       : SBIR Phase I: Gallium Nitride Photodiode Array for Deep Ultraviolet (DUV)
               Lithography Dose and Beam Uniformity Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9960435

Award Number: 9960435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jody J. Klaassen klaassen@svta.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SVT Associates Inc
	      7620 Executive Drive
	      Eden Prairie, MN  553443677    612/934-2100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Phase I SBIR proposal addresses the development of a standards quality,
              solid state detector technology for measurement of deep ultraviolet (DUV)
              irradiance. There is a particular need among manufacturers of DUV
              photolithography equipment for an accurate and stable detector technology to
              measure excimer laser (248, 193, 157nm) pulse energy and total ultraviolet (UV)
              exposure for wafer plane dose uniformity. The current industry standard is the
              KrF 248 nm excimer laser. Systems utilizing the 193 nm ArF laser are ready now
              and 157 nm F2 laser systems will soon become the industry standard. The
              requirements for DUV detection products are high durability under intense UV
              exposure, uniformity of  response over large areas, low noise, linear response,
              and a high power saturation point. The ultraviolet degradation of existing UV
              detection technologies, i.e. silicon or GaAsP, restricts the utilization of
              these materials for the new generation (F2 excimer laser) of DUV lithography
              tools. A single detection/power measurement technology that can be used for all
              UV wavelengths would minimize the new engineering work necessary for each new
              generation of photolithography systems. The wide band gap semiconductor gallium
              nitride (GaN) is proposed as the ideal material system to meet the current and
              future needs for DUV photolithography. P-I-N and Schottky barrier photodiode
              detectors made from GaN, and its ternary compounds with aluminum (AlGaN), have
              high quantum efficiency responsivity for wavelengths shorter than 365 nm. They
              have low noise, linear response over several decades of incident power, and
              high bandwidth. Most importantly for DUV irradiance measurements, the material
              system has the potential to resist degradation under prolonged exposure to high
              intensity UV radiation. In this proposal, plans are presented to evaluate the
              robustness and long term stability of GaN and AlGaN UV detectors under intense,
              prolonged DUV exposure, and also to develop one of the most important, and
              currently unavailable, detection products for this industry, a large area,
              multi-element photodiode array for power and dose uniformity measurements at
              the wafer plane. 

In addition to DUV lithography, there are many other
              industrial and scientific applications for group III-nitride technology
              including UV curing and drying, printed circuit board fabrication,
              sterilization control, phototherapy, combustion monitoring, and solar
              irradiance measurement.

