Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ferroelectric and Ferrite Films on GaAs Substrates - A Solution
               for True Monolithic-Microwave-Integrated Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9960421

Award Number: 9960421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hua Jiang nzat@tiac.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Corning Applied Tech Corp
	      8A Gill Street
	      Woburn, MA  01801    617/935-2030

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This  Phase I SBIR proposal addresses a novel deposition process for the
              manufacture of multilayer films for monolithic microwave integrated circuits
              (MMICs).  MMICs are essential for both commercial and military communication
              applications, such as satellite, GPS, and wireless phones.  Each new generation
              of MMICs are characterized by their increased density, speed, and
              functionality, which, in turn, are the basis for lower cost and higher
              performance devices.  Ferroelectric and ferrite film technology is a key to
              development of a MMIC system-on-a-chip. One substantial advantage of  an MMIC
              chip would be the electric post-processing tuning of circuits in order to bring
              them within specification.  However, such MMICs are not available now, because
              the high growth temperature of ferroelectric and ferrite films are not
              compatible to GaAs substrates. In this proposal, NZ Applied Technologies
              proposes to use a novel metalorganic chemical liquid deposition to fabricate
              high quality low-loss multilayer films on commercial GaAs substrates. This
              low-cost technique has the potential to reduce the film growth temperature
              significantly and to meet all the manufacturing requirements.  If the proposed
              process is successful, miniaturization of true MMICs based on lumped-element
              designs could also become possible.

The commercialization potential for this
              effort includes a new generation of monolithic microwave integrated circuits,
              such as on-chip VCOs (voltage controlled oscillators), high speed tunable IC
              (inductor-capacitor) filters, and tunable delay lines for phase arrays. These
              advanced systems will have application in the space, military, industrial, and
              consumer sectors.

