Title       : SBIR Phase I: Intelligent WWW Access for the Visually Impaired
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9960178

Award Number: 9960178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Simpson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AT Sciences
	      801 East NASA Road One
	      Webster, TX  77598    281/461-7884

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1545,5371,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from AT Sciences
              will develop algorithms and software that allows screen reading software to be
              used by the visually disabled to access computers to respond to changes in task
              context while the user is browsing the World WideWeb (WWW).  Some screen
              readers can adapt their behavior to the current context of the active
              application through application-specific scripts--sophisticated macros that
              determine the behavior of the screen reader in response to the current state of
              the application.  Most screen readers do not provide this capability, however,
              and no screen reading software allows users to associate scripts with
              individual web pages or sites (linked collections of pages).  Software will be
              developed that will allow screen readers to generate page- and site-specific
              scripts automatically, based on (1) the Hyper-Text Markup Language (HTML) code
              defining the pages comprising a WWW site and (2) an analysis of the user's
              actions within that site.  Page- and site-specific scripts will allow screen
              readers to adapt to the current task context while the user is browsing the
              WWW, which will increase efficiency and facilitate the performance of complex
              tasks that may span multiple web pages within a site.

The vast majority of
              blind and severely visually impaired computer users require screen readers to
              access computers.  The algorithms to be produced during this project will be
              applicable to many screen readers and will be useful for automatically
              generating scripts for standard applications as well.  AT Sciences proffers
              technology that can be licensed by other developers to improve the performance
              of new and existing screen readers.  Thus, in light of the growing importance
              of the WWW, which will place a premium on efficient web access, the adaptation
              mechanisms to be developed during this research could serve several
              screen-reading products.

