Title       : SBIR Phase I: Statistical Methods to Enhance Site-Specific Tornado Hazard
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1999  
File        : a9960372

Award Number: 9960372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Nixon knixon@compgeo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CGI
	      330 W. Gray, Suite 500
	      Norman, OK  73069    405/360-0472

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore the
              feasibility of developing innovative spatial/temporal statistical techniques to
              enhance site-specific tornado hazard analysis for any location in the
              conterminous United States. The approach involves use of  a multivariate
              Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and application of Monte Carlo techniques
              that can be applied to the SPC Tornado Database for the purpose of
              regionalizing areas of similar tornado occurrence at the county level. These
              regionalizations provide an optimal basis for determining areas that are
              represented by 'homogeneous tornado statistics' (similar tornado climatology) -
              an important assumption implicitly made during the application of any tornado
              hazard model, and one that has not been suitably addressed in the past. This
              will allow quantification of hazard estimates to be associated with confidence
              estimates based on the characteristics of the data surrounding the point of
              interest. In addition, a new, statistically-based method will be developed for
              identifying and removing spatial and temporal bias in the tornado database due
              to variations in population. The statistical methods will utilize the
              'homogeneous' regionalization. Defining 'homogeneous' regions and removing the
              population bias will enable the SPC Tornado Database to be used to produce a
              more accurate assessment of the 'true' tornado hazard for a specific
              site.
With the science developed fully integrated into a 'site-specific
              tornado hazard analysis system,' any group with an interest in tornado
              climatology, hazard analysis, or risk assessment will have an interest in the
              technology. These groups include companies and organizations that have
              responsibility (or vested interest) in mitigating loss of life and costs of
              tornado-related disasters. Potential users include insurance
              companies,
government agencies (DOE, NRC, civil emergency management),
              engineers, the media, chambers of commerce, and basic researchers. These end
              users represent a significant commercial market for the technology.

