Title       : SBIR Phase I: Production of Enantiomerically-Pure Monomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9960901

Award Number: 9960901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to
              identify, isolate or develop new biocatalysts for producing stereo-specific
              monomers that can be used to synthesize chiral plastics with unique optical and
              mechanical properties. Current technologies for resolving racemic mixtures of
              organic monomers rely on the use of a biocatalyst to selectively react with
              either a desired or undesired enantiomer. The desired enantiomer can then be
              purified and used in the targeted process. During this project, new
              biocatalysts will be identified and used to resolve enantiomers that can be
              used to synthesize plastics. The resulting plastics will initially be tested
              and used to construct devices for controlling optical signals on fiber optic
              cables, and other uses for the plastics will become apparent after the thermal,
              mechanical, and optical properties of the materials are evaluated and
              understood. Without such development work, the properties and utility of the
              plastics can not be predicted, and relatively large quantities of improved
              biocatalysts are needed to produce sufficient quantities of polymers for
              testing and evaluation. The new catalysts will overcome existing limitations
              such as poor reaction kinetics, enzyme instability, insufficient selectivity,
              and high costs which have hindered widespread acceptance of biocatalysts in
              organic synthesis.  Enantiomerically pure chemicals are becoming increasingly
              important as products, and as intermediates for synthesizing pharmaceutical and
              other end products. This work will lead to the production of enzymes that can
              be utilized to synthesize chiral monomers that can subsequently be used for
              creating optical devises for the fiber optic industry. Likewise, the enzymes
              will likely find utility in synthesizing enantiopure intermediates for a wide
              range of chemical syntheses.
