Title       : STTR Phase I: Development of a Compact Cloud Spectrometer and Impactor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960535

Award Number: 9960535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Kok glkok@dropletmeasurement.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D.M.T.
	      2400 Central Ave   Suite B2
	      Boulder, CO  80301    303/-44-0-55

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project aims to prove
              the feasibility of developing a new in-situ instrument for measurement of the
              droplet size distribution and condensed water mass. This Cloud Spectrometer and
              Impactor (CSI) would be based on two existing technologies: the
              light-scattering spectrometer and the counterflow virtual impactor. Features of
              both instruments would be combined in a lightweight, compact, commercial
              instrument for measurement of cloud microphysical characteristics on an
              aircraft platform. Specifically, in Phase I the proposer would design two
              shrouded inlets for the CSI: one that impacts and evaporates droplets for a
              measurement of condensed water mass, and one that optically measures the
              droplet size distribution. A plan for incorporating all the necessary
              measurement and electronic components within the internal framework of a
              standard housing used on research aircraft would be developed. Methods for
              providing sufficient dry carrier gas, even at high-altitude, and would be
              assessed. Candidate techniques for measuring water vapor after droplets and ice
              crystals are impacted and evaporated within the CSI inlet would be evaluated.
              This instrument development focuses on an airborne instrument, but the
              feasibility of ground-based applications would be explored. 
  	Research
              organizations and industrial companies needing accurate measurements of the
              size and mass of condensed water will use this instrument. For research
              organizations, measurements of droplet size distribution and condensed water
              mass are important for weather forecasting and understanding global climate
              change. In industry, the application of agricultural chemicals and many coating
              processes rely on liquid water sprays. The accurate determination of the
              droplet size and total water content is important for correct application of
              the material.

