Title       : STTR Phase I: Microflow and Nanoflow Characterization System (MINCS) for
               Micro-Electromechanical Systems (MEMS) Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960777

Award Number: 9960777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Fiechtner gjfiech@ward.appl.wpafb.af.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ISSI
	      2766 Indian Ripple Road
	      Dayton, OH  45440    937/429-4980

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1443,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project concerns the development
              of a unique characterization system for the enhancement of
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) that rely on microflows or nanoflows. 
              The proposed Microflow and Nanoflow Characterization System (MINCS)
              incorporates a suite of laser-based microfluidcharacterization techniques that
              will be demonstrated during the Phase I program.  Important quantities such as
              velocity and species concentration will be determined simultaneously by
              acquiring two-dimensional images using multiphoton confocal microscopy.  A
              computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code including chemical reactions will be
              incorporated into the instrument.  The fusion of the instrumentation and CFD
              code into the MINCS package will improve the characterization of MEMS devices
              based on either technique alone.  Upon validation using the MINCS instruments,
              the CFD code will be more applicable to the prediction of microflow
              characteristics, thereby enhancing the design of future MEMS devices.  This
              Phase I program has important secondary benefits; MEMS-based devices will
              benefit from improved designs as a result of improved instrumental and
              computational characterization.  This secondary benefit will have a larger
              economic impact through enhanced manufacturing of MEMS devices. For this
              reason, the research partners are a consortium possessing MEMS manufacturing
              facilities and design facilities for MEMS instruments for analytical-chemistry
              applications.

