Title       : SBIR Phase I: Computational Tool for Plasma Equipment Design Using a
               Non-Statistical Boltzmann Solver
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960333

Award Number: 9960333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Kolobov vik@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1266,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a CAD tool
              for plasma equipment/ processes using a non-statistical Boltzmann solver for
              the analysis of charged particle kinetics. Currently used hydrodynamic models
              lack the necessary physics while the statistical (Monte Carlo) methods are too
              expensive for practical use. The proposed Boltzmann solver will enable precise
              yet affordable description of low-pressure plasma reactors for semiconductor
              manufacturing.  The innovative aspects of the research include, (i) development
              of an elliptic representation of the velocity distribution function (VDF) valid
              for arbitrary anisotropy of the VDF, (ii) incorporation of the recently
              discovered hot plasma effects, and (iii) integration of the Boltzmann solver
              with a commercial software, CFD-ACE+, to enable simulations of industrial
              plasma systems. The elliptic representation reduces the Boltzmann equation to a
              set of two coupled equations in a four-dimensional space which can be solved by
              well-established techniques. In Phase I, the feasibility of the approach will
              be demonstrated on selected systems with small anisotropy of the VDF. The Phase
              II work will focus on extending the model to problems with arbitrary VDF
              anisotropy and on validation against experimental data and Monte Carlo
              simulations of industrial plasma reactors.

The CFD-ACE+ software, with the
              addition of the Boltzmann solver, will be capable of kinetic modeling of low
              pressure plasma processing reactors. The use of this software will
              significantly reduce design cycle times/costs for developing new
              equipment/processes for IC fabrication. Additionally, this tool will be used to
              analyze and optimize charge transport in deep sub-micron semiconductor devices.
