Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultra-Compact Driver Technology for Extending the Lifetime of High
               Power Laser Diode Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9960084

Award Number: 9960084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney A. Petr rpetr@srl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop compact,
              all-solid-state drivers for powering laser diode arrays and thereby increase
              their lifetime.  New ultra-high-current semiconductor switch technology will be
              coupled with new proprietary diode protection circuits to extend diode laser
              lifetime tenfold.  This leads directly to a tenfold reduction in annual laser
              operating cost. Recent breakthroughs in high power semiconductor technology,
              namely the GCT (Gate Commutated Thyristor) switch, also offer a tenfold
              improvement in speed and power over existing commercial devices. SRL (Science
              Research Laboratory )  proposes to develop an advanced, compact pulsed power
              module based on these technologies that has the power, speed and protection
              circuitry needed to reliably drive high power laser diode arrays.  This
              GCT-based power conditioning technology offers the improvements in system
              compactness, reliability and lifetime that are essential to the economic
              viability of laser diode arrays for many new commercial applications. 
 
GCT
              technology coupled with proprietary SRL fast protection circuitry offers a
              tenfold decrease in diode laser array size and weight and a tenfold increase in
              diode lifetime.  This new technology is also essential to developing the pulsed
              power required for critical medical applications including new and improved
              methods of detecting metastatic cancer and new cancer therapies now under
              development at SRL and at other laboratories.

