Title       : SBIR Phase I: Intelligent Control of Internal Combustion Engines using Nonlinear
               Model Predictive Control and Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960759

Award Number: 9960759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev Seereeram sanjeev@ssci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scientific Systems Co, Inc
	      500 W Cummings Park Suite 3950
	      Woburn, MA  018016514    781/933-5355

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1266,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
              five-level hierarchical architecture for intelligent control of internal
              combustion (IC) engines. IC engine control problems are highly challenging due
              to nonlinear, time-varying and stochastic nature of the processes and widely
              varying operating conditions. Current IC engine control systems have evolved
              gradually from fully mechanical to computerized electronic systems, but a
              comprehensive unified control architecture is lacking. Basic
objectives of the
              system to be developed are emissions reduction, improvements in fuel
              efficiency, driveability, reliability and safety. A Nonlinear Model Predictive
              Control (MPC) approach based on both physical and Neural Network (NN) models
              will be employed. During Phase I, a complete five-level control architecture
              will be developed using the a state-of-the-art survey. The problem of air-fuel
              ratio control using predictive models and feedback from oxygen sensors will be
              solved using the MPC approach. University of California, Berkeley (Professor
              Karl Hedrick) will participate as a sub-contractor, and provide use of
              experimental facilities. General Motors Research and Development Center
              (Warren, MI) will provide evaluation and guidance for development and
              commercialization efforts.

The market for IC engine power includes the
              global automobile industry.  Significant improvements in emission control, fuel
              savings, driveability, and reliability are anticipated through use of this
              intelligent control approach.  Direct commercial benefits could be enormous,
              given the size and importance of the IC engine in the global transportation
              market.  Indirect benefits include improved air quality and conservation of
              resources used in the production and operation of IC-powered vehicles. 
