Title       : SBIR Phase I: Modeling of Thermal Transport and its Interaction with Crystal
               Formation in Optical Fiber Drawing on Distributed Memory Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9960522

Award Number: 9960522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiwen Liu liu@esi-al.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Engineering Sciences Inc
	      1900 Golf Road, Suite D
	      Huntsville, AL  35802    205/883-6233

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
Program Ref : 0000,1266,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop and
              demonstrate a computational tool for detailed simulation of thermal transport
              in a optical fiber drawing process on distributed memory machines. The ZBLAN
              optical fibers may replace the existing silica optical fibers in the next
              century because they have broader spectrum and lower loss coefficient. However,
              the ZBLAN glass tends to crystallize during the drawing of optical fiber. The
              suppression of crystallization requires a clear understanding of thermal
              transport involving radiative heat transfer and two-phase flow with a curved
              free surface. In Phase I, the finite volume method (FVM) will be modified to
              simulate radiative heat transfer in the gas enclosure as well as inside the
              glass. The gas-glass interface is treated as an optically directional and
              reflecting surface. The full elliptic governing equations will be solved for
              both glass and external gas, which are coupled by the conjugate boundary
              conditions at the interface. The discretization of the physical domain will be
              carried out by the multizone adaptive grid generation (MAGG) technique. An
              efficient parallel algorithm will be developed and implemented in the solution
              procedure with message passing by the Message Passing Interface (MPI) library.
              A parallel algebraic multi-grid (AMG) solver will be developed to solve the
              discretized equations. The Phase I will demonstrate the high accuracy and
              efficiency of the proposed simulation tool for thermal transport process. In
              Phase II, the crystal formation model will be developed, and the coupling
              between thermal transport and crystal formation will be completed in the tool.
              

The simulation tool to be developed will significantly benefit the optical
              fiber industry that requires a detailed understanding of multimode and highly
              coupled transport phenomena and their interactions with thermal induced
              defects. The potential applications include the design, optimization, and
              control of optical fiber drawing process and many other manufacturing and
              materials processing systems.

Key Words: Optical Fiber Drawing, Radiative
              Heat Transfer, Parallel Computing. 
