Title       : SBIR Phase I: Active Control of Gas Turbine Engines Using Eddy Current Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960978

Award Number: 9960978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole A. Teolis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Techno-Sciences
	      10001 Derekwood Lane Ste 204
	      Lanham-Seabrook, MD  20706    301/577-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                      This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the
              development of algorithms for active control of blade vibration and engine
              stability (stall and surge) using the General Dynamics Advanced Technology
              Systems (GDATS) eddy current sensor (ECS) array. The increased demand for
              aircraft maneuverability and efficiency drive the engine designers to produce
              lighter engines that will have to operate in the presence of increased levels
              of steady-state and dynamic engine-face distortion. Such engines demand active
              control systems for safe operation. Working closely with GDATS, the proposer
              has been actively involved in the development of signal analysis and diagnostic
              tools for the detection of engine faults. We shall leverage this ongoing
              development of diagnostics tools for the ECS in the development of active
              control algorithms.  Current ECS diagnostic tools are already able to provide
              tip clearance profiles, as well as vibration and stall indicators. We propose
              to extend the functionality of the ECS system beyond diagnostics to active and
              automatic real-time control of gas turbine engines.
        From this project
              we expect to develop algorithms for active control of gas turbine engine blade
              vibration and stability that make use of the GDATS ECS array. The GDATS ECS
              array is currently the favored sensor system for installation on the Joint
              Strike Fighter. A software system upgrade capable of using ECS data to compute
              the necessary indicators and estimate the disturbances needed for active
              vibration and engine stability control will be highly desirable. If this can be
              accomplished it will reduce the number of new sensors needed for active
              control, thus potentially saving millions of dollars.
