Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improving Pearl Quality and Yield Using Biotechnology: Plugs,
               Patches, Therapeutants and Delivery Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9960694

Award Number: 9960694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil A. Sims nasims@aloha.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Black Pearls Inc
	      P.O. Box 525
	      Holualoa, HI  967250525    808/322-7108

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 1167,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR Phase I project applies biomedical principles and practices to the
              lucrative, but poorly understood process of pearl culture. Despite the value of
              the world pearl industry (around US$3 billion per annum), it is still based on
              turn-of-the-century technology. The Pearl Development Group addresses this
              immense opportunity by bringing together a unique consortium of pearl seeding
              technicians, farmers, biologists,
entrepreneurs and biomedical scientists.
              Their collective efforts are focussed on using rigorous scientific methods with
              state-of-the-art biotechnology to improve pearl production. Preliminary trials
              by PDG reveal two areas of particular promise with the pearl seeding operation.
              Firstly, improved sterility from use of antibiotics or sealants to reduce the
              risk of post-operative infection; and secondly, cellular adhesion 
protein
              coatings on the nucleus to improve pearl sac formation. Both could result in
              more pearls, of better quality. These improvements could have a compounding
              effect, as better yields result in more oysters being subsequently reseeded.
              Sealants may also allow technicians to insert larger nuclei, resulting in
              geometrical increases in value of successive pearls. These innovations will be
              tested on a large scale on our farm, and evaluated by comparing post-seed
              rejection rates and early assays of pearl sac growth and pearl formation. If
              successful, these technologies could be marketable to other pearl farms
              worldwide, through established farm suppliers, as well as leading to increased
              profitability for our subsidiary and partner farms. Slight improvements in the
              pearl seeding operation can dramatically improve farm profitability.  For our
              
Majuro farm model, production improvements of, say, 35% yield revenue
              increases of $1.1 million for minimal added costs.  The price margin on these
              products might then be $10 per seeding operation. Extrapolated to the Tahitian
              pearl industry alone, this is a value-added of over $42 million p.a.

