Title       : SBIR Phase I: StructuresWorld: An Integrated Modeling/ Multimedia Environment
               for Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1999  
File        : a9960847

Award Number: 9960847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Rucki drsoftwr@wolfenet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dr. Software LLC
	      819 NE 71st Street
	      Seattle, WA  98115    206/524-8683

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 7256,7410,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Dr. Software, LLC,
              will prototype a next- generation structural simulation environment, providing
              an advance in the way that concepts are taught and learned in undergraduate and
              graduate-level structural engineering and architectural education.  Real-time
              analysis and visualization will be seamlessly integrated with multimedia
              content to provide a rich environment for presenting and exploring concepts of
              structural behavior.  In terms of existing technologies, this project will
              bridge the gap between advanced analysis tools, which are designed to provide
              numerical/ visual results but limited educational content and context, and
              multimedia environments, which typically are designed to provide rich context
              but generally offer limited analysis capabilities.  The research will build on
              an existing simulation environment in which users can manipulate and modify
              models and simultaneously visualize behavior in real-time.  One portion of the
              proposed research will produce an appealing 3D simulation environment.  Based
              on Dr. Software's experience with developing and using multimedia-based
              instructional tools, a second aspect of the research will implement
              capabilities for scripting model manipulations in conjunction with embedded
              text, images, and time-based media to provide context for the modeling.  The
              total result will be an environment in which structural concepts can be
              presented in a 'live' context, allowing a rich combination of open-ended
              exploration and guided study and presentation.

Dr. Software proffers
              technology that will be useful beyond the targeted audience. The user interface
              and embedded multimedia content can be modified to target other, larger
              audiences, including professional engineers (civil, aerospace, and mechanical)
              and architects. Indeed, it is also an appropriate vehicle for introducing
              engineering concepts to the general public.
