Title       : STTR Phase I: Electrochromic Devices Fabricated from Self-Assembled
               Polyelectrolytes for Flat Panel Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9960640

Award Number: 9960640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Miller millerm@lunainnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Luna Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 11704
	      Blacksburg, VA  240601704    540/953-4267

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I program will
              encompass the revolutionary ionically self-assembled monolayer (ISAM) methods
              of creating multifunctional thin-films monolayer by monolayer to yield
              self-assembled, electronically and photonically-active polymeric thin films. 
              F&S/Luna Innovations and research partners have demonstrated that the ISAM
              technique can be used to fabricate both polymer light emitting diodes and
              inherently noncentrosymmetric electro-optic polymer films.  Because the
              self-assembly technique relies inherently on polyelectrolytes, electrochromic
              devices become another important area of opportunity for the combination of
              ISAM with conducting polymers.  Such devices change their color and/or opacity
              when a voltage is applied.  The ISAM process allows molecular level control
              over the assembly of the layered structures of an electrochromic device with
              exceptional homogeneity and ease of processing. ISAM electrochromic thin film
              devices offer the potential for enhanced electrochromic contrast and increased
              switching speed as well as major advantages of excellent homogeneity, high
              thermal and chemical stability, simplicity and low-cost.  Importantly, the
              films can be conformally fabricated over large areas on flexible substrates. 
              F&S/Luna Innovations will work with optoelectronic and polymer synthesis
              university researchers to rapidly transition recent laboratory results to
              prototype device products.

ISAM electrochromic devices have immediate
              application in military and commercial areas for inexpensive, large area,
              flexible optical displays, smart windows, and automotive rear view mirrors and
              sunroofs.

