Title       : SBIR Phase I: Programmable, Scalable Wireless Information Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1999  
File        : a9960454

Award Number: 9960454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vanu G. Bose vanu@vanu.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanu, Inc.
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  021434228    617/864-1711

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4096,9102,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Vanu, Inc. provides
              a plan for the research and development of a programmable, scalable wireless
              information infrastructure based on software radio technology.  The system will
              support all of the signal processing for many digital wireless communications
              systems entirely in application level software on a cluster of commercial
              off-the-shelf PCs.  This approach enables significant flexibility, through
              software upgrades, that can overcome many of the limitations of current
              wireless communications systems.  For example, the cellular telephony
              infrastructure utilizes hardware-based signal processing in base stations. 
              Adding new services or migrating to new standards requires time consuming and
              costly hardware upgrades.  With a software radio infrastructure, these changes
              can be executed by simply downloading software.  This capability will
              accelerate the pace of innovation in the wireless marketplace, reduce the risk
              associated with deployment of new services and reduce the barrier to entry for
              firms with innovative services, such as wireless broadband internet access and
              cable television services. The research objectives are as follows: design of a
              robust, scalable, distributed software radio infrastructure for real-time
              signal processing; design of a load balancing algorithm; evaluation of the
              computational requirements for advanced digital communications systems; and the
              determination of feasibility of this approach in a commercial context.
Vanu,
              Inc.'s proffered technology with be the basis for a commercial software radio
              product that will permit the deployment of any wireless stand or service as a
              software upgrade.  The firm also intends to benefit the academic community by
              creating a platform to support university research in wireless communication
              and networking.

