Title       : SBIR Phase I: Transcription Profiling for Environmental Toxicity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9960650

Award Number: 9960650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine E. Willett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos E. Semino  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Phylonix Pharm Inc
	      100 Inman Street
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/868-2399

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9145,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to validate the
              zebrafish (Danio rerio) as a whole animal model for developmental compound
              toxicity testing using a molecular genetic approach.  Many toxic substances
              produced by the chemical, pharmaceutical and agronomic industries are not
              properly characterized by comprehensive hazard/risk assessment tests, primarily
              because of the high cost and experiment time of classical animal-base toxicity
              testing and the lack of relevance of results to humans.
New vertebrate animal
              models for hazard/environmental toxicity, which are reproducible, rapid and
              highly predictive of human toxicity, are needed. Inherent advantages of the
              zebrafish model include the low cost to generate and maintain embryos, rapid
              embryogenesis, and a morphological and molecular basis for tissue and organ
              development similar to humans. Phase I research will use in situ hybridization
              and Northern Blot
analysis to study the patterns and levels of expression of
              zebrafish genes which are highly homologous to mammalian genes involved in
              toxicity response. Following treatment of zebrafish embryos with chemicals,
              changes in gene expression will be analyzed and compared with other vertebrate
              models.  The zebrafish model will serve as an inexpensive animal model for
              toxicity testing for the pharmaceutical, chemical, agricultural and cosmetic
              industries.  The zebrafish model will serve as an inexpensive animal model that
              can be used to rapidly generate comprehensive information about the function of
              genes in response to exposure to chemicals, including environmental toxins and
              drugs.  It will be useful to the pharmaceutical, chemical, agricultural and
              cosmetic industries in areas such as toxicity testing, pharmacogenomics, drug
              discovery and screening, 
and bioinformatics.

