Title       : SBIR Phase I: Inversion of Geophysical Measurements for Fracture Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9960077

Award Number: 9960077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Brown sbrown@ner.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Research, Inc.
	      76 Olcott Drive
	      White River Junction, VT  05001    802/296-2401

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
Program Ref : 1038,1266,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
              innovative method for detecting and quantifying natural fracture systems in
              rock. The geometry of fracture systems controls the permeability of many oil
              and gas reservoir rocks. Many of the same aspects of geometry which control the
              fluid permeability also control the geophysical response. This project is to
              develop methods to invert geophysical measurements in fractured rock for the
              underlying fracture geometry, thus allowing prediction of
              permeability.

Several forward models have been developed relating fracture
              geometry to various anisotropic, stress- dependent properties including
              permeability, electrical conductivity, and seismic velocity. These forward
              models will be used as the basis for developing an inverse method for obtaining
              the fracture geometry from diverse geophysical measurements.  This inversion
              scheme will be modeled after an existing successful method for inversion of
              rock pore structure from constraining laboratory measurements.  An inversion
              method for fracture properties will be implemented by inserting forward models
              specific to the fracture problem into the same inversion code previously
              developed for rock pore structure. This initial method will be tested for
              robustness and internal consistency using photographic image data from natural
              fracture networks.

Software developed under Phases I and II of this project
              will provide the needed inputs for dual-porosity fractured reservoir simulators
              from diverse constraining geophysical data. This software will be invaluable
              for exploration and production activities in the oil and gas industry.
