Title       : SBIR Phase I: Carbon Monoxide-Tolerant Anode Catalysts for Proton Exchange
               Membrane Fuel Cells via Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960502

Award Number: 9960502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Faguy pfaguy@microcoating.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Chamblee, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1401,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
              development of low loading/watt CO-tolerant precious metal catalysts for
              application in fuel cells operating on hydrogen from reformed hydrocarbons. 
              Recent research indicates that Pt:Ru, Pt:Mo and even some ternary and
              quartenary Pt-containing systems can achieve the power output and CO tolerance
              required for next generation vehicle (NGV's).  However, most catalyst layer
              fabrication methods are far too expensive for mass-market applications.
              Furthermore, existing technologies cannot provide the short development duty
              cycle and amenability to combinatorial methods that optimization of a composite
              anode catalyst layer requires.  The Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD)
              does provide such a technology and has been demonstrated to provide a low-cost
              solution for catalytic coatings onto both proton exchange membranes(PEM) and
              carbon electrodes.  CCVD's primary advantage is the ability to deposit high
              quality thin films in the open atmosphere in a production friendly manner.  The
              process uses simple, low-cost equipment and relatively inexpensive precursors. 
              Development of low loading/watt, high performance CO tolerant catalysts is
              necessary to reduce the cost of manufacturing and enable the large volume
              production of fuel cell membrane-electrode assemblies (MEAs), a fuel cell stack
              component identified as critical to the successful development of NGV's.

The
              Government/automotive industry Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles
              (PNGV) has identified proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) technology to
              be extremely promising for electric vehicle applications. Adoption of PEMFC
              power technology for automotive drive trains will enable achievement of
              industry goals for better automotive fuel economy and reduced emission of air
              pollutants in comparison with conventional internal combustion engines. This
              goal will be realized only if costs of PEMFC technology can be reduced further
              to competitive levels. Achievement of these goals will increase air quality and
              reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil supplies. Successful technical results
              arising from the proposed program of R&D will have straightforward
              commercialization avenue from MCT to a variety of automotive manufacturers and
              fuel cell producers.


