Title       : SBIR Phase I: In Vivo Studies of a Glucose Sensor in the Nude Rat Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9960400

Award Number: 9960400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Ellis-Busby STIDiane@AOL.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : STI
	      910 Boston Turnpike
	      Shrewsbury, MA  01545    508/842-0432

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9102,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project involves the development
              of
a diabetic small animal model for in vivo testing of a minimally invasive
              glucose
sensor. Diabetes is an increasingly common lifelong disease and is
              associated with
many complications. It is responsible for an estimated 10-15%
              of all health care
expenditures. Effective treatment has been shown to prevent
              or delay many of the
associated complications. The most common current
              treatments include diet,
exercise, and self-monitoring of blood glucose
              (SMBG). An improvement to the
current SMBG method would enable and encourage
              patients to monitor their glucose
levels more closely and thus improve the the
              general health and quality of life of
the diabetic population. This technology
              is based on a small optical sensor implant
that is fluorescent and detectable
              through the skin. In order to bring this novel
glucose sensor closer to
              clinical trials, animal efficacy trials must be performed.
The diabetic,
              immune reconstituted nude rat model will be developed to test the in
vivo
              performance of the glucose sensor. Data will be collected to demonstrate
              that
the sensor measures glucose changes in insulin and glucose tolerance
              tests. The
life-time and biocompatibility of the sensor will also be studied. 
                

An improvement to the current method of measuring glucose levels would
              enable and
encourage diabetic patients to measure glucose levels more
              frequently at home. An
advance in glucose measurement technology would greatly
              impact the diabetes market.
A large commercial market currently exists for
              innovative improvements to the
current fingerstick method, such as the
              minimally invasive glucose sensor described
in this proposal.
