Title       : SBIR Phase I: In Situ Chemical Analysis Of Reacting Thin Films During Thermal
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1999  
File        : a9960353

Award Number: 9960353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiazhan Xu jxu@online-ftir.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : On-Line Technologies Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  061083720    860/291-0719

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a new
              in-situ thin-film probe for monitoring the chemistry of reacting films in
              real-time.  This probe will provide valuable information on many of the new
              chemistry-intensive materials that are being developed to replace the current
              generation of materials used in mainstream IC manufacturing.  It will employ a
              breakthrough in infrared-reflectometry that greatly expands the scope of
              application to modern IC materials.  The probe's improved spectral data will be
              analyzed with physical and chemometric models to extract the complex optical
              constants of materials from the reflectance, and to relate the optical
              constants to the composition and transport properties of the layers.  The
              sensor will be prototyped in Phase I to study 1) the curing process of advanced
              spin-on low-k dielectric thin films, where preliminary low-k and resist studies
              have shown the ability to monitor the reactions of various chemical functional
              groups during cure processes 2) the kinetics of advanced silicide formation
              during rapid thermal processing, where a preliminary study showed the ability
              to monitor a two step formation of titanium silicide In Phase II, the sensor
              will be integrated onto a production fabrication tool for advanced spin-on
              dielectric formation.

This technology will fill needs both for better
              chemical monitoring of complex thin film materials and for better integrated
              in-line metrology, for process development and control.  With better metrology
              for R&D, new low-k dielectrics, photoresists, silicides and other complex
              advanced electronic materials can be developed and integrated more rapidly and
              at lower cost into mainstream IC manufacturing.  With better production process
              monitoring and control, the cost of production of devices will be significantly
              reduced.

