Title       : SBIR Phase I: Auto-Tracking Using Trailing Templates and Skeletal Guides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1999  
File        : a9960369

Award Number: 9960369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Mostert pmostert@gte.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mostert Group
	      3298 Roxburg Drive
	      Lexington, KY  405033432    606/223-1490

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6840,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project from the Mostert Group
              proposes to develop a method to track animals and humans in motion,
              particularly in athletic events, where movement can be characterized by
              repetitive motions over a relatively short period of time.  An efficient
              algorithm for tracking of biological motion through cluttered backgrounds and
              significant self-occlusion that does not require the placement of visual
              targets, is proposed.  While the proposed algorithms will have application in
              many other domains, the Mostert Group initially focuses on real-time tracking
              of running subjects over a fixed distance in actual athletic events. 
              Repetitive motions will be exploited by developing mechanisms to learn
              subsequent search regions for constrained template matching.  A small database
              of tracked positions and velocities (derived from previous motion sequences)
              will allow the algorithm to generalize to new subjects moving over the same
              course.  The Principal Investigator, Paul Mostert, has created a trailing
              template method that will be combined with the method of deformable templates
              of Zhong, Jain, and Dubuisson-Jolly, and used in conjunction with skeletal
              models that will guide the deformation of the ZJDJ templates through
              potentially confusing relationships (e.g., the crossover motion of the legs). 
              The primary objectives of Phase I research will be a preliminary development of
              a graphical user interface followed by that of two key tracking technologies;
              (1) a predictive algorithm to efficiently guide the search for the next
              position of the object features within video frames, and (2) a model-based
              approach to deformation of image templates using skeletal guides to improve
              tracking robustness of biological motion.

Applications for this software
              proffered by the Mostert Group have a ready market demand.  Present commercial
              tracking technology of biological motion requires the placement of intrusive
              control targets at critical positions on the subject.  The commercial need for
              tracking and characterizing general biological motion will be exploited,
              including tools for animal behavior analysis, and predicting and improving
              motion efficiency in athletes.  An initial vertical market for obtaining
              statistical measures known to be significant to the future performance of a
              racehorse has considerable potential.

