Title       : SBIR Phase I: Pathway-Based Detection of Minimal Deletion Sets in Metabolic
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9960294

Award Number: 9960294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99121              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christophe H. Schilling cschilli@bioeng.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genomatica Inc.
	      6199 Cornerstone Ct. East
	      San Diego, CA  92121    619/450-0707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)  Phase I project.  
              Innovative approaches are now needed to utilize the information generated from
              genome research in an integrated fashion to analyze, interpret, and predict the
              function of biological systems to assist in the development of novel
              therapeutics and the advancement of biotechnology on the whole. This proposal
              addresses these needs with novel engineering approaches for studying the
              systemic capabilities of metabolism in completely sequenced bacterial genomes
              to address the emerging healthcare threat of antibacterial resistance. The
              overall objective of the proposed research is the in silico identification of
              the minimal gene deletion sets that are capable of rendering
              cellular
metabolic networks inoperable. This involves the construction of
              genome specific stoichiometric models of cellular metabolism from genomic
              information and the subsequent application of convex analysis to determine the
              set of extreme pathways that can be used to assess the complete production
              capabilities and functions of the metabolic network.  From the set of extreme
              pathways algorithms can be constructed to identify sets of
reactions and their
              associated genes whose loss to the network is critical or lethal under various
              combinations of environmental and genetic conditions. The identification of
              these sensitive or critical steps in metabolism based on their concerted
              effects represents a new paradigm in the search for antimicrobial
              chemotherapeutics and the rational metabolic engineering of industrial
              bacteria. These research efforts will lead to the validation of in silico
              simulations used to identify minimal deletion sets to be used as molecular
              targets in the development of antibacterial chemotherapy. Therefore the direct
              commercial application is in the identification of targets for drug
              development. Additional applications for the identification of these condition
              specific sensitive steps in metabolism include the metabolic engineering of
              bacteria for bioprocesses, and
bioremediation.

