Title       : SBIR Phase I: GaAsNSb - New Low-bandgap Material Lattice-matched to GaAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9960329

Award Number: 9960329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99909              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley M. Vernon svernon@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop growth of a
              new material, GaAsNSb, that is lattice-matched to GaAs and has a bandgap as low
              as 1 eV or smaller.  After establishment of growth by metalorganic chemical
              vapor deposition, we will focus on using this material as the base layer in a
              heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT). This low-bandgap base will permit
              low-voltage operation, while the lattice-match will allow strain-free operation
              for high reliability and ease of monolithic integration.  Another important use
              of low-bandgap GaAsNSb will be for long-wavelength (1300 nm) laser diodes. 
              GaAsNSb, with 3% nitrogen, 8% antimony, is exactly lattice-matched to GaAs and
              should have a bandgap of 1 eV; for an HBT.  The high-bandgap emitter can then
              be GaAs, thus eliminating the problems often associated with AlGaAs or GaInP,
              which are typical emitter materials on GaAs HBTs.  Phase I will concentrate on
              growing, doping, and characterizing GaAsNSb, including forming and testing
              GaAs-GaAsNSb diodes that simulate the base-emitter junction of an HBT.  Growth
              and fabrication of complete HBT structures is beyond the scope of a Phase I for
              this previously unexplored material.  Since this process is GaAs-based, it is
              totally compatible with our existing HBT technology.  Phase II will include
              optimizing GaAsNSb growth and doping control, growth of GaAs-GaAsNSb
              heterojunctions, optimizing HBT design, and growing, fabricating, and testing
              HBT devices.  Use of GaAsNSb in optoelectronic applications may also be
              explored.

The research will result in a new low-voltage heterojunction
              bipolar transistor for use in cellular telephones.  Such HBTs will have
              improved reliability and efficiency over existing GaAs-based devices. The
              low-bandgap, lattice-matched material to be developed here also will have
              applicability to long-wavelength lasers and other optical devices.

