Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fabrication of Photonic Band Gap Structures Embedded in Low
               Temperature Co-fired Ceramic for Millimeter Wave Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1999   
File        : a9960011

Award Number: 9960011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny Eliyahu deliyahu@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WaveBand Corporation
	      375 Van Ness Avenue, Suite 1105
	      Torrance, CA  90501    310/212-7808

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9165,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses development of
              a new material for microwave electronics.  As microwave applications, including
              portable wireless devices, expand, and as digital integrated circuit speeds and
              clock rates increase to the millimeter wave (MMW) range, the need arises for a
              low-loss dimensionally stable dielectric with properties uniform over a broad
              range of frequencies and environmental conditions. The main challenge is to
              find a way of guiding MMW radiation through a dielectric substrate with minimal
              scattering losses, and of creating low-loss resonant cavities.

Waveband
              Corporation proposes to develop a new technique to embed Photonic Band Gap
              Structures (PBSs) in ceramic substrates at an early stage of fabrication. The
              PBSs will reduce radiative losses in devices fabricated using the Low
              Temperature Co-fired Ceramic On Metal technique, by preventing radiation
              leakage and by minimizing undesired scattering. The PBSs will be embedded in
              the ceramic using well-developed fabrication methods. The result will be
              improved performance, without an increase in the manufacturing costs. Moreover,
              a PBS will lead to totally new applications: frequency-band controlled filters,
              perfect channel-drop filters, point-defect resonant cavities, linear-defect 90
              degree waveguide bends, waveguide intersections with low crosstalk, and other. 
              The new material will be employed in high-volume production items for
              applications such as automotive electronics, medical electronics, as well as in
              a variety of portable wireless communication devices.


