Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a Talking Tactile Computer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9960996

Award Number: 9960996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Landau sl@touchgraphics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Touch Graphics
	      140 Jackson Street
	      Brooklyn, NY  11211    718/389-1541

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1545,5371,9178,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR Phase I research project will test the feasibility of a stand-alone
              computer device for use by students and others who are blind or visually
              impaired.  This device will incorporate a 'single board computer' that consists
              of a Pentium-class microprocessor, audio system and connectors for all standard
              computer peripherals, an internal hard disk drive and a rechargeable battery. 
              The operating system will be Windows 98.  Instead of a video display and a
              mouse, this Talking Tactile Computer will rely on a built in touch-sensitive
              surface to which a variety of vacuum-thermoformed raised-line and textured
              tactile graphic overlays will be mounted.  All of this apparatus will be housed
              in a single compact and portable enclosure.  No additional equipment or
              external wiring will be required.  It is expected that the device will be
              competitively priced as compared with standard notebook computers, because it
              does not include a video display.  A blind or visually impaired student will
              use the device, accompanying tactile materials and associated programs to run
              interactive, multimedia computer applications.  The system is being developed
              in tandem with a proposed research project to create a semester-long curriculum
              for College Calculus by Drs. Albert Blank and Michael Kress of the College of
              Staten Island.  For the purpose of the Phase I SBIR test-of-concept, Touch
              Graphics will adapt a series of tactile plates, from a unit on coordinate
              geometry already created by Dr. Blank, to the new device described
              above.

The device and accompanying tactile graphic materials and CD
              ROM-based programs will be marketed to schools, libraries, community and
              residential centers, businesses with visually impaired employees, and to
              individuals.  This single product is intended to be adaptable, through the
              publication of additional software titles by Touch Graphics, to a broad range
              of user groups, including students; technical, professional and office workers;
              senior citizens with declining visual acuity; and others.  With minor
              modifications, the device could be adapted for fixed-position kiosk
              applications in public places, like shopping malls and transit hubs.

