Title       : A New Nanoprobe Instrument for Imaging Trace Elements in Electronic and
               Optoelectronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9460624

Award Number: 9460624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich F. Arlinghaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Atom Sciences Inc
	      114 Ridgeway Center
	      Oak Ridge, TN  378306926    423/483-1113

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0203000   Health                                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop,
              demonstrate, and characterize a high-resolution, highly efficient instrument
              for imaging elemental distributions.  Atom Sciences, Inc.  has designated this
              device as a sputter-initiated resonance ionization nanoprobe (SIRINP)
              instrument. The unique features of SIRINP are necessary to meet the needs of
              the electronics and optoelectronics fields as higher performance, higher speed
              devices continue to evolve. Advances in these fields to date have been
              expedited by improvements in the performance of analytical instrumentation used
              to characterize the composition and structure of devices under development.
              These successes encourage the expectation that still higher performance devices
              will become available, but the concomitant reduction in semiconductor device
              dimension and increases in materials purity and compositional fidelity are
              straining available characterization techniques. Successful completion of the
              proposed new instrument will make it possible to quantify the spatial
              distribution of atomic species in electronic and optoelectronic devices,
              optical fibers, biological specimens, environmental and other samples, to
              sub-parts-per-million concentration levels with high sensitivity, efficiency,
              analysis speed, and lateral resolution approaching 50 nm using a Ga ion probe.
              In Phase I, they will (a) determine the SIRINP imaging capabilities on
              electronic materials relevant to the semiconductor research community: (b)
              determine lateral resolution, sensitivity, efficiency, analysis time, and depth
              resolution possible with SIRINP, and (c) define instrumental modifications
              required to optimize the SIRINP technique for routine high-resolution imaging
              analysis. In Phase II they will optimize efficiency, analysis time, and spatial
              and mass resolution for analytical research. Phase II will result in a full
              prototype SIRINP instrument. In Phase III, SIRINP analyses and instrument will
              be made available for the analytical community.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
