Title       : Real-time Calibration and Dynamic Error Compensation for an Octahedral
               Hexapod-based Machine Tool or Coordinate Measuring Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9460521

Award Number: 9460521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard S. Haynes lhaynes@i-a-i.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Automation Inc
	      7519 Standish Place, Suite 200
	      Rockville, MD  208552743    301/222-0444

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A hexapod has fewer moving parts, greater rigidity, and higher accuracy than
              comparable serial manipulators. Typically CNC machine tools rely on serial
              mechanisms, where the joints are displaced from the end point of the tool and
              therefore angular errors multiply by the displacement to cause large errors in
              the tool position. This reduces accuracy and stiffness. In parallel
              manipulators, stiffness is increased over conventional manipulators because the
              loads are divided among all of the links, and accuracy is increased because,
              over much of the workspace, leg length errors tend to average. Another
              significant characteristic of the hexapod is that the forces applied to
              actuators as the result of machining loads are all axial (tension and
              compression) without any bending moments. In conventional machine tools or
              coordinate measuring machines, the axes are generally calibrated independently.
              The results leave many errors unaddressed, but at least the calibration
              procedure can be done one axis at a time. This is not true in a parallel link
              manipulator. Recently, IAI discovered a method which they believe will allow
              the major errors in a hexapod structure to be calibrated using only ball bar
              data. The scheme is so effective that it can be implemented in real time. If
              instead of a `fixed length` ball bar, a single tracking interferometer is used
              which produces only single axis data, then the calibration procedure could be
              executed continually as the machine operates. The ultimate result of this
              extension is that researchers could build a machine whose controller is
              continually measuring the machine's errors to interferometer level accuracies,
              and dynamically compensating for all the machine's primary errors. With a
              hexapod-based coordinate measuring or machine tool, all the errors could be
              corrected by adjusting only the six leg lengths, so a hexapod-based machine
              tool could be as accurate as the controller's knowledge of the machine's
              errors. IAI's approach to continuous calibration should also be applicable to
              conventional machine tools, and they will investigate this possibility as well.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
