Title       : The Mathematician's Sketchpad
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9460644

Award Number: 9460644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74019              (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Finzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Key Curriculum Press
	      1150 65th Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94702    800/338-7638

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5371,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project builds on the success of
              The Geometer's Sketchpad(, one of very few pieces of educational software to
              have a real effect on the teaching of mathematics in secondary schools. The
              proposed research will design and prototype a next generation of this software
              --The Mathematician's Sketchpad --an integrated exploratory environment for
              algebra and geometry utilizing declarative constraints as a new mathematical
              modeling tool. The Geometer's Sketchpad allows users to carry out geometric
              constructions using Euclid's compass and straightedge tools augmented by
              reflection, rotation, and dilation. At any time, users may drag objects in the
              sketch using the computer's mouse, and all of the other objects will
              dynamically adjust their position and size to maintain the constructed
              relationships. This simple idea has profound implications. The Mathematician's
              Sketchpad will incorporate these tools and methods and go beyond them by
              allowing users to declare constraints on objects after they have been
              constructed, and by allowing algebraic specification of constraints. The
              revolution in the teaching of geometry being brought about by The Geometer's
              Sketchpad, reveals the opportunity to spread its fundamental ideas of
              constraint-based modeling and dynamic dragging to the rest of the secondary
              mathematics curriculum. The objectives of this Phase I research project are to
              design and prototype the critical elements of The Mathematician's Sketchpad and
              describe and prototype the support materials that will ease its introduction
              into classrooms.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
