Title       : Scaleup of the 'Electron Jet' Jet Vapor Deposition Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1995   
File        : a9460604

Award Number: 9460604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bret L. Halpern bret@jetprocess.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jet Process Corporation
	      24 Science Park
	      New Haven, CT  065111968    203/786-5130

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to lay the
              foundation for scaleup and commercial application of a powerful new thin film
              Jet Vapor Deposition (JVD) source, the `electron jet, or e-jet`, recently
              invented at Jet Process Corporation (JPC). JVD is gaining increased recognition
              for its use of `sonic jets in low vacuum` to deposit high quality films of
              metals, semiconductors, oxides, nitrides, and organics at high rate. The e-jet
              has the potential to combine very high rates of deposition with very precise
              in-situ control of the properties of the growing film. This is done by high
              flux ion bombardment with low energy ions, a capability made possible by the
              unusually high ion density of the e-jet's plasma. JPC is collaborating with
              several large companies on applications where the e-jet offers the only
              promising, commercially viable solution. In order to realize the e-jet's
              promise of ultra-high throughput and fine property control they propose to
              investigate and optimize e-jet performance factors critical to film quality:
              cluster formation and growth, plasma ion density, and ion impact energy on
              biased substrates. In Phase I JPC will use mass spectrometry, Langmuir probe
              methods, and retarding potential techniques to address those issues. Success in
              Phase I will result in a JVD source capable of extremely high throughputs,
              control of film quality, pollution free operation, and application to many
              materials; in Phase II a tenfold faster e-jet will be constructed for
              commercial applications. Enhancement of e-jet performance will lead to
              immediate economic benefits for JPC and its contractors in a wide range of
              applications.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
