Title       : Parent/Student Interactive Bilingual Computer Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9460015

Award Number: 9460015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creative Enterprises
	      3 Floresta Drive
	      Santa Fe, NM  875052259    505/672-1036

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5371,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The encouragement, support, and participation of parents is a vital element in
              the motivation of students, especially in low-income and immigrant populations,
              where the parental literacy may be inadequate. This program will develop an
              interactive bilingual science and mathematics computer program to facilitate
              parental involvement in the pupil's education and stimulate the learning
              process for both. It will apply the latest interactive computer technology
              which is extremely easy for the uninitiated to use, and employ multilingual
              voice and text, graphics, animation, and sound effects to build excitement and
              maintain interest. The computer program will also stimulate the parents toward
              better English literacy, and promote computer literacy for all participants.
              The content will be based upon the California Frameworks for mathematics and
              science, integrated in the curriculum, and developed in cooperation with the
              Long Beach Unified District elementary schools. Materials will first be
              developed for Spanish speaking students in the third grade. In Phase I sample
              lessons will be generated for mathematics and science and preliminary
              development testing conducted. Plans will be created for full development
              including the lesson content, and supporting student/parent and teacher guides.
              A plan for test and evaluation of the system will be established, and
              dissemination methods will be examined. In Phase II, the program and supporting
              text material will be completed and initial tests conducted in the Long Beach
              Schools, for both Spanish and Khmer (Cambodian). Commercial avenues for
              dissemination will be evaluated and selected.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
