Title       : Catalytic Oxidation of Chlorofluorocarbons and Related Compounds for Pollution
               Abatement Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1995  
File        : a9460097

Award Number: 9460097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Rossin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Guild Associates Inc
	      5750 Shier-Rings Road
	      Dublin, OH  430161234    614/798-8215

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project investigates the
              feasibility of   using a novel catalyst to control the release of CFCs
              (chlorofluorocarbons) and related compounds into the environment. The release
              of CFCs and related compounds is believed to play a significant role in the
              decline in the earth's ozone layer. Although the production of CFCs is
              currently being phased out, large quantities already exist and must be dealt
              with. Compounds intended to replace CFCs, which include HFC
              (hydrofluorocarbons) and HCFCs (hydrochlorofluorocarbons), also possess
              ozone-depleting properties. As a result, the release of these compounds must
              also be controlled. Catalytic oxidation is a technology well suited for
              controlling vapor phase emissions. However, catalysts capable of oxidizing CFCs
              have deactivated rapidly, due primarily to materials degradation in the harsh
              acid gas environment. A novel catalyst was recently identified which was
              capable of oxidizing fluorine containing organic molecules without loss of
              catalytic activity. The objective of this Phase I proposal is to evaluate this
              novel catalyst for its ability to oxidatively destroy CFCs and related
              compounds in streams of air. To meet this objective, the catalyst will be
              evaluated for reactivity and performance stability against selected CFCs, HFCs,
              and HCFCs. Tests will be conducted over a wide range of process conditions so
              that the performance envelope of the catalyst may be established. Based on
              performance data obtained to date, it is anticipated that the catalyst will
              oxidize the above compounds without loss of catalytic activity.                
                                                
