Title       : Railplugs for High Efficiency Engines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9460876

Award Number: 9460876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Charles Yu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Tracy  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Materials Modification Inc
	      2721-D Merrilee Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220310113    703/560-1371

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Due to the increasing environmental hazards posed by automobile exhaust
              emissions, alternative fuels, such as ethanol/gasohol, CNG, and hydrogen, and
              electric propulsion have been proposed to power future automobiles.
              Nevertheless, these hybrid vehicles suffer a significant loss in the combustion
              efficiency resulting in a rather slow acceptance by the public. In order to
              enhance the combustion efficiency of these alternative fuels, a novel,
              erosion-resistant spark plug (railplug), based on the plasma railgun
              principles, is proposed. The railplug electrodes require high-temperature
              strength, excellent electrical/thermal conductivity, arc/plasma-erosion
              resistance to survive in the harsh environments where they operate. Current
              electrode materials, such as steel, Ni-Mn-Cr alloy, and platinum-coated nickel,
              fail prematurely in plasma environments due to their inferior erosion
              resistance and poor high-temperature properties. In the Phase I, Materials
              Modification, Inc., will develop nanocrystalline refractory composites for
              railplug electrodes using chemical reaction methods. These composites will be
              consolidated using rapid consolidation methods that facilitate the achievement
              of near-theoretical density, in a very short time, at substantially lower
              processing/manufacturing costs. Phase I will focus on optimization of
              synthesis, consolidation, and characterization. Phase II will concentrate on
              optimization of process-structure-property parameters and the production of
              prototypes for lab and field evaluation. This should rapidly lead to a
              collaboration with a major manufacturer in the Phase III for incorporation into
              automotive systems.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
