Title       : Wildlife Remote Tracking System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9460839

Award Number: 9460839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64821              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv CounterMeasure Sys
	      9838 Old Placerville Rd
	      Sacramento, CA  958273559    916/362-9226

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
              miniature remote tracking system with the capability to provide position
              location, data collection, and a data link that relays biological sensor
              information from migratory wildlife, such as ducks, geese, big horn sheep, and
              moose to wildlife researchers. This project will incorporate newly developed
              Radio Frequency products intended for the PCN frequency bands as well as a
              digital data recorder and a position location system. The objective of this
              project is to define the data link requirements and to design the system
              hardware and software, including a miniature, light weight, battery powered
              data recorder, Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver, RF transceiver, base
              station transceiver, and a base station computer.   Current wildlife data
              collection methods are labor intensive and yield incomplete information. The
              animals are observed for many hours continuously or are tracked using radio
              beacons. A remote tracking system would increase the types and completeness of
              biological information recorded, and allow many more animals to be studied.
              With the proposed wildlife tracking system, the researcher need only be located
              in the vicinity of the studied animals to download a week month, or year's
              worth of data into the base station computer, without having to observe or
              disturb the animals. Phase I consists of the system engineering required to:
              define interfaces and protocols, perform a RF link analysis for the remote
              system, select candidate hardware for both ends of the remote link and the data
              logger, generate a prime power budget, define software requirements, and
              estimate total system performance.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
