Title       : An Innovative Concept for a Universal Drill Point Grinder Based on a Hexapod
               Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1996  
File        : a9460802

Award Number: 9460802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Geng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robotronics Inc
	      4950 Cloister Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/493-8583

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Drilling machines represent about 60% of the total number of cutting tools
              throughout the world. The drilling operation generates about three quarters of
              all chips made in metal cutting. More than two million holes need to be drilled
              in a Boeing 737 aircraft structure. A typical automotive engine plant drills
              300,000 holes daily. These simple facts indicate the crucial role that drilling
              operation plays in manufacturing. Global competition has increased demands on
              U.S. manufacturing sectors to produce high quality products at lower costs.
              Therefore, enhancement of drilling efficiency and quality is becoming
              increasingly important for U.S. manufacturers to remain competitive.
              Robotronics, Inc., proposes to study the feasibility and build a prototype of a
              six degree-of-freedom (DOF) universal drill point grinding machine based on the
              Hexapod mechanism (also called a Stewart Platform after its original inventor).
              The grinding or sharpening of drill points requires a dexterous and high
              precision machine tool with great stiffness. While the work envelope required
              by the grinding operation is relatively small, a universal drill point grinder
              needs to be able to generate motion trajectory with six spatial DOF.  The
              Hexapod Drill Point Grinder (HDPG) promises a leapfrog advancement in grinding
              tools which can significantly improve the quality, efficiency, and precision of
              drilling operations. The efficient truss type design of the Hexapod provides
              the stiffest mechanical system for a given mass. The hexapod-based machine tool
              is fundamentally six DOF, hence it can machine virtually any surface. Stiffness
              is increased over its conventional serial counterparts because the loads are
              divided among all of the links, and accuracy is increased because leg length
              errors tend to average and therefore decrease the final error. The forces
              applied to actuators as the result of machining loads are all axial forces
              (tension and compression) without any bending moments. A hexapod is
              mechanically simpler than an equally capable serial link mechanism. Because of
              their mechanical simplicity, Hexapod-based machine tools should be less costly
              than conventional machines of the same capability.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
