Title       : Optimal Shape Design by the Boundary Contour Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9460263

Award Number: 9460263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu X. Mukherjee DeHaneng@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DeHan Engineering Numerics
	      95 Brown Road, Box 1016, Rm 119
	      Ithaca, NY  148509610    607/277-4648

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1260,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is concerned with the
              development of a next generation Computer Aided Design (CAD) software package
              for three-dimensional (3-D) stress analysis and optimal shape design of solid
              structural components. Use of CAD software is commonplace throughout the
              industrial sector in the US and in other advanced countries. Typically, the
              main components of a CAD system are (a) geometric modeler and pre-processor,
              (b) computational engine for stress and sensitivity analysis, (c) optimizer,
              and (d) post-processor. The finite element method (FEM) is usually the
              computational engine. A serious shortcoming of such a system is the need to
              discretize (mesh) the entire domain of a 3-D body into (volume) finite
              elements. This task, which cannot be efficiently automated for bodies of
              complex shape, becomes particularly onerous during optimal shape design when
              the shape of a body changes during successive iterations. Also, volume
              discretization is not naturally compatible either with solid modeling or with
              shape design algorithms. This project proposes the development and use of an
              entirely new computational engine - the boundary contour method (BCM). This
              breakthrough approach only requires the modeling of the 1-D bounding contours
              of 2-D surface elements on a 3-D body, thus preserving a seamless geometry
              interface with a solid modeler. Automatic meshing, initially and between design
              iterations, now becomes straightforward. Also, the approach is extremely
              efficient since only line integrals (on the bounding contours of surface
              elements) need to be numerically evaluated in the BCM for 3-D problems.
              Development of the BCM, for stress and sensitivity analysis, is the main
              research goal for Phase I. Optimization, adaptive meshing and development of a
              data parallel version of the software package for parallel operation on
              networked workstations, are planned for Phase II.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
