Title       : EXC-Halo Lensing Profiles and Merging Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0205935

Award Number: 0205935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne D. Cohn jcohn@astron.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205935
Cohn

In modern cosmology, the basic building block of all cosmic
              structure is a halo, i.e., a condensed clump of matter. The Universe is
              constantly evolving, with these halos falling towards each other and merging
              under the influence of gravity. This theoretical project will study two aspects
              of these basic building blocks: 

The first part of the project involves
              haloes of individual galaxies. Numerical calculations will be used to model the
              patterns formed when distant light sources (such as distant galaxies) have
              their light bent by gravity when it passes close to a second galaxy which lies
              between the earth and the more distant one (gravitational lensing). The halo
              around the intervening galaxy can be studied using this method. Since the
              constant merging of halos implies that haloes of nearby galaxies will contain
              clumps and sub-clumps, these structures can be mapped-out using gravitational
              lensing. The numerical calculations will identify what lensing as a tool can
              discern about the shape of a galaxy halo. This knowledge will then be applied
              to the wealth of new observational data that is available and used to determine
              the actual structure of nearby galaxy haloes.

The second part of this
              project focuses on major mergers of larger halos, which are associated with
              clusters of galaxies. Major mergers produce a severely disrupted halo.  They
              can both create new observational signals and contaminate measurements which
              rely on models which assume undisturbed, idealized properties for the cluster
              haloes. Numerical calculations will be used to determine how often these
              mergers occur, how closely in space they are expected to occur and how these
              results depend upon the many different observational and numerical parameters
              which characterize a cluster halo.  These numerical results will then be used
              to interpret observations of galaxy cluster halo lensing.
***

