Title       : ITR: Mining the Bibliome -- Information Extraction from the Biomedical
               Literature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0205448

Award Number: 0205448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3499759            (Estimated)
Investigator: Aravind K. Joshi joshi@linc.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Liberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan B. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando C.N. Pereira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0205448
Joshi, Aravind
University of Pennsylvania

ITR: Mining the
              Bibliome -- Information Extraction from the Biomedical
Literature 

The
              major goal is the development of qualitatively better methods for automatically
              extracting information from the biomedical literature, relying on recent
              research in high-accuracy parsing and shallow semantic analysis. The special
              focus will be on information relevant to drug development, in collaboration
              with researchers in the Knowledge Integration and Discovery
Systems group at
              GlaxoSmithKline.  

This project will also address several database research
              problems, including methods for modeling complex, incomplete and changing
              information using semistructured data, and also ways to connect the text
              analysis process to an information integration environment that can deal with
              the wide variety of extant bioinformatic data models, formats, languages and
              interfaces.

The engine of recent progress in language processing research
              has been linguistic data: text corpora, treebanks, lexicons, test corpora for
              information retrieval and information extraction, and so on. Much of this data
              has been created by Penn researchers and published by Penn's Linguistic Data
              Consortium.  Hence, one of our major goals is to develop and publish new
              linguistic resources in three categories: a large corpus of biomedical text
              annotated with syntactic structures `Treebank' and shallow semantic structures
              (proposition bank or `Propbank'; several large sets of biomedical abstracts and
              full-text articles annotated with entities and relations of interest to drug
              developers, such as enzyme inhibition by various compounds or
              genotype/phenotype connections `Factbanks'; and broad-coverage lexicons and
              tools for the analysis of biomedical texts.

