Title       : Refined Approximation of Tail Probabilities, Constrained Expectations, Data
               Analysis in Multidimensional and Metric Spaces, Plus Optimal Stable Growth in
               Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0205054

Award Number: 0205054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klass jane@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0205054
Klass
	In work with various co-authors, the PI plans to work on the
              following five tasks. 1) Complete a paper on (nearly optimal) approximation of
              quantile location for sums of independent and otherwise arbitrary random
              variables. 2) Complete a paper in finance which introduces a new constraint to
              augment the optimal growth criterion and thereby provide local wealth
              stability. A natural sub-optimal strategy can be exhibited. It is further shown
              how one can create a long-term portfolio strategy which asymptotically
              withdraws money at the (same) asymptotic rate at which the portfolio is
              growing, without diminishing that long-term rate(!). 3) Extend previous work on
              self-normalized martingales. 4) Attempt to construct and/or identify extremal
              distributions which arise in various situations maximizing the expected value
              of some random quantity subject to infinitely many linear inequality
              constraints. 5) Develop an idea, conveyed to him in 1992 by Prof. David L.
              Allen, to show how to construct a natural posterior distribution on densities
              in R, given only the data acquired, and extending the result to R^d by means of
              the Radon Transform. This approach permits one to establish confidence
              intervals for parameter estimation, to perform hypothesis testing and data
              classification with only finite samples. Goodness of fit tests are also
              contemplated. 
	The principle investigator plans work in five areas: quantile
              approximation for sums of arbitrary independent random variables, optimal
              investment strategy designed to guard against local capital losses of more than
              a pre-set proportion of the previous maximal accumulated wealth (plus a method
              of permitting consumption at the long run growth rate without sacrificing that
              long-run rate), extend previous work on self-normalized martingales, solve or
              find approximately optimal solutions to certain infinite dimensional linear
              programming problems, demonstrate how to make full use of the data acquired in
              statistical settings which involve hypothesis testing or classification
              (categorization) of data. The investment work should be of fundamental interest
              and importance to individual, corporate and community (governmental)
              investment. The data analysis efforts may suggest a best possible approach to
              determining whether a particular datum came from A or B given limited prior
              data on A and B. Such work could be useful in character recognition,
              hand-writing decipherment, etc. The other topics were motivated by prior work
              of the PI. 

