Title       : Sharp Inequalities for Sums and Functions of Dependent Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0205791

Award Number: 0205791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor H. de la Pena vp@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0205791
de la Pena
	In this project the Principal Investigator (PI) introduces
              three related problem areas of key importance in the study of the probabilistic
              and statistical properties of sums and functions of independent and dependent
              random variables. In particular, the PI proposes to develop sharp inequalities
              for the moments of self-normalized processes, as well as for sums of
              multilinear forms and U-statistics (unbiased statistics) in independent and
              dependent variables. In addition, the PI intends to further develop a novel
              approach to approximating the expected time it takes a process (with a general
              dependence structure) to hit a given boundary. The interest in the study of
              self-normalized processes stems from their use as key quantities in the
              development of non-parametric estimators, as well as for their use as pivotal
              quantities for the creation of confidence intervals and tests of hypothesis.
              For example, the t-statistic is a self-normalized and unit-less estimator
              commonly used in the testing of hypotheses about the mean of a distribution
              with unknown variance. The interest on sharp results for self-normalized
              estimators is based in part in the need for approximating p-values and the
              power of tests in situations when the assumptions on the variables need to be
              relaxed (e.g. independence, normality and/or identical distribution). The study
              of results related to sums of multilinear forms and U-statistics is related to
              their use as building blocks in the development of certain stochastic
              integrals, as well as for their use as the typical unbiased estimators in
              statistics. Moreover, sums of multilinear forms in independent random variables
              are frequently used in approximating non-linear estimators of moving averages,
              which are of fundamental importance in econometric studies. 
	The proposed
              work concerning the development of new and improved tools (under relaxed
              assumptions) for the study of statistical estimators is important for the
              assessment of hypotheses with direct implications in medical and social
              sciences as well as engineering through its connection to the comparison of
              competing treatments and technologies under a wider set of scenarios than is
              currently possible. The study on how long it takes for a random process to hit
              a boundary, on the basis of historical evidence, has potential important
              implications in the physical sciences and economics including in the study of
              how long it will take for 1) a tornado to hit a city, 2) a person to develop
              cancer, 3) an earthquake to occur or 4) the stock market to crash

