Title       : Analysis of Optimal Controls for Biomedical Models of Cancer and HIV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0205093

Award Number: 0205093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urszula Ledzewicz uledzew@siue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heinz M. Schaettler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Edwardsvill
	      Campus Box 20
	      Edwardsville, IL  620250020    618/692-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0205093
Ledzewicz

In the project, optimal control problems will be
              investigated which arise as 
mathematical models for biomedical systems in the
              chemotherapy of 
diseases which have a strong cell proliferation aspect such
              as cancer or 
AIDS. Three directions of research will be pursued: the analysis
              of models 
in cancer chemotherapy, an analysis of models for HIV-infection and
              anti-
viral treatment of AIDS, and the design and analysis of a general
              
mathematical framework which combines common features of both cancer 
and
              HIV models. The investigators will use their previous experience 
working on
              cancer chemotherapy models and apply new tools based on 
the method of
              characteristics and high-order conditions for optimality. In 
compartmental
              models for cancer chemotherapy the cell-cycle is 
controlled by clustering its
              phases into compartments and using phase 
specific cytostatic killing and
              blocking agents. The goal is to maximize the 
number of cancer cells that the
              cytostatic agent in the drug kills while 
keeping the toxicity to the normal
              tissue acceptable. In this project a 
synthesis of optimal controls for these
              models will be constructed. 
Furthermore, more complex mathematical models
              that take into account 
additional aspects such as evolving drug resistance or
              bone marrow 
destruction will be analyzed. Due to the complexity of HIV
              infection, 
mathematical models for AIDS have only recently been developed and
              
still are constantly being revised and updated taking new medical data into
              
account. With the main attention so far given to the form of the dynamics
              
that best models the interactions between the virus and the human immune
              
system under drug treatment, many of these models still have not been
              
formulated as optimal control problems. The investigators will analyze a
              
variety of these models in the framework of optimal control and compare 
the
              solutions aiming at a design of optimal treatment protocols.

In the project,
              the investigators will consider mathematical models in the 
chemotherapy of
              diseases that have a strong cell proliferation aspect such 
a cancer or AIDS.
              These models will be analyzed as optimal control 
problems with the drug
              dosage serving as control parameter with the goal 
of maximizing the number of
              cancer cells killed by the drug in the case of 
cancer (respectively
              maximizing the number of uninfected cells in the case 
of chemotherapy for
              AIDS) while minimizing the harmful side effects and 
cost of the chemotherapy.
              Although individually these problems are very 
different in their specifics,
              they also have many aspects in common and 
can be put into one general
              mathematical model that encompasses them 
all. Thus, while on one side there
              is a need to consider these problems 
separately to understand the
              implications for the underlying disease, on the 
other side there are
              simplifications and insights to be gained by looking at 
the general
              properties common to these models. This project will address 
both directions.
              A biomedical interpretation of the conditions that optimal 
controls satisfy
              will be given in terms understandable by biomedical 
personnel and the
              conditions will be related to the underlying biological 
situation. It is
              expected that the outcomes of this project will be of interest 
to the medical
              community by giving some insights into the analysis of 
existing chemotherapy
              protocols for cancer or HIV and possibly aid in the 
design of new improved
              protocols. These results are particularly important 
for HIV treatments which
              so far do not cure the disease, but only provide a 
long-term maintenance
              program.

