Title       : The Evolution of Globular-Cluster Systems Formed in Galactic Mergers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0205994

Award Number: 0205994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois Schweizer schweizer@ociw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205994
Schweizer

The formation and evolution of galaxies is of central
              interest in present-day astrophysics. There
is mounting evidence that many
              galaxies grew from smaller units, and that galactic mergers may
have played a
              major role in determining the shapes and dynamics of certain remnants, and
              perhaps
even of elliptical galaxies. However, the details of this assembly
              remain unclear, and there are
several competing hypotheses for the formation
              of ellipticals. Fortunately, a few galactic mergers
still occur in the local
              universe and o.er valuable clues to the past assembly process.
The 1992
              discovery that globular star clusters form in large numbers during mergers of
              gas-rich
galaxies has opened new avenues to studying the formation and
              evolution of globular clusters and
of their host galaxies. Questions of
              current interest are: Is there an evolutionary link between
globular clusters
              formed in mergers and old globular clusters in giant elliptical galaxies?
              How
do systems of globular clusters formed in mergers evolve? Specifically,
              how do their luminosity
functions, metallicity distributions, and kinematics
              evolve? Do galactic mergers imprint cluster
systems with kinematic signatures
              (e.g., fast outer rotation) that can be traced along a sequence
of merger
              remnants of increasing age?
The Principal Investigator, Francois Schweizer,
              proposes carefully designed observational studies
to address these questions.
              He points out that-whereas the birth of young clusters in ongoing
mergers and
              the properties of old globular clusters in ellipticals have been studied widely
              in recent
years-there is a surprising lack of knowledge about globular-cluster
              systems of intermediate age.
Yet, these systems hold great promise for
              directly addressing the above issues.
Dr. Schweizer and collaborators were
              among the .rst to study globular clusters formed in mergers
with the Hubble
              Space Telescope and to follow up with ground-based spectroscopic
              observations
to determine their ages and chemical abundances. He will now
              search for globular clusters of intermediate
age (1 - 7 Gyr) in about a dozen
              galaxies thought to be transition objects between ongoing
mergers (e.g., NGC
              4038/39) and old ellipticals. He will use both the Baade 6.5-m telescope
              at
Las Campanas Observatory and the Advanced Survey Camera on the Hubble Space
              Telescope to
obtain some of the deepest images ever taken of these transition
              objects and their globular-cluster
systems. Photometric analysis of these
              images, as well as of Hubble archival images, will yield the
chronology of
              these cluster systems from their broad-band colors.
The same deep images will
              also be used to study the evolution of the globular-cluster
              luminosity
function with time. The luminosity functions of fresh-born cluster
              systems are power laws,
while those of ancient systems are close to lognormal.
              Theory predicts that as globular-cluster
systems age, their luminosity
              functions should evolve from the .rst to the second shape through
preferential
              erosion of low-mass clusters. Deep luminosity functions reaching past the
              predicted
turnover magnitudes will be measured from the images to subject this
              prediction to a critical test.
A parallel program of multi-slit spectroscopy
              mainly with the Magellan 6.5-m telescopes, but
also with the northern Gemini
              8-m telescope, will yield metallicities and more accurate ages for some
key
              globular-cluster systems of intermediate age. Measurements of radial velocities
              for typically
40 - 200 clusters per galaxy will permit comparative studies of
              the kinematics of metal-poor and
metal-rich globulars within the same galaxy.
              This will yield valuable clues about the origins of
what are thought to be
              .rst- and 2nd-generation cluster subpopulations.
These observational studies
              will test all proposed formation mechanisms for ellipticals
              and
will-specifically-focus on possible evidence for an evolutionary link
              between 2nd-generation globulars
formed in mergers and metal-rich globulars in
              old ellipticals. The results from this project
will help improve our
              understanding not only of globular-cluster formation and evolution, but
              also
of galaxy formation and growth and, ultimately, of the origin of Hubble's
              morphological sequence
of galaxy types.
***

