Title       : Insect Survey of a Megadiverse Country Phase II: Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0205982

Award Number: 0205982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sharkey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian V. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,5977,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Insects and other arthropods are being surveyed in Colombia, one of the most
              biologically diverse countries in the world, and one of the most poorly sampled
              for arthropods and other forms of life. The arthropod fauna of 10 of Colombia's
              National Parks and wildlife sanctuaries are sampled employing, at each site, a
              number of different collecting methods in order to capture organisms in all
              types of microhabitats from tree canopies to forest ground litter. Samples are
              sent to the Alexander von Humboldt Institute in Villa Leyva (Colombia), where
              they are sorted and prepared. PI Sharkey travels to Colombia to collect the
              samples twice per year. He then sends them to almost 100 scientific
              collaborators across the United States and to 15 other countries around the
              world. The timing is critical since Colombia is the third worst country in
              South America in terms of rate of forest loss and the second worst in terms of
              population growth. Combined with political instability, the high crime rate,
              and the illegal drug trade, the project might appear to be urgent but
              impractical; however, these handicaps have been surmounted. The von Humboldt
              Institute, which is a branch of the Federal Department of the Environment, and
              the Colombian Ministry of National Parks, is collaborating to overcome the
              potential logistic problems. Park naturalists are operating the sampling
              equipment, and send the samples to the Humboldt Institute on a quarterly (or
              more frequent) basis, thus avoiding dangerous travel in Colombia.
Insects and
              other arthropods constitute more than half of the species level diversity of
              all life.  That is, there are more species of insects and other arthropods like
              spiders than all other species of life combined!  Therefore, the study of this
              group is fundamental to understanding the diversity of life, which is higher in
              Colombia than just about anywhere else in the world, due to its varied
              geography and tropical location. Despite this wealth, the international
              scientific community has not had access to it for more than 20 years.  This
              project results in the distribution of tens of thousands of prepared specimens
              throughout the world each year.  Collaborating scientists describe new species
              and higher-level taxa. Using our quantitative sampling data, they prepare
              estimates of the total number of species throughout Colombia, and compare the
              Colombian fauna with other areas of South America and the world to obtain a
              clear picture of the species that are restricted to Colombia. 
