Title       : Galaxy Clusters and The Dark Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0205010

Award Number: 0205010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin White mwhite@astron.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205010
White

Cosmology has made tremendous advances in the past decade,
              with many fundamental questions approaching resolution.  We now have a highly
              predictive theory for the emergence of large-scale structure in the Universe.
              As is often the case, this theory raises new questions, and several crucial
              issues still remain to be understood. First, the nature of most of the matter
              in the Universe remains mysterious. Second, while we have known for some time
              that earthly matter doesn't dominate the energy in the Universe, we now believe
              that not even exotic `dark' matter plays that role.  At present the Universe
              appears to be accelerating, driven by a mysterious component dubbed "dark
              energy''. Luckily we are in a "golden era'' of cosmological observations.
              Upcoming observations will soon constrain the initial conditions for structure
              formation and many cosmological parameters, allowing us to address the next
              frontier: the era of structure formation. A thorough understanding of structure
              formation is instrumental in determining both the consequences of the
              developing 'cosmic web' paradigm and the constraints on variations within this
              paradigm. The key to this understanding is clusters of galaxies. These are the
              largest known objects. They exhibit remarkable regularity, but our
              understanding of their structure is sensitive to our modeling assumptions. 
              This project will construct computer models of galaxy clusters to develop and
              refine methods which will relate the properties of these clusters to the
              distribution and nature of the dark matter and the dark energy and thus to
              sharpen our tests of this dominant paradigm.
***

