Title       : Collaborative Research: ITR--Ensemble-Based State Estimation for a
               Next-Generation Weather Forecasting Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0205612

Award Number: 0205612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hamill hamill@cdc.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1525,1652,1687,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a variety of disciplines large, numerical simulations have become a
              fundamental scientific tool.  A key problem is how to inform or update such
              simulations in real time with large numbers of noisy observations, especially
              when many of the predicted variables are unobserved or the observed quantities
              bear a complex relation to the predicted variables.  In principle, Bayesian
              methods provide a solution to this state-estimation problem, but evolving and
              updating the required probability distributions are problematic in practice, as
              the most straightforward approaches require computations of overwhelming
              size.

These collaborative investigators will address these issues through
              the use of novel ensemble-based or Monte Carlo approaches and within the
              context of numerical weather prediction (NWP).  Weather prediction is a
              challenging test of any approach to state-estimation, as operational models for
              the continental United States will soon have of the order of 108 degrees of
              freedom and ingest an observational data stream of more than a terabyte per
              day.  The Principal Investigators' application of ensemble state-estimation
              techniques to NWP is motivated by recent success in test problems with
              simulated observations, ranging from the prediction of isolated thunderstorms
              in a cloud model to global atmospheric flow in a general circulation model, and
              by potential advantages over existing operational data assimilation schemes. 
              In particular, ensemble-based techniques directly estimate the uncertainty of
              the prior prediction and thereby avoid the assumption of stationary, isotropic
              forecast uncertainty made in most existing schemes.  The benefits of this
              direct estimation will also likely increase as next-generation of NWP models
              reach resolutions of about 1 km and the use of remotely-sensed observations,
              such as from the operational network of Doppler radars, increases at those
              scales.  Thus, this research will lay the foundation for a significant step
              forward in weather forecasting, especially at the scales where most severe and
              disruptive weather occurs.

The proposed work will be carried out within the
              context of the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, which is a
              next-generation NWP model designed for use at the horizontal resolutions of
              1-10 km.  The WRF model will be employed in operational weather forecasting and
              also will be supported for use by the research community.  Use of WRF
              multiplies the educational benefits of this project beyond the direct
              involvement of students and postdoctoral researchers and provides a clear path
              to the implementation of results to improve routine weather forecasts.  

The
              team assembled within this group Information and Technology Research project
              includes leaders in ensemble assimilation techniques as well as members with
              expertise in numerical modeling, ensemble forecasting, and the interpretation
              of Doppler radar observations.  The project will be coordinated through joint
              supervision of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, joint publications
              and annual workshops.  In addition, common software will be used in all the
              research, thus facilitating the transfer of methodologies and expertise within
              the group.

Successful completion of this research potentially will provide
              significantly improved capabilities in weather numerical models.  These
              improvements will allow advances to be made in the forecasting of a variety of
              weather phenomena.
