Title       : ITR:Information Theoretic Secure Hyper-Encryption and Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0205423

Award Number: 0205423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O. Rabin rabin@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yan Z. Ding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Salil P. Vadhan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Lipton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this proposal is to study and implement provably
              information theoretic secure methods for encryption and derive applications to
              important security tasks such as message and user authentication and commitment
              protocols. The great interest in quantum cryptography demonstrates the need for
              absolutely secure encryption. The approach will use existing networks to
              transmit large streams of encrypted data. The proposed implementation can be
              widely deployed within the near future. Having a practical, provably secure
              against any attack, method for preserving secrecy of messages is of great
              importance for protection of personal privacy and commercial correspondence.
              

In recent years a new paradigm for encryption, one that does not depend on
              as yet unproven computational intractability results, was proposed. The
              customary  assumption that the would be code-breaker is computationally
              bounded,is replaced by an assumption that he is storage space bounded. The
              Sender and Receiver share a small private key and employ an unending intense
              stream of random bits readable by them and possibly by adversaries. The
              bandwidth and duration of the bit stream renders the permanent storage of a
              comparable number of bits by the adversary economically infeasible. Methods for
              generating and broadcasting or transmitting the bit stream, and the viability
              of the storage bound assumption, will be studied and implemented. In recent
              years, strong results concerning the information theoretic everlasting secrecy
              of a practical encryption algorithm (Hyper-Encryption) in the bounded storage
              model were proved.

The project will comprise four interleaving lines of
              work. 
1. System design: Satellite, web page, and fiber optics based systems
              for the distribution of the random bit streams will be specified and analyzed
              in consultation with experts in these technologies. 

2. Protocols and
              applications: Innovation and development of Hyper-Encryption based protocols
              for e-commerce and network security. 

3. Web page hopping based
              Hyper-Encryption: Detailed development of a complete Hyper-Encryption system
              employing random walk over pages of the World Wide Web as a pragmatic source of
              randomness and evaluation of its viability. 

4. Theoretical foundations:
              Improving the Hyper-Encryption algorithm. Employing randomness extraction
              methods to enhance the safety of the WWW  based system.

Projected
              achievements: 
A usable detailed system for provably secure communications and
              protocols based on Hyper-Encryptions.  Complete theoretical foundation for
              Hyper-Encryption and its applications.
