Title       : RUI: Star Formation and Interstellar Gas in Extragalactic Tails and Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0205761

Award Number: 0205761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly Smith beverly@panda.etsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Tennessee State Univ
	      P O Box 70565
	      Johnson City, TN  37614    423/232-5640

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0205761
Smith

Collisions and close encounters between galaxies can cause
              major changes in the galaxies, dramatically altering both the morphology and
              star formation rate. A frequent consequence
of such an interaction is the
              production of extended tails and bridges, which often contain massive young
              stars. These structures may fragment and/or disperse, forming new dwarf
              galaxies and/or enriching the intergalactic medium. At present, there are still
              many outstanding questions about the properties of the interstellar gas and
              star formation in these features. What are the rates and efficiencies of star
              formation in these features, and how do these depend on the interaction
              parameters and timescales? What are the properties of the interstellar gas in
              these structures? Are the properties of these features consistent with them
              being the precursors of dwarf galaxies? Is star formation in these features
              subject to a `threshold' effect, only occurring above a `critical' gas surface
              density?

To address these questions, Dr. Beverly Smith, at East Tennessee
              State University, will carry out a comprehensive multi-wavelength study of a
              sample of two dozen tails and bridges and a similar size comparison sample of
              dwarf galaxies. Using multi-wavelength data, Dr. Smith will measure the atomic
              to molecular hydrogen ratios, metallicities, star formation rates, and
              efficiencies in these tails and bridges, and will determine how these depend
              upon the parameters of the interaction. She will determine how the properties
              of these tails and bridges compare with those of dwarf galaxies. These
              observations will be done in conjunction with hydrodynamical modeling of the
              systems in the sample, which will better define the interaction parameters and
              help determine the conditions needed to trigger star formation in tails and
              bridges. Using these results, Dr. Smith will search for a star formation
              `threshold' in tails and bridges analogous to that found for galactic disks,
              and will investigate whether the efficiency of star formation is higher in
              tidal features than in features caused by ram pressure stripping, as predicted
              by theoretical models.  This award is made under the auspices of the Research
              in Undergraduate Institutions program at NSF.
***



