Title       : Spectroscopic Investigations of Massive Binaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0205297

Award Number: 0205297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Gies gies@chara.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0205297

PI Gies

The majority of the most massive stars are born in
              close pairs that are destined to interact over their lifetime. The influence of
              a companion can dramatically alter the evolutionary paths of the stars: the
              mass donors can be stripped down to a fraction of their original size while the
              mass gainers can become rejuvenated as more massive and luminous stars. These
              altered stars will eventually explode as peculiar supernovae, and their
              remnants dominate the appearance of the high energy universe (as massive X-ray
              binaries containing neutron stars and black holes). Although the starting and
              end-points of binary evolution are understood the processes that forge the
              intermediate stages are still mysterious, and great uncertainties surround the
              issues of mass and angular momentum transfer and loss.
  This project will be
              an investigation of these processes at various stages in the evolutionary drama
              through spectroscopic studies of a number of key systems. The first part is a
              survey of two dozen targets for new binaries with hard to detect companions.
              The second section is an orbital analysis of the H a emission flux formed in
              the circumstellar gas in two currently interacting systems. The third part
              examines the link between mass transfer and the spin up of rapidly rotating
              stars, and includes a hunt for faint post-mass transfer companions of Be stars.
              The final component is a joint H a -X-ray study of mass transfer in massive
              X-ray binaries as documented in extensive H a spectroscopy obtained with the
              KPNO Coude Feed Telescope.
***


