Title       : Pulse Dynamics in Optical Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0205496

Award Number: 0205496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, tremendous strides have been made in increasing the
              transmission capacity of fiber optic communications systems. One technique that
              has enabled this increase involves transmitting multiple streams of data
              simultaneously down a single fiber line in a process known at wavelength
              division multiplexing (WDM). In order for this technique to work, interaction
              between the different data streams must be minimized. Another important
              development has been the appearance of all optical devices, system components
              that exploit parametric processes in optical fiber to perform data manipulation
              at faster rates than more tradition opto-electronic components. In contrast to
              WDM systems, these devices depend on strong interaction between different
              frequency components in order to function. Proposed is a consideration of the
              problem of interchannel interaction (the interaction of data streams centered
              at different frequencies) in the two limits suggested by WDM systems (weak
              interaction) and all optical devices (strong interaction). To meet this goal,
              asymptotics, multiple scale and soliton perturbation theory, variational
              methods, and symmetry reduction techniques will be used to obtain reduced
              equations for the dynamics of optical pulses in the relevant limit.  These
              equations will be studied analytically and numerically in order to identify the
              parameter regimes that support stable and efficient system operation. Numerical
              simulations will be used at each stage of the analysis to compare results with
              experimental data. This University-Industry Cooperative Research (U-ICR)Program
               project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
