Title       : Dynamics of Extrasolar Planets and the Kuiper Belt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0205892

Award Number: 0205892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Chiang echiang@astron.Berkeley.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205892
Chiang

Extrasolar planets and the Edgeworth-Kuiper Belt of
              trans-Neptunian bodies constitute two
powerful drivers of planetary astronomy.
              Since the discovery of these objects less than a decade
ago, theoretical
              understanding of their dynamical characteristics remains elusive. Why are
              the
orbital eccentricities of extrasolar planets so large compared to those of
              Solar System gas giants?
What is responsible for delineating an apparent edge
              to the Classical Kuiper Belt at a heliocentric
distance of 47 AU? How did the
              orbital inclinations of Classical Belt objects become dramatically
inflated? 
              Dr. Eugene Chiang and colleagues, at the University of California at Berkeley, 
              will investigate a series of theoretical dynamical problems that directly
              address these issues. He will examine how these two seemingly disparate classes
              of objects participate in many of the same dynamical processes, most notably
              orbital migration and resonant interaction. 

Planets can be remarkably
              mobile while embedded in their natal gaseous disks. Known extrasolar planets
              are sufficiently massive that they clear annular gaps in disk material about
              their orbits. A gap-opening planet is slaved to the viscous evolution of its
              host disk. Viscous diffusion times of magnetohydrodynamically turbulent disks
              shorten with decreasing distance from the star. Thus, two gap-opening planets
              migrate towards their parent star such that the ratio of the period of the
              outer planet to that of the inner planet grows. The divergence of this ratio
              implies that a series of mean motion resonances will be crossed. Each resonance
              crossing can generate substantial orbital eccentricities in the migrating
              bodies. Dr. Chiang and his collaborators will explore this mechanism for
              exciting eccentricities. The viscous, thermal, and mass profiles of
              protoplanetary disks will be computed to determine planetary migration
              timescales. The celestial mechanics of resonance crossings will be investigated
              through a series of analytic and numerical orbit integrations. Numerical
              hydrodynamic simulations of planet-disk interactions will be undertaken to test
              the effectiveness of resonance passages. The circularity of orbits of Solar
              System giants may be reconciled with the extreme elongations of extrasolar
              planetary orbits within the framework of protoplanetary disks whose viscosities
              decrease dramatically with distance; this framework indicates that the orbital
              architecture of the outer Solar System may indeed be commonplace.
The extent
              to which Neptune's outermost, strongest 2:1 mean-motion resonance
              gravitationally sculpted the Classical Kuiper Belt will be ascertained. As
              Neptune migrated outwards during
the era of late heavy bombardment, its
              resonances swept outward and captured Kuiper Belt Ob-
jects into librating
              orbits. Dr. Chiang and his collaborators will account for, through analytic
              and
numerical calculations, the finite masses of bodies librating within the
              2:1 resonance. A massive,
migrating 2:1 resonance may leak objects into the
              Classical Belt domain; imperfect efficiencies of
resonant capture and of
              retainment determine the fraction of bodies that reside in the 2:1 and
              the
fraction of bodies that comprise the non-resonant Classical Belt. The
              degree of dynamical heating
by eccentric, inclined 2:1 perturbers on Classical
              Belt Objects will be gauged. This study will
culminate in predictions for the
              mass within the 2:1 resonance that can be tested by dedicated
observations in
              which Dr. Chiang is already actively involved.
***


