Title       : ITR: (Software & Hardware Systems) Piazza: A Platform for Wide-scale Distributed
               Data Sharing and Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0205635

Award Number: 0205635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $790000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alon Y. Halevy alon@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Suciu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Gribble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This research seeks to create a new global-scale information facility
on the
              Internet in which structured data, rather than raw text, is the
key element
              supported.  Currently, the information provided on the
Internet consists of
              simple text-based documents (HTML), or other
unstructured types such as images
              and streams.  The new facility will
allow data sources to be described by
              schemas and their content to be
indexed and located.  Sophisticated
              query-oriented database-style
operations will be possible over simple or
              complex data sources, and
new views of multiple data sources can be created
              and shared with
other clients.  A new class of data processing services will
              be
possible to collect, manipulate, analyze, and store data.

The first goal
              of project is to define the basic architecture of a
client, allowing it to
              share its data with other peers, participate in
distributed query processing,
              and cooperate with other clients.  A
specific data integration formalism will
              be designed that will allow
clients to integrate their data with others' using
              both global-as-view
and local-as-view data integration paradigms.  Building on
              this
arthictecture, a new query processing technique will be developed
              that
can adapt to both data integration paradigms.  The project will
              then
develop intelligent data placement techniques for storing query
results
              on different clients, thus enabling dramatic performance
improvments for
              subsequent queries.  The data such placed on servers
may become stale, when
              the source data gets updated: the project will
develop specific update
              propagation techniques for publishing and
disseminating updates.  Finally, the
              project is developing novel data
indexing techniques that allow clients to
              search data items globally.



