Title       : U. S.-Mexico Collaborative Research: Foraging and Processionary Behavior of
               Phelypera Distigma (Coleoptera:Curculionidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0205841

Award Number: 0205841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8370               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence D. Fitzgerald Fitzgerald@SNYCORVA.Cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0205841
Fitzgerald

This U.S.-Mexico award will support Dr. Terrence
              Fitzgerald of SUNY at Cortland, in a research collaboration with Dr. Alfonso
              Rubio Pescador of the Universidad de Colima in Tecoman, Mexico.  The
              researchers intend to describe and analyze the trail-based foraging system of
              the larva of Phelypera distigma, a beetle larva.  Studies of social
              caterpillars conducted over the last two decades have shown that the
              caterpillars of some moths and butterflies use pheromones to define the limits
              of their foraging arenas and to facilitate en masse movements between resting
              and feeding sites. The communication systems allow successful foragers to
              direct siblings to food finds and they resemble the recruitment systems of ants
              and termites. Compared to the extensive knowledge of pheromone-based
              communication in other insects, very little is known of the extent to which
              caterpillars use pheromones to facilitate group living and cooperative
              foraging. The research proposed here will be the first study of trial marking
              and processionary behavior in these communal beetle larva.

The collaborators
              will bring complementary skills to the project.  The Mexican counterpart
              scientist has many years of field experience in the tropics and knowledge of
              the biology and ecology of tropical insects, particularly insect larvae.  The
              US investigator brings to the project a broad background in the study of
              sociality in caterpillars and of the methods needed to study and analyze their
              communication systems. In addition, an undergraduate student will be involved
              in the research. The study will lead to a better understanding of the
              similarities between foraging systems of different insects and provide
              perspective on the role of ecological factors in the evolution of trail-based
              communicative systems. 


