Title       : ITR/AP: Simulation of Multi-Scale Deformation in Solid Earth Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0205653

Award Number: 0205653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1925000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Gurnis gurnis@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Pool  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeroen Tromp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Aivazis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1687,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0205653
Gurnis

This is a project to develop a suite of tools to model
              multi-scale deformation for Earth Science problems.  This effort is motivated
              by the need to understand interctions between the long-term evolution of plate
              tectonics and shorter term processes such as the evolution of faults during and
              between earthquakes.  Several major data acquisition efforts within the Earth
              Sciences community are underway or at an advanced planning stage (EarthScope
              including PBO - Plate Boundary Observatory, InSAR - Satellite based
              Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar, USArray - a 400 element moveable
              seismic array, GPS - continuous Global Positioning System measurements).  These
              observational programs will rapidly produce vast, high-quality data sets which
              record deformation of the Earth's surface on multiple time scales, from
              co-seismic and post-seismic to long term tectonic time scales, and on multiple
              spatial scales, from centimeters to thousands of kilometers.

The Principal
              Investigators will produce a modeling package, usable by the entire Earth
              sciences community, that addresses the limitations of what is currently
              feasible and that is engineered with software evolution and growth as design
              requirements.  Their efforts will extend the capabilities of the PYRE
              framework, an object-oriented environment capable of specifying and launching
              numerical simulations on multiple platforms, including Beowulf class parallel
              computers, that can function with grid-computing systems. Specifically, the
              community needs fexible modeling tools that incorporate complex rheologies,
              e.g., temperature-dependent, non-Newtonian, visco-elasto-plasticity with
              discrete failure planes and dynamic re-gridding to resolve evolving regions of
              high strain.  From a computational perspective, this is an excellent time to
              pursue these objectives.  Major advances in the PC industry enable scientists
              to build massively parallel PC cluster computers that facilitate realistic 3-D
              simulations at reasonable computational and monetary costs.  Complimenting
              these hardware advances are major architectural solutions allowing more
              traditional codes to be bound together to solve complex, multi-scale,
              multi-physics problems.

This will be a collaborative project between two
              Caltech units;  The Center for Advanced Computer Research (CACR) and the
              Seismological Laboratory.  After about eighteen months into the project, beta
              versions of the software will be made available to the community and final
              versions will be available without restrictions, installed on NSF PACI
              computing facilities, for example.  The new geodynamics modeling framework will
              easily allow one to launch 2-D AND 3-D simulations on platforms ranging in
              scale from uniprocessors to the TerraGrid, making the code useful to a wide
              range of users from individual scientists and educators to inter disciplinary
              teams working on state of the art calculations posed within EarthScope.
***
