Title       : Laboratory Studies of Magnetorotational Instabilities in a Galium Disk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0205903

Award Number: 0205903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Goodman jeremy@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hantao Ji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1204,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205903
Goodman

Quasars and X-ray binary stars are examples of
              astronomical objects that shine by converting the gravitational energy of gas
              orbiting a black hole into heat and radiation.  The gas arranges itself into a
              flat disk centered on the black hole.  Similar disks surround young stars and
              form planets.  Astrophysicists postulate that turbulent friction between
              neighboring rings of these disks turns this orbital motion into heat.  Most
              believe that this turbulence arises from a magnetic instability that has not
              yet been reproduced on earth except in computer simulations.  The instability
              requires a gas or liquid of high electrical conductivity, a condition usually
              satisfied in space and in stars but not on earth.  Air, water, and other common
              fluids are poor conductors of electricity while ionized plasmas created for
              fusion research are good conductors but too rigidly magnetized.

This project
              will study astrophysical instability and turbulence in a small laboratory
              experiment using an alloy of gallium, a metal that is liquid at room
              temperature, less viscous than water, more conducting than mercury, and safer
              to handle.  This will be set into rapid rotation between concentric cylinders
              in a strong magnetic field---a system dynamically similar to an astrophysical
              disk.  The goals are to confirm previous computer predictions of the
              instability, to study its dependence on rotation, shear, and field strength, to
              validate computer simulations, and perhaps to demonstrate incipient turbulence.
              The results may confirm our understanding of astrophysical disk turbulence,
              which cannot yet be observed directly.
***

