Title       : ITR ACTS - Adjoint Complier Technology & Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0205590

Award Number: 0205590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2022973            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Wunsch cwunsch@pond.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul I. Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Ernst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0205590 Wunsch

Automatic program compilation (and its related task of
              interpreted program execution) has been a vital ingredient in the creation of
              ever more complex software tools. Indeed, modern compilers and interpreters
              have been central to exploiting exponential advances in digital hardware
              capability. Without compilers and interpreters to automate the task of
              correctly transforming a high-level language description of an algorithm,
              modern computer systems could barely exist. With modern computational
              capabilities, workers in numerous fields use large-scale numerical simulation
              of complex interacting elements to understand physical, chemical, biological
              and economical phenomena. The Adjoint Compiler Technology & Standards (ACTS)
              project aims to provide scientists, engineers, academics, and students with
              techniques, tools, reference projects, and easily accessible expertise allowing
              for new approaches to investigating numerical models of real-world problems
              based on mathematically precise derivative information. Considering the
              large-scale applications motivating the ACTS project there is not sensible
              alternative to Automatic Differentiation (AD) as the methods of choice. AD
              transforms the program implementing the original model into derivative code by
              augmenting it with instructions for computing partial derivatives. For example,
              the investigation of numerical sensitivities of certain values with respect to
              certain parameters becomes possible. Where observations are to be combined with
              model output so as to account for the information content of both, one has a
              very large-scale optimization problem. The solution to this problem lies with
              the ability to generate derivative code as well. Because of the sheer size of
              the application programs that AD has to deal with efficiency of the generated
              derivative code is crucial. Inefficiency of the codes generated using AD will
              often mean inapplicability caused by infeasible hardware requirements. This
              project has potential to impact  fields ranging from engineering design
              optimization projects to basic research to complex physical system monitoring
              endeavors. The proposal brings together computer scientists, physical
              scientists and engineers in a group effort to create a standard, reference
              implementation of an extensible toolkit for AD of numerical codes. Such a
              toolkit is a key asset in improving the fidelity and productivity of
              increasingly complex simulation code development efforts in many fields. In
              summary the goals of this project are three fold 1. development of an
              extensible, standards based, infrastructure that will allow research in the
              field of AD to flourish and that will allow academic developments and emerging
              commercial efforts to collaborate in a mutually advantageous manner; 2.
              development of an open-source, freely available reference compiler and support
              material that is as easy and reliable to use as a traditional compiler and that
              will nurture widespread adoption of AD as an key element of all manner of
              numerical simulation; 3. establishment of clear and form connections between
              the mainstream compiler communities in computer science and the mathematics,
              physical science and engineering communities that have historically been at the
              forefront of AD tool development. For mathematical, scientific and engineering
              codes, the work proposed can have far reaching consequences. Just as
              conventional compiler developments have provided the foundation for new
              generations of simulation tools the project proposed here will also provide a
              foundation for new generations of mathematically rigorous and robustly
              manufactured analysis, diagnostic and forecast software.

