Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Comparative Primate and Mammalian Bone
               Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0205185

Award Number: 0205185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8491               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick S. Szalay fszalay@hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most studies of the behavior and biology of extinct primates rely upon the
              examination of the size and external features of fossil material.  Often
              overlooked is the information that can be derived from the analysis of the
              microscopic structure of bone.  The benefits of the latter approach, evidenced
              for example in the recent dinosaur literature, are particularly great where
              fossil materials are incomplete, as is usually the case.  Despite this
              tremendous potential, studies of mammalian bone microstructure are rare. 
              

This project provides a much needed foundation regarding microstructural
              variability among the living primates.  Four bone microstructural features are
              examined in the long bones from 10 living primate species, and several other
              relevant mammals.  Each of these features - visible when thin cross-sections of
              bone are observed under a microscope - has been linked to bone strength in
              locomotion and/or aspects of life-history (the schedule by which animals grow,
              reproduce, and die).  The intent is first to observe and describe existing
              variation.  But, more importantly, the study is designed to identify the
              factors that may be driving this microstructural variability (body size,
              locomotory patterns, etc.).  Once the relationship between these factors and
              the microstructural features is elucidated, several fossil primates, selected
              for their relevance to the understanding of early primate evolution, will be
              examined.  It is expect that the microstructural investigation will illuminate
              previously obscure aspects of the biology and behavior of these extinct
              animals.

This research constitutes one of several ongoing projects in the
              Hard Tissue Research Unit at Hunter College, City University of New York.  As a
              whole, the laboratory is generating a database of information with applications
              to anthropology and to the study of vertebrate skeletons in general.  These
              data are additionally relevant to the clinically-oriented bone biology field;
              all bone is not like human bone, and an appreciation of the variability that
              exists provides the context within which human bone structure and function is
              understood.  Finally, new methods developed in the course of the study will
              become available to the community of bone biologists and comparative
              morphologists at 

