Title       : ITR: Advanced Programming Languages for Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0205737

Award Number: 0205737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Kieburtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mark P. Jones and Richard B. Kieburtz
CCR-0205737
"Advanced Programming
              Languages for Embedded Systems"

Over the last few decades we have witnessed
              remarkable changes in the way that computers are both used and programmed.  For
              example, many of the computers in use today are hidden in embedded systems. 
              From everyday appliances---such as washing machines and televisions---to safety
              and security critical systems---such as vehicle navigation and control, defense
              applications, or medical devices---the use of embedded computers allows
              manufacturers to build systems with much greater flexibility,
functionality,
              and sophistication than has ever been possible before.

During the same time,
              new programming languages have been developed with features that increase
              developer productivity and allow the construction of produce more reliable and
              flexible systems.  For example, module systems help to manage the complexity of
              large projects, type systems can be used to detect bugs at compile-time, and
              automatic storage management techniques eliminate a common source of
              errors.

In industry, however, much of the embedded software that is being
              developed today is still written using older languages, or lower-level assembly
              languages, without the benefits that modern languages can provide.  The problem
              is that the results and focus of recent programming language research have not
              been a good match for the challenges and context of embedded systems
              development.  As a result, where some might have expected embedded systems
              developers to embrace modern programming languages, it might seem instead that
              many have chosen to ignore them!

One source of problems arises from
              difficulties in capturing so-called non-functional aspects of behavior---such
              as execution time, power consumption, and adaptivity---that are critical
              requirements for many embedded systems.  Unfortunately, these are exactly the
              kinds of things that language designers have abstracted away from in the hope
              of increasing productivity and portability.  Other difficulties occur as the
              result of complicated treatments of features such as concurrency and event
              handling, which again play a central role in many embedded applications. 
              Significant bugs can occur if programmers do not adhere to a carefully worked
              out discipline of coding when they use such features, but there is very little
              that the underlying type system or semantics can do to help in detecting these
              problems.

This project is working to bridge the gap between these two
              important fields, and to demonstrate how embedded systems development can
              benefit from and inform programming language research.  In particular, the
              project is focusing on the ongoing development and use of a high-level language
              called Timber that supports an implicit notion of concurrency, asynchronous
              communication, and non-blocking, reactive programming. All of these features
              are directly relevant in the context of embedded systems design.  In addition,
              the project is developing new analysis and compilation techniques that enable
              non-functional aspects of behavior to be specified using high-level constraints
              and policies for graceful degradation.  Because they are specified at a high
              level, these constraints can continue to serve as meaningful descriptions of
              required
behavior, even as programs evolve to accommodate new functionality or
              to support new platforms.  The key to success is a declarative approach in
              which programmers focus on what is required, while compilers determine how it
              should be accomplished, using the results of analysis to guide the selection of
              an appropriate, low-level implementation strategy.

With the transition from
              research to industry in mind, the project is focusing on tools for PC/104
              systems, which is an industry standard and an important sector in today's
              embedded systems market.  In the longer term, the project is contributing to
              shifts in attitude and beneficial changes in the role that programming language
              technology can plays in the delivery of more widespread, more flexible, more
              reliable, and more secure embedded systems.

