Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Image-Based Rendering in Forensic Reconstruction
               and Historical Preservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0205324

Award Number: 0205324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248236             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Luebke luebke@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Valuable information about the world around us is being lost. Every day we lose
              information of both current and historical significance, simply because it is
              too difficult to capture 3D models of our environment. Today, such models are
              primarily created by hand, making measurements with tape measures and entering
              the results manually. Even after models are constructed, we do not know the
              best ways to visualize them effectively.

This research proposes to design
              and develop an end-to-end solution to the problem of documentation,
              dissemination, and display of real-world environments. To focus the research,
              two driving problems are targeted: forensic science and education. This
              research brings together an interdisciplinary team including the law
              enforcement community, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Armed Forces
              Institute of Pathology. Additionally, one of our team members, from the New
              Orleans Museum of Art, is directing a major exhibition in which we propose to
              include a virtual environment of Monticello, President Jefferson's home.

We
              will tackle the problems of acquiring, processing, representing, rendering and
              display of real- world data, focusing on the two target applications. Our goal
              is to design and build a complete end-to-end prototype system. The work
              includes:

Acquisition. We will mount an accurate rangefinder on a motorized
              cart and tackle the problem of capturing as complete a model as possible. This
              requires accurate tracking and a solution to the next best view problem in a
              practical sense, including resolution, reflectance, and importance of the
              surfaces.
Processing. A very difficult problem is the registration of color
              with depth data, and of scans from multiple locations. We will develop
              algorithms to robustly register the data, and filter to reduce outliers and
              noise.
Representation. We will develop algorithms to process the massive
              amounts of data (100 MB per scan, tens of scans per room) into both efficient
              geometric and image-based representations. We will compare and contrast the
              representations in terms of quality and efficiency.
Rendering. We will develop
              hierarchical and out-of-core algorithms to render the image- based and
              geometric models at interactive rates, and research perceptually driven
              rendering techniques to maximize rendering efficiency.
Display. This is
              perhaps the most difficult part of the problem because it involves the way
              humans perceive the environment. We will develop a hybrid
              projector/head-mounted-display system to provide stereo views to multiple
              viewers in a life-sized walking environment. The goal is to give the
              participants a sense of presence, of being in Mr. Jefferson's house.



