Title       : Moduli Spaces and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0205643

Award Number: 0205643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emma Previato ep@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number DMS - 0205643        Investigator Emma Previato ep@math.bu.edu

                                Moduli spaces and differential equations

This project
              combines projective geometry and differential 
algebra.  For a few decades
              now, moduli spaces of vector bundles
over curves have been prominent in
              mathematical physics.  A few 
interrelated open problems are the object of
              this research.  
In projective space, models of moduli of vector bundles still
              don't have 
explicit description, by equations or by classification.  The
              generalized 
theta functions (sections of higher-rank vector bundles) are not
              developed 
to the point that one can describe flows of completely integrable
              
hierarchies or perform the necessary calculations of quantum field
              theory
(partition function, e.g.)  Finally, flows of commutative rings 
of
              partial differential operators (generalized KP flows) have not been 
described
              explicitly.  In the proposed work: on the projective-geometry side, 
equations
              for moduli spaces of higher-rank bundles and dimensions of 
Brill-Noether loci
              will be calculated by methods of representation theory 
and correspondences
              between Grassmannians.  On the analytic side, 
differential equations for the
              Kleinian functions (which generalize the 
Weierstrass p-function) will be
              derived and applied  to integrate new 
Hamiltonian systems and the generalized
              KP flows. A theme that runs through 
the proposed research is the classical
              problem of reduction: Weierstrass' students 
Koenigsberger and Kowalevski,
              respectively, characterized the abelian integrals 
of genus 2, 3 respectively,
              that reduce with "multiplicity" 2 to an 
elliptic integral; since then, very
              little was found in general 
(e.g., higher genus or multiplicity).  Progress
              on this problem 
is now under way, partly due to results that revisit the
              Kleinian
functions, and partly to the aid of computer algebra.  The problem 
              of reduction is linked 
with the problem of curves with automorphisms, and the
              project includes applications of 
the results to differential Galois theory,
              monodromy of ordinary differential equations, 
and decoding algorithms for
              algebraic (Goppa) codes. 
  

Elliptic functions have an "unreasonable
              effectiveness",to borrow E.P. Wigner's phrase.  
They occur when modeling
              harmonic oscillators, shooting billiards, measuring the 
amplitude of ocean
              waves, computing the partition functions of quantum field theory.  
The word
              "elliptic" refers to the number of periods of the functions 
(one over the
              real, two over the complex numbers). Theta functions are the multi-periodic
              
analog of elliptic functions. Although Old Masters such as Klein,  H.F. Baker
              and O. Bolza,
obtained equations for genus-2 (4 complex periods) theta
              functions, most 
properties of theta functions are still inexplicit, including
              their dependence on the 
period lattice.  New impetus in the study of such
              functions came from the theory of 
integrable PDEs, such as the
              Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation, and the attendant
algebraically completely
              integrable systems that have been intensively studied since the 
1970s.  This
              project will combine projective geometry and differential algebra to identify
              
differential equations satisfied by the (Kleinian) theta functions, and apply
              them to 
find exact solutions of Hamiltonian systems and non-linear PDEs.
At
              the same time the project will pursue the other major, 
"non-abelian"
              generalization of theta functions, by embedding moduli spaces into projective
              
space.  Theta functions that can be reduced to expressions in elliptic
              functions will be 
characterized geometrically and used in effective decoding
              algorithms.


