Title       : ITR/IM: Novel Indexing and Retrieval of Dynamic Brain Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0205178

Award Number: 0205178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2034722            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Kantor kantor@scils.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0205178
Paul Kantor
Rutgers University

Novel Modeling of Dynamic Brain
              Images for Indexing and Retrieval

The proposed research will develop new
              techniques for representation, organization and retrieval of dynamic brain
              images.  High resolution brain imaging facilities at two sites will conduct
              targeted experiments to develop image sequences supporting the research. 
              Multiple techniques will be used to provide higher time resolution than the
              native fMRI format.  Images will be archived with web access for the research
              team, and for other teams elsewhere around the world. The research will develop
              novel models of episodes of brain activity and effective schemes for indexing
              and retrieving those episodes. 

A practical research goal of the project is
              to support a new kind of "Query by Example" access to archives of space-time
              brain images, usable by clinicians and researchers for research and diagnosis.
              The project also contributes to clinical applications of cognitive science, to
              the advance of scientific knowledge, and to scientific education, at the
              undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate levels. The Rutgers-Princeton project
              is a collaboration among cognitive scientists, computer scientists and
              engineers, information scientists, applied mathematicians, statisticians, and
              cognitive neuroscientists, with guidance from an advisory committee of
              clinicians and radiologists.

The algorithms developed will better
              approximate judgments that trained humans make when scanning an array of stored
              images for ones "similar to" a given image, that is, "Query by Example". This
              project will help to make neuro-imaging analysis tools available to the
              clinical and industrial investigators who are best positioned to adapt new
              methods to applied domains.


