Title       : ITR: The I-Guide Project: Extending Museum Experience Using Portable Devices,
               Wireless Networks and Web Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0205664

Award Number: 0205664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Semper robs@exploratorium.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mirjana Spasojevic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exploratorium
	      3601 Lyon Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941231099    415/563-7337

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1657,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0205664
Robert J. Semper
Exploratorium, San Francisco, CA
"The I-Guide
              Project: Extending Museum Experience Using Portable Devices, Wireless Networks,
              and Web Technology"

This multidisciplinary Information Technology Research
              project, involving a collaboration between the San Francisco Exploratorium and
              Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, addresses several areas of computing research,
              including ubiquitous or pervasive computing, context-aware computing,
              augmentation of the real world, human-computer interaction and
              computer-supported cooperative work. The goal of this project is to gain a
              deeper understanding and to disseminate knowledge about how the use of a
              ubiquitous computing infrastructure may augment learning both during and after
              a visit to an interactive science center. The project focuses on three research
              domains: 1. The creation of a functional wireless nomadic computing
              infrastructure and on-line personalized delivery system to gain knowledge about
              how nomadic technologies can be configured to support learning in a complex
              setting in which there are multiple, competing constraints for a user's
              attention, 2. The development of an instructional design framework for creating
              learning, teaching and community-building resources capable of delivery on
              multiple devices using this system in order to explore which on-line
              information resources can better promote learner interests, sustain science
              learning, and improve science understanding and 3. Studies that explore the
              impact of these resources on the learner's use of the museum to determine the
              relationship between physical visit activities and post-visit on-line
              activities that can be supported by a personalized network experience. The
              project involves 1. The design and implementation of points of information (pi
              stations) and a data network for 10 museum exhibits, 2. The design and
              implementation of free standing kiosks for accessing Web-based content during
              the visit (for visitors who do not carry a wireless handheld device), 3. The
              design and implementation a dynamic, personalized Web-based server system for
              on-site (wireless) and remote (wired) access by visitors, 4. The develop of
              Web-based content for the exhibits as a group and for each exhibit, including a
              mixture of dynamically, customizable text, audio, and visual content and
              interactive discussion-group/bulletin board functions, 5. Research on the
              utility of the system with 300 individual and small groups of learners, 6. The
              creation of a user-triggered method for capturing user experience for extending
              visitor engagement, and 7. The develop of a user model and instructional design
              framework for ubiquitous learning and guidance systems. The project is
              headquartered in the multimedia Exploratorium Learning Studio which includes
              facilities for project staff to engage in project design and implementation as
              well as research studies. 

