Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mechanisms of Female Mate Choice in a Coercive Mating
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0205766

Award Number: 0205766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Oberhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Mechanisms of Post-Copulatory Choice in a Coercive Mating System
Dr. Karen S.
              Oberhauser
Michelle J. Solensy

When sexual coercion, sometimes called
              forced copulation, is prevalent in a species, females have limited control over
              the outcome of individual mating attempts.  However, they may evolve other
              means of determining the males with which they mate, or the males that actually
              fertilize their eggs.  Mating attempts in monarch butterflies typically involve
              a lengthy ground struggle during which males sometimes force females to mate. 
              Females may use this struggle to assess male quality and adjust their level of
              resistance accordingly (precopulatory choice), or they may bias sperm use in
              favor of high quality males (postcopulatory choice).  Postcopulatory mate
              choice by females could be an important selective force driving the evolution
              of male reproductive strategies, and should be especially important in species
              in which coercion is a common mating strategy.  In a preliminary study, there
              was little evidence to support the existence of precopulatory female choice in
              monarch butterflies.  Studies addressing this topic will be continued in both
              laboratory and wild populations.  Studies of postcopulatory choice will address
              the hypothesis that females use spermatophore size as an indicator of male
              mating history, and bias sperm use in favor of males that have mated
              previously.  Spermatophore size is a reliable, honest, and detectable signal of
              male mating success, and previous work has demonstrated that male mating
              success is heritable.  Thus, females may benefit by selecting sperm based on
              this cue since mating success should be transmitted to their sons.  The
              proposed experimental design separates the effect of biased sperm use from the
              potentially confounding effect of sperm competitiveness.

