Title       : ITR: Methodologies for Robust Design of Information Systems under Multiple
               Sources of Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0205227

Award Number: 0205227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Blaauw blaauw@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarma K. Vrudhula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Sylvester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sachin S. Sapatnekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As CMOS technology enters the nanometer-regime, one of the most fundamental
              challenges will result from the loss of predictability of design behavior due
              to both variations during manufacturing and interferences between components
              during normal operation. As features on the die continue to shrink, control of
              the physical parameters, such as the feature size of transistors, their doping
              levels, and oxide thickness, will become increasingly difficult to control,
              resulting in dramatic increased uncertainty in the electrical characteristics
              of individual devices. Also, the close proximity of devices to each other will
              give rise to significant interference from elements surrounding a device, due
              to inductive and capacitive coupling, and due to environmental factors, such as
              power supply and temperature fluctuations. The increase in the number of
              uncertainties, as well as their severity will result in a general loss of
              predictability in nanometer-CMOS design and will threaten the ability to
              produce robust designs. 

In this project, we are developing a statistical
              framework for analysis and optimization of system performance, power, and
              functional integrity, as well as their newly emerging trade-offs in nanometer
              design. In the presence of variations due to process fluctuations and
              environmental interferences, signals are inherently stochastic as are the basic
              measures of design quality, such as delay and power. The research is therefore
              investigating the development of stochastic models for performance metrics that
              capture their dependence on the various sources of uncertainty. The new design
              methodology will focus on robustness as a new measure of design quality,
              including delay, power consumption and measures of functional integrity, and
              will allow these design objectives to be constrained at prescribed levels of
              confidence. Furthermore, the research team is considering new methods for
              simultaneous optimization of performance, energy, and functional integrity that
              effectively exploit new trade-offs and interactions between these objectives in
              nanometer design. 

