Title       : ITR Collaborative Research: Enabling Microscopic Simulators To Perform
               System-Level Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0205411

Award Number: 0205411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Armstrong rca@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sidney Yip  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1403,1687,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

An interdisciplinary research team, at four universities, is
              collaborating on this medium-size Information Technology Research (ITR) project
              aimed at systematically bridging the gap between microscopic descriptions of
              complex material systems and systems-level analysis of direct engineering
              importance.  A mathematics-assisted computational methodology will be developed
              that will enable microscopic-level simulators to perform systems-level analysis
              directly, without the need to pass through an intermediate level description of
              the material system through macroscopic (partial differential or
              integro-differential) evolution equations.  Specifically, an ensemble-averaged
              "coarse" time-stepper-based computational superstructure will be "wrapped
              around" state-of-the-art microscopic dynamic simulators, such as molecular
              dynamics, kinetic Monte Carlo, Lattice-Boltzmann or hybrid codes.  This
              methodology will enable microscopic simulators to perform advanced
              systems-level analysis: stability, bifurcation, "coarse" integration,
              sensitivity, and control tasks, of complex, nonlinear distributed processes. 
              The planned algorithms will run on massively parallel machines.

The
              computational framework will consist of the following basic elements: (i)
              choice of statistics of interest (e.g. distribution moments) for describing the
              coarse behavior; (ii) "lifting" of a macroscopic initial condition to an
              ensemble of consistent microscopic configurations; (iii) evolution over the
              same (short) time period of each initial microscopic configuration in the
              ensemble according to a microscopic simulator that embodies the best current
              description of the physical system; (iv) averaging ("restriction") over the
              ensemble of the evolved microscopic configurations to provide a macroscopic
              evolved system state; and (v) execution of the previous three steps over a
              finite set of macroscopic initial conditions.  This new approach is robust in
              its implementation and portable in its range of scientific and engineering
              applications.  It has general applicability to all systems for which a
              macroscopic description is conceptually possible, yet unavailable in closed
              form.  It circumvents the difficulty in obtaining and closing such macroscopic
              models, while computationally extracting precisely the information that would
              be obtained by a macroscopic model, had the model been available in closed
              form.  This provides the link between ITR and a spectrum of application
              areas.

Impact:

The impact of the research will be on establishing a
              powerful and general link between state-of-the-art microscopic-level
              simulations and fast systems level analysis capabilities.  Although the
              research focuses on specific problems in heterogeneous hard materials and
              complex fluids, the computational framework is applicable to a broad range of
              complex systems, including biological systems, their processing and function. 
              Since it has the potential to revolutionize engineering systems-level analysis,
              it could have educational impact as well as furthering advances in
              microelectronics, bioinformatics and nanotechnology.

