Title       : Computer Simulation of Classical and Quantum Phenomena in Condensed Molecular
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0205146

Award Number: 0205146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $614000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Klein klein@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division, Michael Klein of the University of Pennsylvania will
              use computer simulation and modeling techniques to investigate structural and
              dynamical phenomena in molecular solids and fluids.  Ab initio Car-Parrinello
              molecular dynamics (CPMD) as well as classical Monte Carlo (MC) and molecular
              dynamics (MD) techniques will be used to characterize the behavior of a variety
              of condensed-phase molecular systems.  CPMD methodology will also be utilized
              to explore fundamental chemical reactions in both aqueous and superacid media. 
              Novel methodologies and algorithms for condensed-phase simulations will be
              developed and implemented, with emphasis on using the latest generation of
              massively parallel computing platforms.

Computer simulation of molecular
              systems provides rich insights into chemical behavior at the molecular level. 
              As computer algorithms and force field models continue to improve, it is
              possible to study larger systems and to gain useful insights regarding more and
              more physical and chemical properties.  Using a combination of computer
              simulation techniques Klein is able to perform calculations on systems
              consisting of large numbers of molecules, such as polymer melts and polyatomic
              fluids, and to bridge regimes of vastly differing time scales.  In this way he
              is able to study a number of important chemical and physical properties of
              interest in, for example, biophysical systems or the design of new materials.

