Title       : High-Precision Computational Spectroscopy Of Fe-Peak Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0205827

Award Number: 0205827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Pradhan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205827
Pradhan

The spectra of iron and iron-peak elements are of
              fundamental interest in astronomy. Although
produced as the end-products of
              stellar life cycles in supernovae, these elements trace the chemical
and
              physical history of the Universe even to high redshifts (z). Iron in particular
              is ubiquitous in
most astronomical sources: stars, active galactic nuclei
              (AGN), supernova remnants (SNR's), and
the interstellar and intergalactic
              media (ISM and IGM). Some of the basic questions are: How
accurately can we
              analyze the spectra and determine abundances in various types of stars? Is
              the
abundance of iron a `chronometer' of the earliest epochs of stellar
              formation? Can the spectra of
iron-peak elements be used for spectroscopic
              calibration of supernovae as `standard candles'?
The spectra of iron-peak
              elements are complicated. A considerable effort by the new generation
              of
telescopes and instruments will be directed towards their high-resolution
              spectroscopy. But high resolution in observations demands high precision in
              theory. Spectra obtained with great effort and expense remain inadequately
              analyzed owing to the absence or paucity of fundamental atomic parameters. This
              is especially true of iron and iron-group elements. 

However, large-scale
              computations with high precision are difficult and very time consuming.
              In
spite of the progress made in the past decade, the requisite precision and
              quantity of the atomic
parameters for iron-peak elements has not been attained
              to enable sufficiently accurate numerical
models. Much of the progress in the
              recent past has been due to two major international projects
in atomic
              astrophysics - the Opacity Project and the Iron Project. While most of the
              state-of-the-art theoretical tools were developed under these projects, the
              actual computations are yet to be carried out and require further
              developments.

Dr. Anil Pradhan and colleagues at the Ohio State University
              will carry out a comprehensive effort based on recent advances in relativistic
              calculations for atomic processes for iron and iron-peak elements. These relate
              primarily to electron impact excitation, photoionization, recombination, and
              radiative transition probabilities.  Dr. Pradhan's effort is aimed at some
              outstanding problems that entail numerical spectroscopy of: (I) iron spectra
              from AGN and strong Fe II emitting quasars, (II) Fe-peak elements (Cr, Mn, Fe,
              Zn) in the IGM, (III) Fe-Co-Ni spectra in SNR's, (IV) Non-LTE monochromatic
              opacities for stellar modeling and abundance determinations, (V) an exact
              treatment of radiative transfer in Non-LTE models, using the new atomic data,
              for important ions such as Fe I-IV and Ni II, and (VI) for studies of iron
              spectra in AGN, Fe II/Mg II ratio vs. redshift, and Fe II/Ni II abundance
              anomalies in SNR's and galaxies. Physical excitation mechanisms such as
              Lyman-alpha and UV fluorescence will be studied. The targeted atomic species
              are in low-ionization states
observed mainly in the Optical and Near-IR from
              ground-based observatories. As massive computational resources are an a priori
              requirement for this undertaking, Dr. Pradhan has secured a large allocation of
              computation time at the Ohio Supercomputer Center in Columbus,
              Ohio.
***



.

