Title       : High Spatial and Spectral Resolution Images of Titan at Infrared Wavelenths:
               Observations and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0205893

Award Number: 0205893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imke de Pater imke@floris.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205893
dePater

Dr. Imke dePater, of the University of California at
              Berkeley, will direct  a program of ground-based high resolution imaging,
              spectroscopy, and modeling of Titan. The  program will use some of the world's
              largest optical/infrared telescopes, the 10-m Keck Observatory and the 8-m
              Gemini Telescope, to obtain diffraction-limited images of Titan in narrow band
              filters between 1 and 2.5 micron wavelength. To investigate Titan's atmosphere
              and surface in even greater detail, Dr. dePater and her team will obtain
              spectral image datacubes of Titan using the near-infrared spectrometer NIR-SPEC
              together with the Keck Adaptive Optics system.  Spectra of Titan will not
              immediately reveal surface composition, since sunlight reflected from the
              surface will in part be absorbed by methane gas (as well as other absorbers) in
              Titan's atmosphere, and will undergo scattering by haze particles. Since
              Titan's surface albedo varies significantly across its surface, a single
              observation of Titan does not give the necessary constraints to determine the
              atmospheric haze and methane cloud distribution and properties. To better
              constrain Titan's atmosphere and surface, this team will observe the same
              surface features through multiple atmospheric paths. In parallel the team will
              develop advanced models of Titan's atmosphere, to simultaneously extract
              surface reflectance spectra and the vertical haze distribution as a function of
              location on Titan's disk. To better understand the formation and removal
              processes of the atmospheric haze particles, as well as their chemical and
              physical properties, this group will complement the data with observations at
              mid-infrared wavelengths, sensitive to Titan's high-altitude hazes and various
              hydrocarbon gases.
***



