Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Fine-Scale Pelagic Predator-Prey Interactions: Hawaiian
               Spinner Dolphins and the Mesopelagic Boundary Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0205752

Award Number: 0205752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9065               (Estimated)
Investigator: Whitlow W. Au wau@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              "Fine-scale pelagic predator-prey interactions:
Hawaiian spinner dolphins and
              the mesopelagic boundary"

Whitlow W. L. Au
Doctoral Student: Kelly J.
              Benoit-Bird

Spinner dolphins in Hawaii feed at night on small fish, shrimp,
              and squid. Their prey is very deep during the day but migrates close to the
              surface and near the coastline every night. Spinner dolphins follow the
              movements of their prey. They move inshore and offshore along with their prey's
              migration and they dive to the depths at which their prey is most abundant.
              Spinner dolphins also forage specifically on high-density prey  patches, small
              areas that have more prey than those around them do. Other studies of pelagic
              predators, however, have not shown this type of overlap with prey. Data will be
              collected on both spinner dolphin predators and their prey simultaneously using
              scanning sonar, a device that will allow the location and abundance of predator
              and prey to be plotted in three-dimensions. Foraging dolphins will be tracked
              from a boat with the scanning sonar and the density and geometry of prey
              patches will be measured. Changes in these characteristics will be observed as
              the dolphins forage to observe how they affect the behavior of their prey.
              Dolphins probably use echolocation, a natural sonar system, to find their prey.
              How this system is used by animals in the wild to forage has however, not been
              studied. To begin to understand echolocation's role in foraging, the rate of
              echolocation clicks, individual sonar signals, will be measured while measuring
              the distance of the dolphins from their food. If spinner dolphins are using
              echolocation to find their food, the number of clicks and their production rate
              should increase as dolphins get closer to their prey. This work will determine
              if pelagic predators can overlap with their prey at small scales, which
              behaviors allow this to happen, and what role echolocation plays in dolphin's
              search for food. 


