Title       : SGER: Exploring Massive Chip Level Active Deskewing for VLSI Chips Beyond 20GHz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0205854

Award Number: 0205854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Chen chen@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              During the last several decades, the clock rate and the level of integration of
              VLSI chips have reached a level that distributing clocks has become an
              increasingly difficult task. The most recently released chips run at more than
              2GHz-clock rate. The performance projection for future ULSI chips will be up to
              20GHz in the next 5-10 years. This implies that the overall clock skew needs to
              be kept under 5ps across the chip in order to control the amount of clock skew
              to be within 10% of the total clock cycle. This problem will be further
              exacerbated by the steep increase in process variations in future processing
              technologies beyond 50nm generations. Furthermore, when chips contain more and
              more components (gates), the disparity of switching activities on chip will
              vary more widely resulting in greater on-chip variations of temperature and
              supply noise, which are time-variant. 

The research proposed here is
              intended to explore a dramatically different design paradigm for designing and
              distributing clock signals for the future where the clocking networks will be
              dynamically adapted to chip's operating environment to perform a deskewing
              function in real-time. Active deskewing uses on-chip active devices such as
              delay-locked loops (DLLs) to detect and reduce skews between any two points on
              the chip. The issues the proposed research addresses include: 
Given a chip
              architecture and the characteristics (switching, leakage, and density) of the
              blocks used on the chip, what is the optimal topology of the self-adjusting
              deskewing network that must be stable?
Given the performance requirements for
              the chip, what is the maximum latency of the deskewing network the chip can
              tolerate?
What is the resolution of deskewing circuits? And how does this
              affect the overall performance of the clock network?
Research includes an
              extensive exploration theoretically to determine the practicality of such a
              deskewing approach. A mathematical model for the entire deskewing system is
              formulated as a multi-input, multi-output (MIMO) discrete-time dynamic system.
              A stability analysis based upon the model is being developed. This approach
              uses results from robust control theory that can guarantee stability even for
              perturbed systems.

