Title       : Laboratory Spectroscopy for Studies of Metal-Poor Halo Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0205124

Award Number: 0205124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207494             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Lawler jelawler@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Den Hartog  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1205,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205124
Lawler

The study of abundances of the heavy elements in
              metal-poor halo stars is contributing to a more quantitative understanding of
              stellar nucleosynthesis and Galactic chronometry.  The odd-even sawtooth
              pattern of abundances throughout the lanthanides is examined to separate out
              the
contributions of the r- and s- processes (synthesis by rapid and slow
              neutron capture) throughout
the evolution of the Galaxy.  The abundances of
              the radioactive chronometers Th and U are
measured along with abundances of
              other near-lying r-process elements such as Os, Ir and Pt to
determine stellar
              age and thereby put a lower limit on the Galactic age.  

Abundance accuracy
              is key in these studies, and yet the database of transition probabilities on
              which the abundance determination depends is sorely lacking for many of the
              heavy elements.  Often astronomers must make use of solar gf-values which have
              many sources of uncertainty, particularly for heavy elements which are
              relatively weak in comparison to the Fe group in the solar spectrum.  Old
              laboratory measurements and semi-empirical results are also often used,
              although they are known to have large errors for weaker lines.  With modern
              beam-laser techniques, gf-values can be eliminated as the major source of
              uncertainty in solar and stellar abundance determinations.

Dr. James Lawler
              and colleagues, at the University of Wisconsin, will conduct laboratory
              measurements of large sets of accurate, absolute transition probabilities. 
              Transition probabilities will be determined by combining radiative lifetimes
              with branching fractions.  The radiative lifetimes will be measured using
              time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence on a slow beam of atoms/ions. 
              Branching fractions will be measured using Fourier transform spectroradiometry.
               Priority will be given to the lanthanide spectrum Nd II, as well as spectra of
               important chronometers Th II and U II.   The gf-values of these spectra have
              been identified as the most in need of improvement, and as critical in studies
              of halo stars.   As time and resources allow, measurements will continue on the
              spectra Os I, Pt I and Ir I, which have also been identified as needing
              improved gf-values, and as important in studies of halo stars.
****


