Title       : ITR: ZebraNet: Position-aware Power-aware Wireless Computing for Wildlife
               Tracking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0205214

Award Number: 0205214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1299999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Martonosi martonosi@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold V. Poor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel I. Rubenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As computer systems become increasingly ubiquitous, computer systems research
              and design has moved
from being a highly performance-centric process to being
              one that juggles many design goals and metrics.
Mobile and embedded computing
              systems must, in addition to providing sufficient performance, be
              rugged,
reliable, power-efficient, and lightweight. Because of the extreme and
              multidimensional design constraints they face, they must also be attentive to
              the specific needs of application domains, so they can be designed to satisfy
              these needs while still meeting power budgets and weight limits.

The
              Princeton ZebraNet Project is an inter-disciplinary effort with thrusts in both
              Biology and Computer
Systems. On the computer systems side, ZebraNet is
              studying power-aware, position-aware
computing/communication systems.  Namely,
              the ZebraNet project works to develop, evaluate, implement,
and test systems
              that integrate computing, wireless communication, and non-volatile storage
              along with
global positioning systems (GPS) and other sensors.  On the biology
              side, the technology enables novel
studies of animal migrations and
              inter-species interactions. From a computing standpoint, key
              research
breakthroughs are required in protocol and system design in order to
              make the system power-efficient and
reliable.  From a biology standpoint, the
              system enables fundamentally new types of biological
observations that allow
              us to: (i) understand long-range migrations in large mammals, (ii) observe
              inter-species interactions between carnivores (predators) and ungulates (prey),
              and (iii) track the behavior of extremely endangered species.

As a computer
              systems research problem, ZebraNet is compelling because the needs of the
              biological
researchers are stringent enough to require real breakthroughs in
              wireless protocols and in low-power
computer systems design and computer
              systems power management.  These breakthroughs can be
leveraged into other
              (non-wildlife-oriented) fields of research; essentially ZebraNet is a
              power-aware
wireless ad hoc sensor network, but with more serious bandwidth
              and computational needs than most prior
sensor networks research problems.  As
              a biology research problem, ZebraNet allows researchers to pose
and to answer
              important long-standing questions about long-range migration, inter-species
              interactions, and nocturnal behavior.

Major research activities span a broad
              range, including:
	Modeling long-range animal migrations
	Observing
              inter-species predator-prey interactions
	Analyzing the impact of human
              development on animal behavior
	Developing power-aware systems for
              position-aware computing
	Incorporating error resilience and domain-specific
              performance optimizations into lightweight
                  wireless
              protocols
	Managing logged sensor data to minimize the number of required
              uploads from tracking nodes

ZebraNet is engaging in a mix of theoretical
              research, prototyping, and field experimentation.  The project
is not solely
              about systems-building, but rather mixes theory with practical hands-on
              evaluations of the
ZebraNet designs. Research is conducted both at Princeton
              University and at the Mpala Research Centre.
Mpala is a biology field station
              in central Kenya that Princeton University administers along with the
Kenya
              Wildlife Service, the National Museums of Kenya, the Mpala Wildlife Foundation,
              and the
Smithsonian Institution.

Overall, ZebraNet represents a truly
              interdisciplinary effort bringing together research strengths from
disparate
              fields over a challenging problem.  The potential contribution of the project
              includes significant
advances in computing technology as well as in our
              understanding of wildlife migrations.  The three main
researchers bring
              strengths in wildlife biology, power-aware computer systems, and wireless
              technology.
The interplay between these disciplines fosters creative to the
              research problems in both arenas.


