Title       : Fossil Mysteries at the San Diego Natural History Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0205820

Award Number: 0205820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Shelly rshelly@sdnhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego Soc Nat History
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92112    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The San Diego Society of Natural History (SDSNH) will design, fabricate and
              install a 9,000 square foot permanent exhibition exploring the fundamental
              scientific concepts of paleontology, geology, biology and ecology as they
              pertain to prehistoric southern California and the peninsula of Baja
              California.  Playing the role of paleontologist, visitors will be invited to
              ponder a mystery, explore the setting, examine the evidence, and use scientific
              tools to discover answers.  Carefully crafted settings will support exploration
              that engages learners of all ages at levels for both novice and experienced
              learners.  Visitors will discover how natural patterns reveal natural
              processes, and examine the relationship between past, present and future. 
              Focused activities will enable visitors to exercise their skills of observation
              and critical thinking, with exhibits that promote learning in a family context.
               The exhibits and activities focus on the Museum's collections and research,
              and are grounded in comprehensive visitor research supporting exhibit
              development.  The exhibition and related science education materials will
              demonstrate how these fundamental concepts can be investigated in a regional
              setting.  Visitors will extend their learning experience beyond the museum
              through a content-rich interactive website, a popular book on regional geology
              and paleontology, and related public programs and fossil displays at regional
              nature centers near the actual discovery sites.  Exhibition planning, program
              evaluation and visitor research will be widely disseminated as contributions to
              the literature on best practices for interpretation of prehistoric life and
              landscapes
