Title       : RUI: Reconstructing Galaxy Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0205960

Award Number: 0205960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. West west@bohr.uhh.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii at Hilo
	      200 West Kawili Street
	      Hilo, HI  967204091    808/974-7444

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205960
West

Understanding the origin and evolution of galaxies is one
              of the major goals of modern 
astrophysics.   It is generally believed that
              galaxies arose from small density fluctuations in the 
primordial matter
              distribution that were amplified over time by gravity.  However, our
              
knowledge of the details of the galaxy formation process is still far from
              complete, and many 
important questions remain unanswered.  How and when did
              galaxies form?  How have they 
evolved over time?  How do their environs
              influence galaxy properties?   
 
Over the past few years, Dr. Michael West
              has been pursuing a number of original lines of research, both observational 
              and  theoretical,  to  address  these  questions.    With this award he will
              build  upon previous successes and explore new avenues that may lead to further
              insights about the 
genesis of galaxies.  Specific goals of this project
              include the following: 
 o One of the most promising ways to learn the secrets
              of galaxy formation is by studying their globular cluster populations. 
              Globular clusters are dense aggregates of up to a million stars that are held
              together by their  mutual gravitational attraction.   Most galaxies are
              surrounded by systems of tens, hundreds, or thousands of globular clusters that
              swarm around them like bees around a hive.  The present-day globular
              populations of galaxies reflect the cumulative effects of billions of years of
              ongoing galaxy formation and evolution via mergers and collisions, accretion,
              generations of star formation, and other processes.   Careful analysis of a
              galaxy's globular cluster population can thus 
allow astronomers to
              reconstruct its history.  A major goal of Dr. West's project is to undertake
              the most comprehensive study yet of the globular cluster systems of hundreds of
              galaxies in the Virgo and Coma clusters. 
 o Dr. West and collaborators
              recently found evidence of the existence of a sizeable population of 
              intergalactic globular clusters that are not gravitationally bound to
              individual galaxies but instead roam freely throughout the cores of galaxy
              clusters.  The discovery of this new class of objects is  an exciting result
              that invites further study, and searches for intergalactic globulars in several
              nearby galaxy clusters are currently underway. The colors,  luminosity 
              function,  and  spatial  and  velocity  distributions  of  these  intergalactic
              globulars will place strong constraints on their origin. 
 o A growing body of
              evidence suggests that galaxy destruction might be a much more common
              occurrence than previously thought, and that the births and deaths of galaxies
              are intertwined.  Rich galaxy clusters are especially harsh environments, where
              small galaxies can be cannibalized by larger ones,  collisions between galaxies
              can strip material  from  their  halos,  ablation  removes  their  interstellar
               gas,  and galaxies may be partially or even completely torn apart by tidal
              fields as they travel through the cluster core.  Yet the demise of some
              galaxies may also give rise to new ones, as material spilled into intergalactic
              space is eventually recycled into other galaxies.  A goal of this research
              project is to conduct the first systematic survey to look for the faint remains
              of disrupted galaxies in galaxy clusters, in order to place quantitative
              constraints on the current rate of galaxy destruction in dense environments. 
              
This award is made under the auspices of the Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) program at the NSF.  
***

