Title       : ITR: Collaborative Hardware-Software Adaptation for Multimedia Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0205638

Award Number: 0205638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve sadve@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Kravets  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klara Nahrstedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile systems primarily processing multimedia data are expected to become
a
              dominant computing platform for many application domains.  The design of
such
              systems imposes several new challenges, as it must consider
              demanding,
dynamic, and multidimensional resource requirements and
              constraints, with
energy becoming a first-class resource.  At the same time,
              the ability of
multimedia applications to trade off output quality for system
              resources
and the difference between their peak and average demands offers a
              huge
opportunity for optimization.

A promising approach to meet the
              challenges of mobile multimedia systems,
therefore, is to design all system
              layers with an ability to adapt in
response to system or application changes.
              Further, to reap the full
benefits of these adaptations, all system layers
              must cooperate to reach a
system-wide globally-optimal configuration.  This
              research seeks to develop
and demonstrate an integrated cross-layer adaptive
              system where hardware
and all software layers cooperatively adapt to changing
              system resources
and application demands, seeking to maximize user
              satisfaction while
meeting resource constraints of energy, time, and
              bandwidth.  This work is
expected to have a large impact because it will
              expose sources of
substantial performance improvement not available before,
              for a platform of
increasing importance to many application domains.




