Title       : Analysis and Control of Layered Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0205148

Award Number: 0205148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott W. Hansen shansen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oleg Imanuvilov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0205148
Hansen
 
The focus of the proposed research is to analyze
              controllability and 
stabilization properties of systems of partial
              differential equations (PDE's) 
that model layered elastic media. Specific
              layered elastic systems we are 
concerned with include constrained-layer
              damping models, laminated 
plates, plates with surface-mounted and/or embedded
              actuators and 
general multilayer plate theory.  For a given layered
              structure, generally 
there are many different PDE systems of varying
              complexity that could be 
used to model the vibrations. Often the various
              PDE's are connected 
through a perturbation, which may be singular. The
              central concern will be 
to determine the dependence of stability and
              controllability upon the 
perturbation parameters that connect the possible
              models. This way model 
dependence, accuracy, and robustness properties of
              control and feedback 
strategies can be tested. The plan is to apply this type
              of analysis to 
practical control applications such as optimal design for
              constrained-layer 
damping and the stabilization of elastic structures using
              surface-mounted 
and embedded piezoelectric actuators. Several theoretical
              challenges 
present themselves in attempting to develop control methods that
              are 
useful for multilayer plates.  In particular, it is hoped to develop a
              theory 
of Carleman multipliers that is applicable to boundary control of
              layered 
systems. The objective is to obtain the sharpest possible results
              regarding 
boundary control.
 
Understanding the modeling, control and
              stabilization of layered elastic 
systems is becoming increasingly important
              due to the rapid advances in 
material sciences, fabrication of composite
              materials, and speed of 
processing. The models considered are motivated by
              practical real-world 
applications involving composite layered structures. 
              These include the 
design of ship hulls and airplane fuselage, sound-proofing
              in auto bodies 
and the design of sporting goods such as skis and tennis
              rackets. Often, it 
is possible to utilize a composite construction to achieve
              a far superior 
design compared to what is possible with a single material. 
              Developing a 
theory for control and feedback of these structures is a
              challenging 
problem due the complicated nature of the coupling between the
              layers.  
On the other hand, for a model to be useful in practical engineering
              
applications, various crude approximations need to be made to reduce the
              
complexity. Thus, a large part of the goal is to quantify the connection
              
between an accurate, but complex mathematical model and a simplified, 
but
              more useful engineering model.   Specific problems of practical 
interest
              which will be addressed include: feedback control of vibrating 
structures
              using strategically placed actuators, optimal design and stability 
analysis
              for damping in layered and laminated composites.

