Title       : ITR: SafetyNet: Synergistic Support for Availability, Designability,
               Programmability, & Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0205286

Award Number: 0205286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1450000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Wood david@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0205286  David A. Wood University of Tennessee  ITR:  SafetyNet:  Synergist
              Support for Availability, Designability, Programmability, &
              Performance

Information services, supported by remote server computers, are
              becoming part of society's essential infrastructure for commerce, science,
              education, and government.  Many servers are shared-memory multiprocessors that
              multiply the 60-fold single-processor performance improvements of the last
              decade by an additional factor of two to 64.  These incredible performance
              improvements are putting increasing pressure on sever designs to improve
              complementary computer properties, such as:

Availability. Society needs
              information services that are as dependable as our electricity and fresh water
              supplies.  Unless new architectural techniques are developed and applied,
              however, server availability will go down with time, since deep submicron
              transistors are less reliable (and more susceptible to radiation) and future
              servers will employ more transistors, offering more failure
              opportunities.

Designability.  Designability is the challenge of deploying a
              completely correct computer.  Getting the bugs out of today's computer systems
              is expensive, in both manpower and time, and getting worse as the transistor
              bonanza enables more complex designs.  Furthermore, unpredictable delays leave
              expensive manufacturing facilities underutilized and cost 5% performance per
              month (due to Moore's Law).

Programability.  Servers typically run
              multi-threaded software to turn their raw computing power into high-throughput
              information services.  Unfortunately, hard-to-test races make writing such
              software a challenge that stresses current programming practices and leads to
              bugs in deployed software.  Hardware that facilitates rapid development of
              robust software should be prized.

Performance.  Solutions that improve
              availability, designability, and programmability will more likely flourish if
              they have, at most, a modest impact on cost-performance.  Better yet would be
              hardware that actually improves performance, in addition to the other
              properties.

