Title       : Animations for Visualization of Earth Processes and History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0205928

Award Number: 0205928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tanya Atwater atwater@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1746      DISTINGUISHED TEACHING SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1746,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this project and the goals of my teaching goals are to instill as
              much understanding as possible of the way the earth works, and also to convey
              my own love of the beauty, excitement and rigor of the scientific endeavor. In
              recent years I have experimented with the creation of multi-media visualization
              products for the understanding and teaching of earth subjects. My initial
              animations and movies have met with great response, and are used in numerous
              classrooms at the University of California-Santa Barbara, across the nation and
              around the world. I believe a major portion of the human population learns best
              from imagery, especially moving images, and I am very excited about the new
              multi-media tools that make this form of communication so much more possible.
              Moving imagery is especially useful and helpful for the teaching of geology,
              since the subject is so visual and is often far outside ordinary human scales
              of time and space. I am presently refining regional geological animations and
              materials for southern California. Through the current project I am expanding
              the geographic reach of this work by creating an Educational Multimedia
              Visualization Center for visiting teacher-scholars. The center allows experts
              in the geology of their own regions/disciplines to bring their traditional
              images and knowledge, and to transform them into animations and presentation
              packages. They return home with these products and also with a new array of
              skills to share around their own institutions. Their imagery products join my
              works that are already out in film, videotape, as freeware on the web and as
              materials in the NSF-funded digital libraries of ADEPT and DLESE. Indeed, the
              ADEPT group is based at U.C.S.B. and is interested in developing a streamlined
              process for transferring content generated at the Educational Multimedia
              Visualization Center into their online holdings. The Multimedia Visualization
              Center is building upon the long experience and excellent infra-structure of
              this organization, extending its services to off-campus visitors. Thus,
              visitors return home with their own projects and also with new ideas about
              instructional support possibilities. Likewise they share with us the
              innovations of their home institutions that we may learn from them and pass
              them along.
