Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0205128

Award Number: 0205128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Levi levi@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0205128
PI: Mark Levi
Institution: Penn State University
Title:
              Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical Systems

ABSTRACT

This
              project consists of three parts.  The first part deals with a fundamental
              theoretical question of dynamics: To understand the nature of physically
              observable chaos.  Despite the great amount of work done over the past five
              decades, the fundamental question of demonstrating genuine chaotic behavior in
              a physically realistic differential equation has not been answered.  The answer
              seems finally within grasp, due to incremental progress in understanding
              two-dimensional mappings on the one hand and some new insights into
              differential equations on the other.  The second part of the project deals with
              rapidly vibrating systems.  High-frequency oscillations lead to fascinating
              phenomena, which have found their use in such areas as particle confinement,
              particle accelerators, and laser tweezers.  A recent observation of the author
              shed a new light on these phenomena and opened connections with other fields,
              which will be further explored in this project, along with possible new
              applications.  The third part of the project deals with the mathematical
              analysis of a geometrical object (a class of area-preserving cylinder maps)
              which is of independent mathematical interest on the one hand and gives insight
              into physical systems on the other.  These systems include (i) charged
              particles in magnetic fields, (ii) the Frenkel-Kontorova model of an
              equilibrium configuration of electrons in a crystal lattice, and (iii) arrays
              of Josephson junctions.

This project involves three different research
              directions.  The first direction addresses a major gap in our understanding of
              how chaos really manifests itself in physical systems.  Surprising as it may
              seem, despite the large amount of sometimes deep work in the field of "chaos,"
              chaotic behavior has not been proven (understood in the mathematical sense) in
              realistic physical systems.  The nature of chaos has really been understood
              only in mathematical models that are too simplified to include some key
              features of real systems (although even those simplified models can be quite
              complex).  The theory, however, has reached a level where such understanding
              seems finally within grasp.  A mathematical proof of the existence of chaos for
              a realistic physical system would be the culmination of a long development over
              the past five decades or more.  The second direction of the project deals with
              the study of physical systems with rapid oscillations, where phenomena occur
              that are both utterly fascinating and useful.  For example, subjecting the end
              of an open bicycle chain to high-frequency vibrations will, in theory, enable
              the chain to stand up stably (!) on its end.  The theory which underlies this
              curiosity is also responsible for the workings of such seemingly unrelated
              devices as particle traps, particle accelerators, laser tweezers (which allow
              one to move a particle inside a cell by a laser beam without breaking the cell
              wall), and acoustic levitators.  Over the past few years, the author has found
              an explanation of these effects; prior theory predicted the result but did not
              answer the "why."  The explanation opened new directions, which we plan to
              explore further.  We plan, in particular, to better understand the concept of
              vibrational control and explore the use of vibration for filtering (using
              acoustic waves).  The third direction is of basic mathematical interest but has
              significance in several physical situations.  The mathematical theory will give
              insight, otherwise inaccessible, into at least three different phenomena: (i)
              the behavior of particles in magnetic fields of certain patterns; (ii) the
              electric conductivity of certain types of crystals, and (iii) the electric
              behavior of some arrays of Josephson junctions known as superconducting quantum
              interference devices (the so-called SQUIDS).


