Title       : Hyperbolic and Kinetic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0205032

Award Number: 0205032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios E. Tzavaras tzavaras@math.wisc.edu@  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0205032
Mathematical Sciences: Hyperbolic and kinetic
              partial differential equations

Abstract

0205032  Tzavaras



This
              project deals with several aspects of the theory of weak solutions for
              hyperbolic systems, and the mathematical theory of transport equations that
              arise in kinetic theory of gases.
Specific themes are:
(i)	To exploit the
              interface between the theory of weak solutions for hyperbolic systems and the
              theory of transport equations in the kinetic theory of gases, particularly with
              regard to issues of propagation and cancellation of oscillations. 
(ii)	To
              study well-posedness and hydrodynamic limits for certain collisional kinetic
              models, problems that are intimately connected to the thermomechanical issues
              arising in the passage from microscopic to continuum theories. 
(iii)	To
              exploit variational techniques in the study of the structural properties for
              the equations of multi-dimensional elastodynamics and viscoelasticity.
              
(iv)	To analyze various instances of diffusion-sensitive dynamics, like the
              effect of small-viscosity on the long-time evolution of hyperbolic systems and
              the notion of graph solutions for diffusion sensitive systems.

The
              mathematical research on hyperbolic systems of conservation laws is to a large
              extent motivated by the fundamental conservation laws in physics and continuum
              mechanics.  From its early stages, analytical and numerical methods in this
              field have developed together, and analytical understanding contributes in the
              design of high performance computational algorithms.  In recent years there has
              seen a very fruitful exchange between ideas in the theory of kinetic equations
              and the theory of weak solutions for hyperbolic systems.  At the core of this
              exchange is the issue of deriving continuum theories from microscopic models of
              kinetic theory of gases or statistical physics. This project will make use of
              this exchange of ideas to develop mathematical techniques to better understand
              the wide variety of important physical systems that are modeled by conservation
              laws.


