Title       : RUI: Statistical Modeling of Microlens Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0205754

Award Number: 0205754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34926              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Heacox heacox@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii at Hilo
	      200 West Kawili Street
	      Hilo, HI  967204091    808/974-7444

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,9150,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0205754
Heacox

Dr. William Heacox will analyze gravitational microlens
              survey data in the current  literature in order to deduce the mass
              distributions of the objects causing the lensing, and thus help characterize 
              their  natures.    Microlensing  is  a  promising means  of  detecting 
              otherwise undetectable planetary- to stellar-mass objects in such locations as
              the halo of our galaxy, where a large amount of dark matter of unknown nature
              is known to exist.  In a typical microlens survey, a few  million  stars  in 
              the  Large  Magellanic  Cloud  are  monitored  periodically  to  detect  the
              optical amplification caused by gravitational lensing when a Galactic halo
              object (the lens) passes nearly in  front of a background star (the  source). 
              While the resulting amplification amplitude depends upon lens mass, it also
              depends upon such unknowable quantities as the relative velocity of lens and
              source, and the distance of closest encounter of the lens to the line-of-sight 
              to  the  source.    This  complication  has  prevented  accurate  estimates  of
               lens masses, so that the observation of a few tens of microlenses has not 
              greatly  aided in the identification of halo dark matter.  Dr. Heacox' research
               consists of the application of sophisticated statistical  modeling techniques
              to the entire set of observed microlenses in a survey, in order to determine
              the statistical distribution of lens masses (rather than the masses of
              individual lenses).   The method uses all that is knowable about the kinematics
              (velocities, distances) of lens and source populations, together with the set
              of observed microlens parameters, to infer all that can be deduced  about the
              mass distribution  of the underlying 
population causing the lensing.   In
              application to the Galactic halo microlenses, the result 
should be the first
              credible estimate of the mass distribution of the halo dark matter, and  a
              
concomitant increase in our understanding of the nature of this material. 
              The nature of dark 
matter in the Universe is one of the outstanding problems
              in modern astronomy; a better 
understanding of the component in our galaxy
              will be a useful first step in determining what 
most of the Universe is made
              of.  This award is made under the auspices of the Research in Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) program at NSF.
***


