Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Coercion and Reconciliation in a Socially Monogamous
               Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0205804

Award Number: 0205804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9820               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Jaeger biology@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dissertation Research:  Coercion and Reconciliation in a Socially Monogamous
              Species
Robert G. Jaeger, Ph. D.
Ethan D. Prosen, M.S.

	This research
              project examines the effects of aggression on socially monogamous behavior
              using the red-backed salamander (Plethodon cinereus) as a model organism.  In
              laboratory studies, some males and females of this territorial species have
              shown a preference for associating with their partner relative to other
              individuals of the opposite sex (i.e., are socially monogamous).  This
              preference is unknown in other amphibians.  Preliminary evidence implies that
              both sexes direct aggressive behavior towards partners that associate with
              individuals of the opposite sex (i.e., are "fickle").  This increased
              aggression, or "sexual coercion", may be what drives some individuals toward
              social monogamy.
	Primate studies have shown that reconciliation, or making-up
              behavior, reduces the negative effects that result from aggression between
              individuals that often interact.  There has been a call for research exploring
              the possibility of reconciliation in animals outside of the primates. 
              Red-backed salamanders exhibit two of the three minimum requirements for
              reconciliation: long-term memory and individual recognition.  Therefore, it is
              hypothesized that partners will display reconciliation behavior after
              aggression following a fickle event.
	These experiments look at how
              intimidation shapes the social behavior of red-backed salamanders.  This
              research tests the general hypothesis that aggression can maintain socially
              monogamous partnerships.  Parental investment theory predicts social monogamy
              to be rare, especially when males provide no direct resources to offspring. 
              Because red-baked salamander males provide no direct resources to offspring,
              this species provides an ideal situation for the exploration of the maintenance
              of social monogamy.  In addition, finding evidence of reconciliation in a lower
              vertebrate such as salamanders would open up a field dominated by primate
              studies.

