Title       : Infalling Planetesimals in Young Star Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0205895

Award Number: 0205895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Pilachowski catyp@astro.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Pilachowski

Dr. Pilachowski is awarded funds at Indiana University to
              use the recently discovered "falling evaporative bodies" (FEBs) in young star
              systems to study the timescale for the formation of planets.  FEBs are
              planetesimals whose orbits are perturbed by newly formed planets.  The
              planetesimals are either ejected from the planetary system or sent inward on
              orbits that impact or graze the central star.  Near the star, the planetesimals
              are heated and turned to gas, and can be detected by their transient spectral
              absorption features.  The FEBs offer direct evidence of planets and
              planetesimals in the star system, and also provide information about the
              dynamics of the system and the composition of the planetesimals.  Observations
              of FEBs in a sample of young stars with well-defined masses and ages may
              constrain the timescale of planet formation and/or the mechanism of orbital
              migration. 
 
Dr. Pilachowski will examine late B and early A dwarf stars in
              young star clusters 
ranging in age from a few million years up to 30 million
              years to explore the timescales over which planetesimals may be cleared out of
              young solar systems by the formation of planets and by orbital migration. The
              stars will be monitored spectroscopically using the 3.5-m
              Wisconsin-Indiana-Yale-NOAO (WIYN) telescope and multi-object spectrograph. 
              The PI will involve both graduate and undergraduate students in the work, and
              expects that this study of  "comets" in extra-solar planetary systems is likely
              to attract broad public interest and to fire the imaginations of children.
              
***

