Title       : Observational Study of the Role of Magnetic Fields in Star Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0205810

Award Number: 0205810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Crutcher crutcher@astro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0205810

PI Crutcher

The theoretical effort to understand star
              formation and the role of magnetic fields in the formation and evolution of
              interstellar clouds is extensive and accelerating. However, in spite of
              significant progress in recent years, there remain fundamental unanswered
              questions about the basic physics of star formation. If dense molecular clouds
              have lifetimes significantly longer than their free-fall collapse times, they
              must be supported against gravitational collapse. One view is that magnetic
              fields provide this support. This hypothesis can be tested by measurement of
              the mass to magnetic flux ratio in dense clouds.  The other extreme is that
              magnetic fields are weak and that molecular clouds are intermittent phenomena,
              and that the problem of cloud support for long time periods is irrelevant.
  
              This project will measure, directly or indirectly, magnetic field strengths in
              a large, statistically meaningful sample of molecular clouds in order to help
              answer the above questions. Because the requisite measurements are of weakly
              polarized continuum and spectral-line emission from molecular clouds,
              measurements of interstellar magnetic fields remain among the most difficult of
              astronomical observations, and information about magnetic fields remains very
              sparse. It is crucial to our understanding of the fundamental physical process
              of star formation that measurements of interstellar magnetic fields continue to
              progress.
***

  
  

