Title       : Galaxy Evolution Studies with Metal-deficient Blue Compact Dwarf Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0205785

Award Number: 0205785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Trinh X. Thuan txt@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205785
Thuan

Galaxy formation is one of the most fundamental problems
              in astrophysics. Most high-z objects
observed thus far are found to be rich in
              heavy elements, thus not qualifying as bona fide primeval
galaxies. An
              alternative approach is to search among nearby galaxies that may be actively
              forming
stars for the first time at the present epoch. The best candidates for
              such a search are extremely metalpoor blue compact dwarfs (BCDs). They
              constitute excellent laboratories for pursuing the following cosmological
              problems. The standard hot big bang model of nucleosynthesis (SBBN) is one of
              the key quantitative tests of big bang cosmology. The primordial abundance Yp
              of 4He, together with that of Deuterium, is crucial for checking the
              consistency of SBBN. The relative insensitivity of 4He production to the
              baryonic matter density means that Yp needs to be determined to a precision of
              better than 1%.  Dr. Trinh Thuan, at the University of Virginia, will evaluate
              systematic effects and correct Yp for them to attain that precision.  He will
              search for more extremely metal-deficient BCDs in the newly released Sloan
              Digital Sky Survey spectral data base to improve the determination of Yp.  The
              study of the BCD stellar populations will allow them to understand the
              properties of massive stellar populations in very low metallicity environments,
              like those prevailing in the era of galaxy formation. Moreover, Cold Dark
              Matter models predict that low-mass dwarf galaxies could still be forming at
              the present epoch because they originate from density fluctuations considerably
              smaller than those giving rise to the giant ones. Thus establishing the
              existence of young dwarf galaxies in the local universe will put strong
              constraints on the primordial density fluctuation spectrum. Dr. Thuan will
              apply age-dating techniques which he has developed and refined to a sample of
              very metal-deficient BCDs. There is a dichotomy in the way star formation
              proceeds in BCDs. In some, star formation occurs in a "passive" low-level
              diffuse fashion, with a low extinction. In others, "active" star formation
              occurs at a high level in Super Star Clusters, mixed with dense gas and a large
              amount of dust.  Dr. Thuan will study the physical parameters which
govern
              that dichotomy.  Dr. Thuan will also study how the metallicity of the neutral
              gas compare with that of the ionized gas. Is the metallicity of the H ii region
              higher because of self-enrichment? Which constraints can be put on the time
              scale for the mixing of newly formed heavy elements in the H ii region with the
              HI gas? If the metallicity of the HI gas is very low, that would put
              constraints on the amount of metal pre-enrichment by the hypothetical
              Population III stars during the early pregalactic epoch. Such studies will shed
              new light on the study of abundances in high-redshift damped Lyman-alpha
              systems. Finally, Dr. Thuan will use these models to study correlations of the
              efficiency of mass exchange between the galaxy and its environment with global
              properties of BCDs such as their sizes, luminosities, metallicities, star
              formation rates, etc.  
***



