Title       : ITR: Virtual Power for a Wireless Campus - A Vision of Ubiquitous Computing On
               Low-Cost Mobile Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0205712

Award Number: 0205712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000798            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Franz franz@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra Krintz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Wolski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              While handheld, battery-powered devices such as personal digital
assistants
              (PDA's) and web-enabled mobile phones are emerging as new
access points to the
              world's digital infrastructure, their cost and
short battery life are factors
              that are holding back their enormous
potential.  Worse yet, the cost of such
              devices might even widen the
"digital divide".  This research addresses these
              cost and battery-life issues
simultaneously, thereby getting one step closer
              to a vision of ubiquitous
computing embracing all of society.  The specific
              focus is the digital university
campus with wireless Internet coverage.

In
              this setting, the aim is to increase the utility and battery-life
and decrease
              the cost of handheld wireless computers by enabling the
use of relatively
              simple hardware for the mobile devices. This research aims
both at designing
              embedded hardware that better conserves resources, as well as
creating a
              software layer that masks the limited computational prowess
of a handheld
              device by seamlessly coupling it to a relatively high-powered
stationary
              computational infrastructure via an "always on" wireless connection.
By
              off-loading power-intensive operations to the stationary infrastructure,
the
              battery-powered mobile device is provided with "virtual power".

Adaptive
              just-in-time compiler technology will be developed for minimizing
power use on
              mobile devices running mobile
code, and adaptive scheduling methods using
              results from the
Computational Grid research community.  Depending on the
              algorithm to
be run on the mobile device and its current distance from the
              nearest
base station, the computation to be performed is to be
              automatically
partitioned between a part to be executed in the
              stationary
infrastructure and another to be run on the mobile device.

At
              the hardware level, orchestrated resource-management strategies will
              be
developed to enable designers to correctly design and implement
              highly
resource-constrained embedded systems while helping them to meet
              system-level
constraints. This requires augmenting today's functional design
              flows with a
resource-centric view. Here, the goal is not to replace existing
              design methodologies
with yet another all-encompassing methodology, but rather
              making a cross-cutting
impact by demonstrating the applicability of results to
              several driving examples
at different levels of abstraction, including
              System-on-Chip (SoC) platforms,
memory architecture level, and operating
              system level.

