Title       : Collaborative Research: Fundamental Properties of Local Subdwarfs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0205789

Award Number: 0205789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Terndrup terndrup@astronomy.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darren L. DePoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc H. Pinsonneault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205789
Terndrup

Many outstanding issues concerning the formation and
              evolution of the Milky Way require improved
knowledge of the kinematics and
              chemical enrichment patterns of local metal-poor subdwarfs in the
Galaxy's
              halo and thick disk, and how these compare to globular cluster stars. Even
              after several recent
efforts, current samples do not adequately cover the
              range of metallicities and kinematics seen in globular
clusters, while
              observations of local metal-poor giants give tantalizing evidence of
              significant differences
between local halo stars and those in globular
              clusters of the same metallicity.
This project will improve the observational
              situation by obtaining accurate and self-consistent
measures of temperature,
              reddening, and composition for a critically selected sample of
              approximately
150 subdwarfs identified in recent surveys for metal-poor stars.
              There will also be new theoretical efforts
to explore the dependence of the
              main-sequence luminosity on detailed stellar chemical composition and
on
              often-neglected physics such as helium diffusion and rotation. This project
              will also yield valuable
information on the kinematics and star formation
              history of the halo and the metal-poor tail of the thick
disk, identify
              samples of subdwarfs that are well matched in abundance patterns and kinematics
              to
globular cluster stars, and improve the temperature and abundance scales of
              globular cluster main
sequences for comparison to spectroscopic determinations
              on the giant branch. There will also be a
systematic study of the relative and
              absolute ages of globular clusters, with a focus on reducing the errors
in the
              theoretical plane.
Importantly, this project will enable the community to take
              full advantage of the future FAME and
SIM satellite missions, which will
              measure accurate parallaxes for the subdwarfs in the sample and
thereby yield
              the absolute calibration of the main-sequence luminosity for globular clusters
              and hence
their distances. Current distance estimates are only good to 10 -
              15%, resulting in age errors of about
30%, insufficient to reliably explore
              the age spread in the globular cluster system or even set lower limits
to the
              age of the Universe by comparison with the predictions of stellar evolution
              theory.


