Title       : Complex Stochastic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0205034

Award Number: 0205034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Kurtz kurtz@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will focus on singular martingale problems and stochastic
              differential equations, particle representations for stochastic partial
              differential equations and measure-valued processes, and spatial point
              processes. The work on singular martingale problems and related stochastic
              equations addresses fundamental questions regarding the specification,
              transformation and approximation of the models. Applications to controlled
              stochastic networks motivate much of the work. Particle representations provide
              a powerful tool for understanding the behavior of complex stochastic processes.
              Work to be performed will extend the range of applicability of these methods,
              develop new constructions of particle representations, and address problems of
              existence and uniqueness of solutions of the stochastic equations underlying
              these representations. Application of the results to filtering and to
              theoretical models in finance will provide both useful intuition and a check on
              the appropriateness of the theoretical developments. Spatial point processes
              characterized as stationary distributions of Markov birth and death processes
              and as solutions of stochastic equations driven by Poisson random measures will
              be studied. The work will focus on spatial ergodicity and central limit
              theorems with applications to parameter estimation in mind. 

The study of
              stochastic processes is concerned with mathematical descriptions of natural
              phenomena governed by "random" or "chance" mechanisms. Mathematical models of
              such phenomena may attempt to describe variation in time, in space, or both.
              The research to be performed is concerned with developing methods for
              specifying these mathematical models, approximating complex models by simpler
              ones, obtaining information about the true state of a system from corrupted or
              noisy observations, and determining how to influence or "control" the evolution
              of the models and the phenomena they represent. Motivating examples include
              models for the effects on asset prices of the valuations assigned by a large
              number of traders and for communication and computer networks. 

