Title       : First Light In The Universe: Probing the End Of The Dark Ages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0205738

Award Number: 0205738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piero Madau pmadau@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205738
Madau

In currently popular cosmological scenarios at very early
              times, the gas within protogalactic halos with masses comparable to those of
              present-day dwarf ellipticals experienced rapid cooling and fragmentation.
              These fragments formed massive stars , which in turn synthesized heavy
              elements, and exploded as Type II supernovae,  enriching the surrounding
              medium.  These subgalactic stellar systems then  generated the ultraviolet
              radiation and mechanical energy that reheated and reionized most of the
              hydrogen in the cosmos.  The history of the Universe during and soon after
              these crucial formative stages is recorded in the thermal state, ionization
              degree, and chemical composition of the all-pervading intergalactic medium
              (IGM). Throughout the epoch of structure formation, the IGM becomes clumpy
              under the influence of gravity, and acts as a source for the gas that accretes,
              cools, and forms stars within subgalactic fragments, and as a sink for the
              metal enriched material, energy, and radiation which they eject. The study of
              the gaseous and stellar content of the high-redshift Universe thus provides
              invaluable insight into this era and the basic processes that govern the
              collapse, cooling, and evolution of some of the earliest formed cosmological
              structures. This theoretical  project  will study  the epoch of .first light,
              the astrophysics of protogalactic  systems, the intergalactic medium and quasar
              absorbers in the context of current theories of galaxy formation. It will focus
              on a series of critical questions in each of these interrelated areas: (1)
              cosmological reionization, (2) the epoch of first light, and (3) protogalaxy
              halos, SN-driven winds, and the metal enrichment of the IGM. A coordinated
              approach will be pursued involving theoretical studies of the controlling
              physical processes, and direct numerical simulation of their effects within the
              current paradigm for structure formation. The results of this program should
              aid in the planning for future large observational facilities such as the
              California Extremely Large Telescope, the Low Frequency Array, the Square
              Kilometer Array, and the Next Generation Space Telescope.
***

