Title       : ITR: New directions in clustering and learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0205594

Award Number: 0205594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1530001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev Arora arora@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amit Sahai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Moses Charikar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              New directions in clustering and learning

Faced with ever-larger amounts of
              data, researchers, government 
institutions, corporations and even the general
              public  seek tools that help them deal 
with large bodies of information,
              identify patterns in it, learn what these
patterns mean, and act upon that
              information in a timely fashion. 
Developing such tools involves  a novel and
              interesting blend of algorithms, 
statistics, AI, and machine learning. The
              project assembles a team of experts (four
from academia and two from industry)
              in these areas to attack an interesting
and meaningful subset of such problems
              which have the general flavor of
clustering or learning.

The  defining
              philosophy of this proposal is that no clear boundary 
Separates the twin
              notions of clustering and learning. Clustering is usually driven
by the end
              goal of learning, but can also be viewed as  a learning task
in itself since
              it results in a more compact description of the data.
By the same  token all
              learning  involves clustering of some sort, and
in fact this viewpoint is
              implicit in recent papers in the learning 
literature. The project takes an
              integrated view of the entire problem of learning
patterns in data, starting
              from streaming computations that might produce
representative sketches of the
              data as it streams by, to problems of 
clustering data into meaninful patterns
              (with attendant problems of outlier removal,
multiobjective optimization
              etc.), to learning algorithms that fit
sophisticated models (SVMs, bayesian
              nets, gaussian mixtures etc.) for 
inference and reasoning tasks.

The
              investigators believe that all these disparate algorithmic efforts
              have
unifying ideas. Furthermore, their synergistic approach throws up
              several
interesting ideas of its own that could lead to significant advances.
              
Examples: include using coding theoretic ideas in  disparate applications
              such as 
Multiclass learning (a broad class of learning problems including
              text and speech 
categorization, part-of-speech tagging, gesture recognition
              etc.) and shape recognition
in vision; the use of clustering ideas to do
              dimension reduction (offering
an alternative to popular SVD based approaches),
              and using ideas from
approximation algorithms and clustering to do
              near-optimal model fitting
for models such as bayesian nets.

The project
              also includes a management and educational plan that involves
dissemination of
              the ideas of this research through development of new 
courses and also pieces
              of learning software that will be placed in the public domain.
Algorithms
              developed in as part of this project will be tested on large 
datasets,
              including those obtained from Google Inc. Some algorithmic ideas will 
also be
              implemented in industry (including Google).


