Title       : ITR: Representations and Algorithms for Deformable Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0205671

Award Number: 0205671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2809668            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonidas J. Guibas guibas@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lydia Kavraki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitris N. Metaxas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muthu Govindaraj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Claude Latombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Deformable objects are ubiquitous in the physical world at all scales, from the
              molecular to the astrophysical. Many of life's basic functions, from protein
              folding and ligand binding at the micro level, to meiosis and mitosis at the
              cellular level, to the beating of a heart at the macro level, are best
              described as shape deformations in time. Flexible materials are finding
              increasing applications in engineering, across areas such as testing and
              manufacturing, and especially in biomedical applications, including prosthetic
              devices and minimally invasive imaging and surgical procedures. Special effects
              in the entertainment industry and haptics-based human-computer interfaces also
              require better models for flexible objects. Though deformation in nature can be
              based on a variety of underlying physical processes, we believe that there are
              a number of unifying principles common to understanding all deformations.
              Today, however, we lack a general computational theory of how to sense,
              represent, simulate, approximate, actuate, control, and render deformable
              objects.

Research Goals and Methods
The goal of this proposal is to
              undertake a foundational study of representations and algorithms for the
              computational modeling of deformable objects. Such modeling is challenging
              because deformations involve representations of shape and motion, and bring
              together continuous and discrete phenomena, as well as local and global
              constraints. Some of the specific challenges that have to be addressed
              are:
1.	the behavior of deformable objects is defined by both geometry and
              physics and characterized by complex high-dimensional energy landscapes that
              need to be compactly encoded and efficiently interrogated for actuation,
              control, and planning;
2.	physically accurate simulation of deformations is
              of-ten computationally expensive; we must find ways to approximate the full
              physics, while still guaranteeing the correctness, or at least appropriateness,
              of the solution that we compute in the parts of the system we care
              about;
3.	discrete events, such as collisions and self-collisions, alter the
              continuous evolution law of the system; these events must be efficiently
              predicted or detected, and processed;
4.	contact and self-contact must be
              modeled across rapid changes in the contact manifold, including its
              dimensionality (e.g., cloth draping over a rigid object);
5.	deformations are
              often associated with changes in the shape topology (e.g., the surgeon's
              scalpel cutting the patient's skin tissue); such topology modifications must be
              smoothly accommodated in our models.
Towards this goal we have put together a
              team of PIs and consultants/advisors that combines expertise in scientific
              computing and physical simulation, geometric modeling and computation, motion
              planning and control, local and distributed sensing and actuation, model
              parameter estimation, as well as extensive experience in the computational
              modeling of specific deformable objects, from molecules to textiles, and in
              applications from medicine to entertainment 



