Title       : The Wireless Revolution: Teaching Advanced Techology to Diverse Audiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0205927

Award Number: 0205927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold V. Poor poor@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1746      DISTINGUISHED TEACHING SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1746,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The penetration of advanced technologies, and in particular information
              technologies, into every day life has proceeded at a breathtaking pace over the
              past decade. Such technologies will touch and transform the personal and
              working lives of current and future generations of students for many decades to
              come. This is true not only for students in the SMET disciplines who are
              developing this technology, but also for students in the many disciplines
              spanning the breadth of academia. A significant fraction of all students need
              to learn about such technologies in order to conduct their professional lives
              and to live as informed citizens in an age that will be defined by advancing
              technologies. Moreover, SMET students need to learn about the non-technical
              implications of technology in economics, politics, society, and business, and
              about the corresponding influences of such non-technical spheres of activity on
              technology. This project addresses these needs by developing pedagogy and
              pedagogical materials suitable for teaching advanced technological subject
              matter to undergraduate students across a broad spectrum of academic
              discliplines, not only within SMET isciplines, but also within the fine arts,
              humanities, and social sciences. This approach takes advantage of the greater
              computer and mathematical literacy of today's students to offer course material
              with technical substance, but also with a view toward the greater role of
              technologies in shaping society and commerce. The project focuses particularly
              on telecommunications technology, in order to exploit the Principal
              Investigator's experiences in teaching such material to Princeton
              undergraduates in his recently-developed course, "The Wireless Revolution:
              Telecommunications for the 21st Century." This course, which covers the
              technical, social, economic, and political aspects of wireless, has been very
              successful in attracting a large and diverse audience from across the
              University. This holistic approach to the subject, and the teaching of both
              SMET and non-SMET students in the same classroom, has resulted in significant
              educational benefits for all of the students involved. Although
              telecommunications is, of course, widely taught worldwide, there is little
              available material for the teaching of the subject in a holistic manner, and
              particularly to a mixed audience at the undergraduate level. This makes it
              difficult to export the model of "The Wireless Revolution" to other
              institutions, or even to other instructors. This is due in part to the very
              dynamic nature of the field, which renders conventional textual materials
              inadequate because it needs to be updated very quickly. It is also partly due
              to the breadth of disciplines needed to adequately address the subject and to
              uniformly challenge students with very diverse interests. This difficulty has
              been addressed in the "Wireless Revolution" course thus far through the use of
              guest lecturers, a solution which is not necessarily portable to other
              universities or instructors. The principal goal of this project is to develop
              useful pedagogical materials that can address both the breadth an dynamism of
              this field. These materials combine the traditional textbook format, where the
              subject matter is relatively stable, with Web-based resources for the more
              dynamic subject matter. The objective of this development is to allow the
              successful format of this course to be used in a sustainable way by other
              instructors at Princeton, and to be exported to other institutions. The scope
              of these materials will reach beyond wireless communications to the field of
              telecommunications in general, so that the subject matter will fit the needs
              and interests of a greater number of students and institutions. The updateable
              and flexible nature of these pedagogical materials will allow for the content
              to shift from year to year as new telecommunications technologies wax and wane.
              This will further allow for the content to vary from institution to
              institution, as different instructors may wish to emphasize different aspects
              of the field. Finally, it is hoped that this development will provide a model
              for the holistic teaching of other advanced technologies to broad undergraduate
              audiences.
