Title       : ITR: Massively Convergent Distributed Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0205452

Award Number: 0205452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes E. Gehrke johannes@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emin Sirer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Demers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Birman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayavel Shanmugasundaram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer networks have become more pervasive in scope and mission-critical to
              businesses, scientific endeavors and other computing applications. But at the
              same time, network instability and unreliability has become an increasing
              problem.

This research tackles this issue by laying the groundwork for a new
              system infrastructure and an associated generation of algorithms capable of
              overcoming the unreliable nature of the network using probabilistic techniques
              for ensuring consistent cooperative behavior, coordination, and coherency. The
              central property of the infrastructure is that it uses probabilistic techniques
              (instead of absolute guarantees) but, by so doing, obtains outstanding
              stability under stress, scalability, and robustness to even extreme
              disruptions. 

This research will proceed in steps, starting with a
              quantitative study of existing distributed system architectures, especially
              focusing on (1) gossip-style data dissemination, (2) anonymous communication,
              and (3) peer-to-peer networks.  The next step will explore the design of new
              and enhanced architectures for large-scale distributed analysis systems.  It is
              the ultimate goal to implement new designs in ways compatible with prevailing
              platforms (Windows, Java, Unix), and release public-domain versions of these
              experimental solutions, and to measure their behavior on a large scale. 

