Title       : ITR: A Twin-Framework To Analyze, Model and Design Robust, Complex Networks
               Using Biological and Computational Principles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0205061

Award Number: 0205061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3042549            (Estimated)
Investigator: Animesh Ray animesh_ray@kgi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Galas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amarnath Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fan Chung Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Gregory Dewey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keck Graduate Institute
	      535 Watson Drive
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/607-7853

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0205061
Ray, Animesh 
Keck Graduate Institute 

TITLE: A Twin-Framework
              To Analyze, Model and Design Robust, Complex Networks Using Biological and
              Computational Principles



Vulnerability of natural networks (such as the
              Internet, power supply grid, or gene regulatory circuits of cells) to
              accidental or deliberate attack is an important area of study. To date most
              work has focused on observations of existing static networks or on computer
              simulations, because most natural networks are difficult to manipulate
              experimentally.  The complex molecular machinery regulating the synthesis of
              RNA molecules in the nucleus of budding yeast, a single-celled organism, is a
              real-world instance of a natural network that can be experimentally perturbed
              by defined genetic manipulations, and the results of these perturbations can be
              studied at the molecular level with unprecedented accuracy by current genomic
              techniques.  The goal of this project is to develop a biology-driven
              computational framework for network robustness.  To achieve this goal, a
              biological test-bed of sufficiently complexity, the gene regulatory network of
              sporulation in yeast, has been adopted as an experimental network model. 
              Systematic gene knockout mutations (equivalent to node removal), and regulatory
              site deletion mutations (equivalent to edge removal), are being used as tools
              to actively alter the network. Effects of these perturbations in the gene
              regulatory network architecture are being analyzed at the level of whole-genome
              transcriptional profiles.  A generic data model for large-scale networks is
              being developed.  The relevant experimental behavior of the biological network
              is being emulated with the data model.  Design principles underlying the
              architecture of complex networks selected through evolution are being probed
              through mathematical modeling and testing. Insights obtained from these studies
              will be valuable for defensive strategies in complex network design, with
              implications in, among others, communication technology, disaster response, and
              in designing robust communication infrastructure resistant to planned
              attacks.


