Title       : Topics in Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0205977

Award Number: 0205977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dirk Kreimer dkreimer@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur M. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal investigates recently discovered algebraic structures which
              enhance our understanding of quantum field theory and the renormalization
              group.  Kreimer will investigate number theoretic aspects of quantum field
              theory and their interplay with Hopf algebra structures, with an emphasis on
              applications to non-perturbative results.  Rosenberg will work on the
              connection between differential geometry and quantum field theory, as suggested
              by the Birkhoff decomposition in renormalization theory and their corresponding
              flat connections.  Jaffe will extend the methods of constructive field theory
              in light of these recent developments. 

In general, this work investigates
              the mathematical structure of quantum field theory (QFT) and the
              renormalization group. These are theoretical concepts which underlie the study
              of matter in phase transitions (e.g. boiling, freezing) as well as physics at
              the highest energies.  While the mathematics behind QFT is still not well
              understood after fifty years of research, the predicative power of QFT in the
              laboratory is remarkable for its accuracy.  Kreimer and his collaborators have
              discovered algebraic and combinatorial mathematical structures underlying basic
              QFT computations, which substantially simplify these calculations.  In this
              research, we will both further the theoretical understanding of these concepts
              as well as investigate new applications.   
