Title       : Center for Advanced Materials and Smart Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0205803

Award Number: 0205803
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3750000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagannathan Sankar sankar@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
There is a keen interest in developing advanced ceramics and innovative
              composites for a wide variety of applications including structural components,
              energy-efficient environmental and thermal barriers, and high performance
              electronic and sensor materials. Structural ceramics have unique properties
              that can be used to great advantage in advanced high temperature applications
              (diesel engines, turbines). Innovative ceramic composites are also being
              developed for use in high-temperature applications, wear resistant materials,
              and novel sensor and smart structure applications. Smart ceramics and piezo
              ceramic patch sensors may be attached to the external surfaces of structures,
              or directly embedded within materials to provide in-situ measurements of
              structural behavior. Thin film oxide-based structures and ferroelectric
              perovskites, are needed for fabrication of electronic devices such as sensors,
              transducers, nanomagnetics, filters and non-volatile memories.

This
              continuation proposal focuses on the basic science issues affecting both
              advanced structural ceramics and composites and electronic ceramic materials in
              a synergistic manner using innovative materials processing methods including
              nanoengineering. The subproject areas of particular interest to the Center for
              Advanced Materials and Smart Structures (CAMSS) include:
o Nanoengineered and
              surface engineered coatings and materials (functionally gradient coatings, fuel
              cell materials,environmental and thermal barrier coatings, and metal-ceramic
              joining)
o Nanocomposites and other innovative composites (nanostructured
              ceramic composite coatings, self-reinforced Si3N4 composites, nanomagnetics,
              and advanced oxide based fiber composites) and
o Electronic and smart
              materials and structures (advanced electronic materials, novel sensor materials
              and health monitoring-smart structures)

The proposed center continuation
              activity will develop strong research and education programs in the science and
              technology of nanostructured and other advanced materials. Nanoscale science
              and technology is expected to revolutionize next-generation technology ranging
              from structural materials to smart structures, microelectronics tomedicine. To
              position US industry strategically in a leadership role, we need to equip
              students with the multidisciplinary skills needed for nano and other innovative
              engineering fields. We seek to create a crossdisciplinary infrastructure that
              transcends departmental barriers and lends itself to the integration of
              research and education in this vital field of advanced materials and smart
              structures. The primary goals of this program are: (1) continue to promote
              advanced materials engineering as a unifying research and education discipline;
              (2) continue to develop multidisciplinary curricula for training the new
              generation of graduate students; and (3) continue to recruit talented
              undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups into this
              field of immense technological importance. 

All the subproject areas of this
              continuation proposal listed above will emphasize the following aspects of
              advanced and nanocrystalline materials in a coherent way, utilizing the
              complementary skills of the research teams at NC A&T SU, NCSU, ORNL, industry
              and other educational partners: 1) synthesis and processing; 2)
              characterization (macro, micro and nano); 3) structure-property correlations;
              and 4) modeling. 
Research facilities associated with NSF/CREST,
              NCSU-NSF/Atomic Resolution Electron Microscope Facility, NSF/ERC -University of
              Florida (connectivity) and the ORNL/ High Temperature Materials Laboratory
              facilities will play a pivotal role in the research based training of these
              students. The NSF Atomic Resolution TEM Facility at NCSU under the direction of
              NCSU Co-PI (JN) represents a unique research facility in the country, where
              students can be trained in atomic-level characterization techniques that are
              essential for nanoengineering of novel materialsand structures. The above
              research facilities (mechanical test equipment, innovative processing
              facilities and various characterization facilities) will provide a unique
              platform to foster multidisciplinary approaches for integrating graduate
              education and research, recruiting minority graduate and undergraduate
              students, and introducing new course curricula in this field of vital
              importance. The results of these fundamental studies will be used to develop
              models to explain novel advanced materials and unusual properties of the
              nanostructured materials.The eventual aim of these activities will be to
              develop predictive tools for designing advanced and novel nanostructured
              materials with unique properties so that a knowledge base for "creating
              materials by design" will be established. Strong outreach and technical
              transfer efforts targeted towards the local and global community will also
              continue as a part of the center activity.


