Title       : "Forces of Nature" -- A Large-format Film
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0205992

Award Number: 0205992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2158846            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Truitt ltruitt@ngs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Novros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Casey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NGT
	      1145 17th St., NW
	      Washington, DC  200364688    202/857-7000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National Geographic Television, in Collaboration with Graphic Films, is
              producing a 40-minute, large-format, documentary film about the scientific
              quest to understand some of the most dramatic geological and meteorological
              events we experience -- volcanoes, earthquakes and violent storms.  The goals
              of the film are to inform audiences about geological and meteorological forces
              which greatly impact our planet, present the scientific research being
              performed in an effort to understand and predict these forces, portray
              scientific role models and to stimulate a greater appreciation and interest in
              the Earth sciences.  

Informal education outreach will include:

A "Forces
              of Nature" website that will include educational resources targeted to the
              general audience as well as to students and teachers.

Museum and Family
              Activity Guides

The National Geographic Society will support public programs
              at science-technology centers by providing access to scientists who work in the
              areas of science covered in the film.

National Geographic's cable program
              Explorer (carried on MSNBC) will produce a themed show around "Forces of
              Nature" to coincide with the launch of the film.

A companion book

In
              addition, outreach materials for formal education will include:

A "Forces of
              Nature" Teacher's Guide
A teacher training seminar to be conducted at the
              first 20 theaters in the U.S. that lease the film
Workshops at the national
              conferences of the National Science Teachers Association, the National Council
              for the Social Studies and the National Council for Geographic
              Education.
Instructional information in National Geographic for Kids, the
              classroom magazine for elementary school students in grades 3-6.

The
              Executive Producer for the film will be Lisa Truitt.  George Casey will be the
              Producer/Director.  The Lead Science Advisors are Stephen Schneider, Professor
              of Environmental Biology and Global Change, Stanford University; James
              Shymansky, Professor of Science Education, University of Missouri-St. Louis;
              and James Walker, Professor Emeritus, Space Physics Research Lab, Department of
              Atmospheric, Oceanic and Space Science, University of Michigan. 

