Title       : Dynamical Studies of Molecular Cloud Formation in Spiral Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0205972

Award Number: 0205972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve C. Ostriker ostriker@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0205972
Ostriker

Several lines of observational and theoretical evidence
              suggest that giant molecular clouds (GMCs) have short lifetimes, forming and
              dissociating within a few tens of millions of years. Prevailing theoretical
              arguments favor instability mechanisms in spiral arms to form GMCs, but
              existing work has suffered from technical limitations, and has not previously
              directly demonstrated that condensations with the properties of GMCs indeed
              form.  Dr. Eve Ostriker, at the University of Maryland, will lead an
              investigation of a series of linear stability analyses, nonlinear numerical
              simulations, and supporting diagnostics to address outstanding questions
              concerning GMC formation in spiral galaxies. The modeling will include several
              important technical innovations. These researchers will, for the first time:
o
              Use direct numerical simulations to study development of the Parker instability
              in 3D with realistic rotational shear self-consistent with large-scale density
              gradients through arm and interarm regions of galaxies, also incorporating
              self-gravity to study linear and nonlinear coupling of Parker and Jeans
              modes;
o Comprehensively survey, using spectral methods, shearing-wavelet
              integrations, and magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) simulations, the potential effects
              of the magnetorotational instability in galactic disks, focusing on coupling to
              self-gravitating modes in both secular-growth and saturated-state regimes;
o
              Incorporate a realistic multi-phase gaseous medium for the initial conditions
              in two and three- dimensional simulations of self-gravitating and
              magnetically-driven galactic disk instabilities;
o Directly confront
              stochastic coagulation vs. collective instability mechanisms for forming
              GMC-scale condensations by performing controlled experiments of multiphase
              evolution with and without self-gravity and magnetic effects.

As GMC
              formation is intimately coupled to star formation, and the cold ISM is the most
              dynamically-responsive component of a disk galaxy, the results of this project
              will have broad impacts on both Galactic and extragalactic astronomical
              research, with implications for understanding the global regulation of star
              formation and the structure and evolution of spiral galaxies across the Hubble
              sequence.
***



