Title       : Constructing Protein Ontologies Using Text Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0205470

Award Number: 0205470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Inderjeet Mani im5@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy H. Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0205470
Inderjeet Mani
Georgetown University

ITR: Constructing Protein
              Ontologies Using Text Mining

Given the vast amounts of genomic and molecular
              data being generated by scientific research, there is a pressing need to
              develop advanced bioinformatics infrastructures for biological knowledge
              management. An ontology is a semantic model that contains a shared vocabulary
              and classification of concepts in a domain. Ontologies for biology are crucial
              in data integration from multiple databases and in literature mining for
              knowledge extraction and evidence attribution. This project focuses on the
              development of an ontology of protein names, consisting of a data dictionary
              and links to more specific, more general and synonymous protein names. Ontology
              development, however, currently requires substantial human effort. This project
              will exploit statistical and computational linguistics methods to induce an
              ontology of protein names using text corpora from MEDLINE and a knowledge base
              developed at the Protein Information Resource (PIR); terms in the induced
              ontology will also be linked to the functional hierarchy of the Gene Ontology.
              The induced ontology can then be further edited by a human. This project aims
              at demonstrating that this domain-independent method of ontology induction is
              more cost-effective than having humans develop an ontology from scratch. The
              approach could therefore be of practical value in other domains where there is
              a need to develop ontologies linking text corpora and nomenclature in
              databases. Both the ontology and software system developed in this project will
              be freely distributed to the scientific community via the PIR web site in
              standard XML-based ontology interchange formats and for intelligent literature
              mining and PubMed searching. 


