Title       : Collaborative Research: Advanced Parallel Computing Techniques with Applications
               to Computational Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0205611

Award Number: 0205611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Laxmikant V. Kale kale@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Winslett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is advancing the state of art in both computational cosmology and
              parallel computing simultaneously and synergetically. Breakthroughs in
              cosmology, which improve our understanding of the formation of galaxies and
              planets, are enabled by advances in parallel computing being made in this
              project. Parallel machines with over hundred thousand powerful processors are
              now being built. NSF's widely accessible TeraScale facilities have already
              deployed a 3,000 processor machine in 2001. At the same time algorithmic
              advances have made it possible to solve problems at a much faster rate. Yet the
              complexity of algorithms combined with the difficulty of parallelizing them on
              such large machines remains a hindrance to advances in Science and Engineering.
              This project explores an object based methodology that is simplifying the
              process of developing highly efficient parallel applications. This approach
              allows users to write applications at the level of natural entities in the
              application domain, without explicit regard to which processors will house such
              entities and
carry out associated computations. To make this possible, the
              "runtime system" must be able to make fine-grained resource allocation
              decisions automatically. Advances in parallel computing are being sought to
              that end. Specifically, application developers may specify a program in terms
              of a collection of millions of objects that communicate with each other in
              several stylized patterns. In addition, parallel components can be plugged in
              and out of running computations, and exchange data with each other in a exible
              manner. Based on this infrastructure, this project is building a framework that
              makes it easy to build "particle-oriented" parallel programs. In addition to
              computational cosmology, which predomi-nately involves simulations that
              represent galaxies, dark matter, stars, planetary bodies and gas as particles,
              such programs are used in other fields as well. The framework contains highly
              efficient parallel algorithms that operate on collections of billions of
              particles, spread across machines with tens of thousands of processors. These
              advances are being used to carry out scientific studies in cosmology. Large,
              detailed simulations of structure formation powered by parallel computers are
              necessary to make quantitative predictions from cosmological theories. By
              calculating the non-linear gravitational and gas dynamics of the formation of
              galaxies and clusters of galaxies, we are creating galaxy catalogues, X-ray
              maps, and other observables that can be compared directly with new satellite
              and ground-based data, and thereby constrain the parameters of cosmological
              theories. These parameters include the amount and nature of the dark matter,
              the existence and equation of state of any dark energy, the total amount of
              baryons, and the nature of the initial uctuations in the Universe. Similar
              simulation studies are being used to study how planets form from a proto-solar
              disk in order to create an ab initio theory of planet formation. The software
              developed via this project is being made available to a wide community of
              researchers. Also, the research results of simulations can be downloaded or
              visualized via the web.

