Title       : ITR/AP: The Analytic Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0205575

Award Number: 0205575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon J. Osterweil ljo@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lori A. Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Riseman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0205575
U of Mass, Amherst
Leon J. Osterweil

The internet has
              changed forever the way science is done. Collaborations such as
              NSF-sponsored
Globus, and GriPhyN are beginning to employ internet access to
              facilitate data sharing and
expedite collaboration among worldwide communities
              of geographically distributed researchers.
This creates opportunities to do
              better science through the use of shared data and expertise, but it
also
              creates risks arising from uncertainty about how internet-accessed data sets
              were produced
and how they can be used. If scientists cannot determine how
              particular results were obtained,
those results may be subsequently combined
              in ways that will lead to incorrect or misleading
conclusions, possibly with
              devastating effects.
Our project will develop, demonstrate, and evaluate
              technologies to facilitate the building of
community consensus by supporting
              definition, validation, repeatability, and adaptability of
scientific
              processes that integrate and combine web-based data sets and tools. Although
              there will
always be debate about the most appropriate models, methodologies
              and conclusions used in
scientific inquiry, our work should help scientists
              focus on areas of disagreement and resolve these
disagreements more quickly,
              perhaps through further experimentation and inquiry. Thus, our work
will also
              help policy makers in areas where scientific results are critical ingredients,
              such as
economic policy, environmental management, and social initiatives..
