Title       : ITR: A Grid for Research and Education in Distributed Systems and Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0205702

Award Number: 0205702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1547874            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Lepreau lepreau@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pascal Van Hentenryck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the last two years, we've built a new type of experimental environment for
              research in distributed systems and networks: a highly configurable Internet
              emulator,  known as Emulab.  This time-and spaceshared facility has been used
              by numerous top institutions for research published in top venues.  So
              successful is the project, that others are building their own Emulabs, centered
              around our software and design.  While the individual power of such Emulabs in
              experimentation and teaching is great, connecting these into one large Research
              and Education Grid will offer unprecedented power and flexibility.
We now
              propose, with dramatically expanded software and innovative algorithms, to
              establish the framework for a federated set of local Emulabs, each
              heterogeneous under local control and offering a unique set of hardware. 
              Adding sites to the Grid will be easy and cheap, offering even small
              institutions a chance to contribute while gaining access to an immensely
              diverse and powerful resource.  Individual sites' users will have priority for
              local hardware, as well as control over local administrative, security, and
              resource allocation policies.  Such autonomy will encourage organic growth,
              while intelligent allocation, scheduling, and swapping systems will provide
              abstraction.  Researchers and students can be unconcerned with local
              complexities, instead seeing one large collection of a wide variety of
              hardware, including standard PCs, network processors, wireless nodes, and more.
               Even the links between Emulabs will be a useful resource for experiments
              wishing to operate on the real  Internet, while controlled-bandwidth links will
              shield experiments that do not.  Support for wireless, mobile nodes will open
              entirely new avenues for experimentation.
Achieving this vision, however,
              involves daunting challenges.  Creating the software to manage this will
              involve a dramatic extension of existing Emulab systems and the application of
              novel algorithms and techniques.  Existing database systems will be augmented
              with failure-resistant peer-to-peer sharing of network information between
              Emulabs.  Through these mechanisms, topology data will be shared for
              observation and experiment scheduling.  Such scheduling on a non-static,
              wide-area system is a particularly challenging NP-complete problem which will
              require new algorithms to be designed and implemented.  Automated systems to
              control experiment scheduling and allocation will be developed all the while
              facing the challenge of maintaining simple user interfaces.  Emulab algorithms
              and software must also be extended to handle a wider variety of hardware,
              including wireless nodes.  Aspect-oriented programming and component
              technology, developed at Utah, will manage software interfaces for complex and
              numerous inter-operating hardware systems.  In  addition, methods for sharing,
              saving, and restoring state between machines, as well as maintaining
              performance isolation while multiplexing multiple virtual nodes on a single
              computer, will be explored.
The incorporation of multiple Emulabs into a
              single federated entity offers a rich opportunity to overcome a wide variety of
              network research and software engineering challenges, and allows for
              experimentation on an unprecedented scale.  Users, ranging from individual
              students to large research groups, will benefit from a greatly expanded ability
              to controllably and faithfully emulate large real networks, coupled with the
              availability of diverse and cutting-edge network components. Unifying resources
              in a standard and consistent way will simplify experimentation, and make
              accurate emulation an integral part of systems and network instruction and
              research.
The resulting loosely-coupled distributed system will enable
              experiments in a host of areas.  As just one example, if Emulab is successful
              in one of its core goals, isolation, experiments too dangerous to conduct in
              the wild could be run.  Realistic Internet War Games could be staged, in which
              attackers and defenders engage in a simulation of possible Internet attack
              scenarios, replete with destructive and contagious worms and dangerous
              automated counterattacks.  Only in an Emulab Petri dish could they be safely
              evaluated at reasonable scale.
