Title       : Stochastic Variational Problems: Optimization and Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0205699

Award Number: 0205699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger J. Wets rjbwets@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0205699
Wets

This research proposal is centered around approximation issues
              in 
stochastic programming, in particular as they arise in two quite
              
challenging problems: equilibria problems in a stochastic environment and
              
recourse problems involving partial differential equations.  The
              
"stochastic" equilibrium problem adds a new level of difficulty; rather
              
than just optimizing one must find a mechanism to determine a price 
system
              under which the optimization takes place. Such equilibria have 
been derived
              by relying on fixed point theorems.  Thirdly, because it is 
only possible to
              solve discretized versions of stochastic optimization 
problems, it is of
              paramount importance to investigate thoroughly 
approximation issues. Not only
              the question of approximating the 
stochastic process that describes the
              uncertainty but also how to improve 
the construction of this process from the
              available data and to analyze the 
effect this will have on the solution of
              the stochastic program.

The field of stochastic programming provides
              mathematical tools for 
solving and analyzing models for decision making under
              uncertainty. This 
project will be concerned with two significant and
              difficult applications 
and with approximation issues:  
-- A problem in
              groundwater remediation which was selected because it 
requires both
              theoretical and computational developments. It is a 
stochastic optimization
              problem where the state of the system is obtained 
by solving a partial
              differential equation whose coefficients are rapidly 
oscillating
              (heterogeneous media) and stochastic (uncertainty about the 
media
              composition). The possibility of deriving a homogenized version of 
this
              problem will also be investigated.  
-- Walras equilibrium problem in an
              uncertain environment. This problem 
is selected because it adds a dimension
              to stochastic optimization in that 
one must also find price systems (setting
              up an "equilibrium") under 
which this stochastic optimization must take
              place.   
-- Approximation issues in stochastic programming. The question of
              
having a reliable estimate for the parameters of a dynamic stochastic
              
programming problem is raised. It is expected that a more comprehensive,
              
approach which makes use of all the information available, rather than just
              
the collected data will result in more reliable solutions for stochastic
              
programming problems.

