Title       : ITR: Proactive Self-Tuning Systems for Ubiquitous Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0205266

Award Number: 0205266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Siewiorek dps@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Garlan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Steenkiste  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mahadev Satyanarayanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A system called Aura will be designed, implemented, deployed and 
evaluated.
              Aura will exploit the abundance of computing resources 
made possible by
              Moore's Law to reduce demand on the scarcest 
resource, human attention. Aura
              is targeted for environments 
involving wireless communication, wearable or
              handheld computers, and 
smart spaces.

The research spans every system
              level: hardware, operating system, 
applications and end users. Aura applies
              two broad concepts. First, 
is proactivity, or the ability of a layer to act
              in anticipation of 
requests by a higher layer. Second, is self-tuning: layers
              adapt by 
observing the demands and adjusting performance and resource usage
              to 
match. Both techniques contribute to lowering demand on human 
attention.
              These ideas will be evaluated through controlled 
experiments and live use by
              a small community. The metrics used in 
evalutation  include both traditional
              computer systems metrics  plus 
user-centric metrics.

There are three major
              research thrusts. First, operating system and 
networking capabilities
              required by Aura-like systems are 
investigated. Second, how high-level user
              intent can be captured and 
exploited for proactivity is explored. Third, how
              contextual 
information can be used is examined.  A unique aspect of the
              research 
is its tight integration with education since the Aura prototype
              will 
be used in graduate-level courses.

