Title       : ITR/AP: Simulation-Based Medical Planning for Cardiovascular Disease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0205741

Award Number: 0205741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3689774            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Taylor taylorca@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Shephard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Zarins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ITR/AP: Simulation-Based Medical Planning for Cardiovascular Disease

The
              current paradigm for interventional and surgery planning for the treatment of
              congenital and acquired cardiovascular disease relies exclusively on diagnostic
              imaging data to define the present state of the patient, empirical data to
              evaluate the efficacy of  prior  treatments  for  similar  patients,  and  the
              judgement  of  the  surgeon  to  decide  on  a  preferred  treatment.  The
              individual variability and inherent complexity of  human  biological  systems 
              is  such  that  diagnostic  imaging  and  empirical  data  alone  are
              insufficient to predict the outcome of a given treatment for an individual
              patient. 

The specific objectives described in the present proposal are to
              develop a Problem  Solving Environment for Simulation-Based Medical Planning
              combining (i) the construction of patient-specific preoperative geometric
              models of the human vascular system directly from medical imaging data, (ii)
              the modification of these models to incorporate multiple potential
              interventional and surgical plans, (iii) the generation  of  finite  element 
              meshes  of  the  treatment  plans,  (iv)  the  simulation  of  blood  flow  in 
              these patient-specific models, and (v) the visualization and quantification of
              resulting physiologic information. Techniques for identifying vessel boundaries
              from computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data using
              two- and three-dimensional level set methods will be improved to enhance
              accuracy and efficiency. 
The ultimate result of the successful completion of
              the outlined tasks will be the development of an integrated Problem Solving
              Environment for Simulation-Based Medical Planning incorporating image
              segmentation, geometric modeling, mesh generation, computational mechanics, and
              scientific visualization techniques.


