Title       : Studying Galaxy Formation and Evolution with New Data, Models, and Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0205944

Award Number: 0205944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel R. Primack joel@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Avishai Dekel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anatoly A. Klypin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Blumenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205944
Primack

The goals of this project are to improve the
              understanding of key issues in galaxy formation and evolution, especially the
              origin of the structure of dark matter halos and the evolution of their
              baryonic contents. It will address the questions that have arisen concerning
              cold dark matter (CDM) type models by developing analytic and semi-analytic
              treatments based on, and tested against, high-resolution simulations. These
              will provide detailed predictions of galaxy properties at both high and low
              redshifts, to be compared to space and ground based data especially from the
              Deep Extragalactic Evolutionary Probe (DEEP) program. These simulations feature
              use of the Adaptive Refinement Tree (ART) technique, which adjusts the
              resolution automatically to follow particles in dense regions, and can now use
              particles of different masses to improve mass and force resolution. This
              permits the identification of all dark matter halos that can harbor bright
              galaxies. In addition the project will use a second tool, Semi-Analytic Merging
              (SAM) to model the outcomes of various star formation and feedback scenarios in
              CDM galaxy formation. These SAM models will be used to study the structural and
              chemical evolution of galaxies, including gas cooling, star formation,
              supernova feedback, satellite merging, and the effects of dust. They model dust
              emission, and allow the prediction of galaxy counts and integrated backgrounds
              over wavelengths from the far-UV to the sub-mm. These predictions will be
              invaluable for interpreting data from previous and planned space missions such
              as COBE, SIRTF, GALEX, etc. The computer codes for the ART and SAM models will
              be made available to the public.
.***

