Title       : Bar Strength and the Structure of Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0205143

Award Number: 0205143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Buta buta@sarah.astr.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205143
Buta

The principal objective of Dr. Ronald Buta's project  is to
              use a new, direct technique for quantifying the strengths of bars in disk
              galaxies, and to derive the distribution of bar strengths in order to evaluate
              various scenarios for the origin of bars. The technique involves using
              near-infrared images to infer the gravitational potentials of galaxies, and
              then from these potentials estimating the actual torque due to the bar. The
              maximum value of the ratio of the tangential force to the mean radial force
              (called the relative bar torque parameter Qb) provides a single number that can
              characterize the bar strength of a whole galaxy. It is the most promising,
              direct technique for quantifying bar strength, and should supercede a host of
              other indirect methods that have been used in the past. Dr. Buta will refine
              the technique to improve its accuracy.  A second objective of this project is
              to examine correlations between bar strength and other properties of galaxies,
              such as the shapes of bar dust lanes, chemical abundance gradients, the shapes
              and orientations of rings, the distribution of star formation, global star
              formation rates, nuclear activity, and bar ellipticity. These correlations are
              important because they allow us to understand how bars affect galaxy structure
              once they have formed. Secular evolution of structure is of critical importance
              in barred galaxies, and the role of bar strength on that evolution can be
              evaluated by studying these correlations.

Measuring the distribution of bar
              strengths in galaxies is a critical piece of information that has
not yet been
              used to constrain bar formation models. The origin of bars is a fundamental
              problem
in astronomy. Through their nonaxisymmetric potentials, bars are
              thought to generate or at least
influence the development of a host of
              phenomena including circumnuclear starbursts, bulge growth, global spiral
              structure, secondary bars, lenses, noncircular motions, and inner and outer
              rings. Bars are so pervasive, being found in at least 70% of disk galaxies,
              that they are clearly important to the structure and evolution of galaxies.
              Models can predict the distribution of expected Qb values for a given
              bar-formation scenario. 
***




