Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Achieving Innovative and Reliable Services in
               Unlicensed Spectrum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0205431

Award Number: 0205431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Friedman friedman@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The establishment of unlicensed communication bands has successfully
              encouraged innovation, most recently in wireless devices and infrastructure
              that use unlicensed spectrum to provide connections to the Internet. A key
              aspect of Internet usage is an almost unlimited capacity for growth. For
              unlicensed wireless, the transition from 11 Mb/s 802.11b to 54 Mb/s 802.11a
              marks the start of an industry race toward ever-higher data rates. The
              combination of increasing data rates and a proliferation of devices could
              easily lead to inefficiency in the use of unlicensed spectrum due to a
              combination of overuse and failure to develop mechanisms for efficient sharing
              of this resource. While the overload of any finite band may be inevitable, this
              project is addressing the increase in capacity of the available unlicensed
              bands as much as possible, and is developing approaches that can predict
              overloads and prevent sudden, unexpected failure modes.

This
              multi-disciplinary project seeks efficient use of unlicensed spectrum by
              combining an engineering and technology perspective with insights from the
              literatures on regulation, property rights, and economic coordination. The team
              includes researchers with expertise in property rights, networking fairness,
              and wireless communications and network engineering. This team is developing a
              general framework for understanding cooperation in unlicensed band wireless
              networks by studying the following issues:

Property rights as applied to
              spectrum management
Protocols for collaboration between technology neutral
              wireless devices
Pricing mechanisms for efficient and fair sharing of
              congested unlicensed spectrum
Radio-level interference avoidance
              techniques

The above problems are being studied with a combination of formal
              and conceptual analysis, simulation and experimental methods, including a
              dynamic spectrum management testbed which implements potential collaboration
              protocols and cooperation models. The thrust is to preserve the "creative
              chaos" of the unlicensed bands while creating a degree of long term stability
              and predictability that is appropriate to the size of the investments being
              made and the strategic importance of these uses to the nation. Results from the
              project are of value to both policy makers and emerging unlicensed band
              wireless Internet providers as well as wireless technologists.


