Title       : Journey to Planet Earth: An Annual Report
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0205382

Award Number: 0205382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1788688            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Weiner screenscope@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hal Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SCREENSCOPE, Inc.
	      4330 Yuma Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20016    202/364-0055

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Screenscope, Inc. is producing three annual "state of the environment" reports. 
              The reports will consist of a yearly, ninety-minute, prime-time public
              television program and an extensive outreach initiative to engage families and
              the public in a variety of educational activities.   The television programs
              will:

Present an up-to-date "state of the environment" assessment of
              ecosystem performance and human health.

Feature the year's most important
              environmental incidents.

Highlight the year's most cutting-edge scientific
              breakthroughs and research dealing with environmental issues.

Focus on
              community programs that have helped improve the quality of the environment over
              the past year.

The outreach initiative will include:

A Citizen Science
              Project with strong emphasis on family participation

Neighborhood workshops
              and coalitions organized by local PBS stations in association with the
              
American Association for Advancement of Science and the World Resources
              Institute.

An interactive web component including real-time environmental
              satellite data and visualizations.

Local and national media events featuring
              the yearly release of a "State of the Environment" report.

Partnerships will
              be developed with environmental organizations to help promote and implement the
              initiative's informal education activities.

The project will be under the
              direction of Marilyn and Hal Weiner with the television programs being produced
              by their company, Screenscope.  Anthony Janetos, Vice President and Chief of
              Programs at the World Resources Institute will have oversight responsibility
              for the science information presented in the Annual Report.  Project advisors
              include:

Bonnie Cohen, former Under Secretary of State for Management and
              Board member of CARE

Chet Cooper, former Deputy Director, Emerging
              Technologies, Battelle/Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

Robert Fri,
              Senior Fellow Emeritus at Resources for the Future and former Director of the
              National Museum of Natural History

Edward Frieman, Director Emeritus at of
              the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Vice Chancellor of the University
              of California

Nay Htun, Dean of the University of Peace and former Assistant
              Secretary-General, United Nations Development Programme.

Thomas Lovejoy,
              Science Advisor to the World Bank and the UN Foundation

Jessica Tuchman
              Mathews, President of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace

Per
              Pinstrup-Andersen, Director-General, International Food Policy Research
              Institute

Maurice Strong, Chairman, Earth council and former
              Secretary-General of the United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro

There
              also will be science advisors for each of the individual episodes.


