Title       : RR Lyrae Stars of the Inner Halo and Thick Disk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0205813

Award Number: 0205813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horace A. Smith smith@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205813
Smith

RR Lyrae stars are among the oldest stars in the Galaxy,
              and have long been recognized as
important probes of the processes by which
              the halo and thick disk formed. Nevertheless, our
knowledge of the RR Lyrae
              population within several kiloparsecs of the Sun remains very
incomplete. Dr.
              Horace Smith at Michigan State University will use observations obtained by the
              Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) to identify and
              characterize RR Lyrae stars north of declination -30 degrees. RR Lyrae stars of
              Bailey types ab and c will be detected to a limiting magnitude of <V> = 15,
              corresponding to a distance of about 8 kpc. This survey is expected to include
              about 5000 RR Lyrae stars. Most of these variable stars will be newly
              discovered in this survey. 

The ROTSE survey will enable Dr. Smith to
              investigate how the density and properties of RR Lyrae stars change as a
              function of distance from the galactic center and distance from the galactic
              plane.
He will test the hypothesis that field RR Lyrae reveal the presence of
              a dual halo: an inner flattened system, with RR Lyrae stars that have the
              characteristics of those in Oosterhoff type II globular clusters, and an outer,
              less flat, system with RR Lyrae stars that have the characteristics of those in
              Oosterhoff type I globular clusters. The RR Lyrae sample will also be used to
              make a new estimate of the local RR Lyrae density and of the scale height of
              the RR Lyrae of the thick disk.  The ROTSE survey will make it possible to
              trace the distribution and properties of RR Lyrae stars throughout the Galaxy,
              from the bulge, through the solar vicinity, to the distant halo. It will also
              provide a database to be used in selecting stars for follow-up spectroscopic
              studies. Dr. Smith will begin this process with the determination of
              spectroscopic metal-abundances and radial velocities for the hitherto often
              neglected RR Lyrae of Bailey type c. These will be used to determine a
              statistical parallax solution and to study the motions of RRc variables. The
              ROTSE survey will also systematically identify multi-mode RR Lyrae stars in the
              solar vicinity, including double-mode stars and Blazhko effect
              variables.
***



