Title       : Exploring Dynamical Systems: Exposing Students to Contemporary Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0205779

Award Number: 0205779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Devaney bob@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1746      DISTINGUISHED TEACHING SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1746,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the major difficulties facing mathematics today is the fact that most
              people have no idea about what is happening in contemporary mathematics or why
              this field is important. Unfortunately, most contemporary research in this
              field is difficult, if not impossible, to explain to students. The problem is
              that much of today's mathematics builds upon years or even centuries of prior
              mathematical research. As a consequence, undergraduate students rarely have the
              background to experience what is new and exciting in this field.

In this
              project, the PI and his collaborators are attempting to change this culture by
              creating a series on on-line activities that provide students with the
              background and the tools necessary to experience and investigate certain
              contemporary topics in mathematics. The activities are drawn from the areas of
              mathematics known as dynamical systems theory and fractal geometry. These are
              two relatively new areas of mathematics that have widespread applicability in
              all areas of science and engineering. In addition, much of the current research
              in this field involves a significant experimental component involving computer
              graphics. Most importantly, much of the PI's current research in these areas
              involves iteration of simple expressions (such as quadratic functions), and so
              many of the ideas in this field can be readily explained to students with only
              a high school background in mathematics. 

In this project, the PI is
              developing a series of ten stand-alone modules, each of which is designed to
              acquaint the user with a particular topic of interest in these fields. Each
              module includes streaming video introductions, online software (java applets),
              computer generated animations, and suggested areas for student investigation.
              The materials being developed can be woven into courses throughout the
              curriculum, ranging from introductory math courses for liberal arts students
              and precalculus to calculus and linear algebra courses, to give students an
              ongoing glimpse of the excitement of modern mathematics. Alternatively, the
              modules can be concatenated in a string of activities designed to bring the
              student to the forefront of active research in this area.
