Title       : Collaborative Research: Arecibo Radar Studies of Zodiacal and Interstellar Dust
               in the Solar System.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0205848

Award Number: 0205848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205992             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Mathews JDMathews@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0205848
Mathews

Dr. John Mathews, at Penn State University, in
              collaboration with Dr. David Meisel, at State University of New York at
              Geneseo,  will conduct a 3-year observational and analysis/modeling study of
              small particles in the Solar System based on radar micrometeor observations
              performed at the Arecibo Observatory. Knowledge of the distribution, sources,
              and gravitational, electrodynamical evolution of interplanetary dust particles
              (IDPs) in the ~0.2-100 micron size range is critical to the planetary sciences
              and-as extrasolar and interstellar particles are also present-to local galactic
              science. 

The Arecibo Observatory (AO) UHF radar has proven to be uniquely
              suited for ground-based micrometeor observations that yield velocity,
              deceleration, and radiant information-and thus orbits-of large numbers of
              interplanetary and hyperbolic dust particles. Observational results now extend
              from 1997 through the present with a steadily evolving technique that now
              yields meteoroid Doppler speeds with instantaneous accuracies of as small as 10
              m/sec (with meteoroid speeds ranging over 10-90 km/sec thus far). This combined
              with a sorting mechanism based on classical, in-atmosphere meteoroid dynamics,
              clearly distinguishes down-the-beam particles from those meteoroids with a
              significant across-the-beam velocity component.  The new effort extends these
              studies to details of IDP distribution/evolution in the solar system and
              considers the role of the interstellar particle flux to the solar system as
              well as local galactic processes/features illuminated by this flux.

The new
              observational/analysis/modeling study funded with this award will continue
              providing routine sampling of IDPs including the expected earth-crossing
              asteroidal-orbit particles, interstellar particles (ISPs), Jovian perturbed
              and/or derived particles, and low-mass b particles ejected by radiation
              pressure from the inner solar system. As the database of ISPs grows, these
              researchers will continue theoretical/modeling studies of the flux and origins
              of the largest of the interstellar particles. Thus far they can account for all
              AO ISPs as being products of the same supernova that
produced the Geminga
              pulsar.  This effort has involved and will continue to involve undergraduates
              from SUNY-Geneseo, Penn State, and other institutions and graduate students
              from Penn State as well as the staff of Arecibo Observatory and other
              organizations. Results from these efforts appear in several courses including
              electromagnetics, astrophysics, and plasmas at both Geneseo and Penn
              State.
***


