Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Putting a Face on Cognitive Tutors: Bringing Active
               Inquiry into Active Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0205506

Award Number: 0205506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelene Chi chi@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1657,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0205301
Albert Corbett
Carnegie-Mellon University

ITR: Collaborative
              Research: Putting a Face on Cognitive Tutors:
Bringing Active Inquiry into
              Active Problem Solving

Collaborative project with:
0205506
Michelene
              Chi
University of Pittsburgh

This project builds on a growing body of
              research concerning effective learning and tutoring strategies. The project
              involves constructing and evaluating educational technology that emulates human
              tutors by integrating a state-of-the art educational technology called
              Cognitive Tutors with a innovative interactive questioning environment called
              Synthetic Interviews to produce an inactive learning environment that rivals
              the effectiveness of human tutors. Cognitive tutors are built around a
              cognitive model of problem solving knowledge and provide precisely the support
              students need to complete problems successfully. Used alone, cognitive tutors
              do not support the help-seeking and meta-cognitive skills that characterize
              active learners. By incorporating a novel interactive communication technology
              called Synthetic Interviews, an Active Learning Environment is offered that
              rivals the effectiveness of human tutors in supporting deep student learning.
              Synthetic Interviews allow learners to engage in active inquiry by providing
              the means for conversing in-depth with an individual. Synthetic Interviews
              permit knowledge capture in a new form providing utility similar to an expert
              system but a development effort approaching the simple video taping of a
              conversation. The Active Learning Environment serves as a research tool to
              examine both computational and pedagogical challenges and also as an
              educational environment in classrooms and homes. In particular, the domains of
              knowledge that are constructed around this learning environment are mathematics
              and biology courses. The project promises to make important contributions to
              cognitive science, computer science and educational practice including the
              following: 1) The analysis of student questions during synthetic interviews
              will contribute to basic cognitive models of the functional relationship
              between declarative conceptual knowledge and procedural problem solving
              knowledge, 2) This project will integrate cognitive models of student knowledge
              and tutorial dialogue structure. More generally, the project will help define a
              design and engineering process for intelligent learning environments, 3) The
              research will inform the design of more effective computer-based learning
              environments. 4) The research and the active learning environment can support
              improved professional development both for pre-service and in-service teachers.
              The Active Learning Environments for mathematics and biology that are developed
              in this project promise to directly improve educational practice nationally.
              Current generation cognitive mathematics tutors are already in use in about 2%
              of middle schools and high schools around the country. The demand for effective
              mathematics and science education continues to grow. States are increasing
              mathematics graduation requirements and instituting assessments that govern
              student graduation and school evaluations. If Active Learning Environments are
              more effective than current generation Cognitive Tutors, they promise to
              rapidly enter widespread classroom use. 

