Title       : ITR: Reconfigurable Fabric
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0205682

Award Number: 0205682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Majid Sarrafzadeh majid@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn Reinman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Estrin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mani B. Srivastava  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1667,9215,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Because of the relentless march of the silicon-based electronics technology as
              predicted by Moore's Law, computation, storage, and communication are now woven
              into the fabrics of our lives.  The emerging technology of flexible
              electronics, where electronics components such as transistors and wires are
              built on a thin flexible material, offers a similar opportunity to weave
              computation, storage, and communication into the fabric of the very clothing
              that we wear.  The implications of seamlessly integrating a large number of
              communicating computation and storage resources, mated with sensors and
              actuators, in close proximity to the human body will transform many aspects of
              biomedical research and practice. For example, one can imagine biomedical
              applications where biometric and ambient sensors are woven into the garment of
              a patient or a person in a medically-critical or hazardous environment to
              trigger or modulate the delivery of a drug.
To realize this vision outside the
              laboratory, radical innovation is required in the area of system-level
              information technology. These systems will not scale to widespread use if they
              are viewed simply as traditional chips or motherboards based on a different,
              flexible form factor. Rather, a rethinking of the architecture and the design
              methodology for all layers of these systems is needed. The reasons are
              two-fold. First, the underlying technology of electronics in flexible materials
              has characteristics and computation-communication cost trade-offs that are very
              different from that of silicon and PCB-based electronics. Second, the natural
              applications of these systems have environmental dynamics, physical coupling,
              resource constraints, infrastructure support, and robustness requirements that
              are very different from those faced by traditional systems. 
One of the
              challenges in developing the needed information technology architecture and
              design methodology for these systems is that one needs to both conduct
              experimental work and develop a conceptual understanding of the problem domain.
              This research studies: 
	Application: Use as a driver application capability,
              reconfigurable fabric (R-Fabric) based on a combination of (i) the technology
              of flexible electronics using organic materials, and (ii) computing,
              communication, and sensing elements implemented as E-Buttons.
	Architecture:
              Develop the general architecture concepts and cost/performance optimization
              techniques. The issues that we will focus on will include (i) appropriate
              primitives for composing the architecture, (ii) system interconnect network
              optimized for the electrical characteristics of the organic electronics, (iii)
              techniques to cope with the high ration of communication to computation cost,
              and (iv) architecture level self-configuration and re-configuration for robust
              operation.
	Programming: Develop techniques and primitives for programming a
              system composed of hundreds of computation, storage, sensing, and actuation
              elements that are individually resource constrained and are connected by a
              structured but fault-prone high-cost interconnect network.
	Processors:
              Develop domain-specific processor architecture optimized for these
              power-constrained, physically coupled applications.

Design Methodology:
              Develop techniques and hybrid emulation platform for systematic architecture
              exploration, simulation, optimization, and reconfiguration of these
              systems.


