Title       : ITR: Veterinary Telemedicine - Proactive Herd Health Management for Disease
               Prevention from Farm to Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0205487

Award Number: 0205487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Andresen dan@cis.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Poole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice M. Sargeant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Andresen Abstract

This project is building sensor net infrastructure to
              support intelligent, mobile medical monitoring devices that continuously assess
              state of health in concentrated and distributed cattle herds.  

Research is
              conducted to develop and integrate the following areas of information
              technology:
	
- Receiver systems that manage wireless traffic and prioritize
              overlapping signal streams. 
- Scheduling algorithms that adaptively determine
              where data analysis should occur and which areas require more in-depth
              analysis.
- Algorithms that search for data patterns that may indicate
              problems.
- Security mechanisms that maintain confidentiality of economic data
              and herd health information associated with individual farms, while providing
              epidemiological data of statistical validity.
- Low cost system components
              (affordable by farmers and producers 
who may have tenuous financial
              stability).
- Robust packaging and linking technology for biomedical sensors,
              GPS receivers, and Bluetooth-enabled devices for survival in difficult
              environments.

The experimental component of the project uses durable, small
              sensors (e.g., to report animal identity, position, temperature, blood
              pressure, and other physiological data), with Bluetooth-compliant monitoring
              stations near cattle congregation points, such as feed bunks and watering
              troughs.  These stations upload data from nearby environmental sensors,
              Bluetooth-enabled devices with global positioning capability that are worn by
              the animals, and wearable/remote biomedical sensors. These results are
              integrated with previous sensor data, weather reports, weather forecasts,
              infrared camera images, and prior health assessments. The project is developing
              initial algorithms to perform rapid analysis on local data prior to uploading
              summary data for the ranch to regional databases so that these data can be
              correlated with data provided by other producers. Significant findings can then
              be immediately broadcast to appropriate medical personnel and
              producers.

Monitoring systems will improve the ability of the animal
              sciences industry to react to and predict disease onset and its epidemiological
              spread (e.g., mad cow disease, hoof and mouth disease), whether from natural or
              terrorist events. Trend analysis, information storage, and health prediction
              lessons learned from this effort will have immediate application to distributed
              medical systems targeted at assessing and predicting human state of health and
              the spread of disease in human populations.  These networked embedded sensor
              systems have implications for homeland security, veterinary medicine, the
              agriculture industry, and in the long term, human medicine and quality of life.
               

