Title       : ITR: Development of a General Computational Framework for the Optimal
               Integration of Atmospheric Chemical Transport Models and Measurements Using
               Adjoints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0205198

Award Number: 0205198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2299997            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Carmichael gcarmich@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrian Sandu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Seinfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1524,1652,1661,1687,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this project is to develop general computational tools, and
              associated software, for assimilation of atmospheric chemical and optical
              measurements into chemical transport models (CTMs). These tools are to be
              developed so that users need not be experts in adjoint modeling and
              optimization theory. These developments will foster a deeper understanding of:
              (1) inaccuracies in CTMs; (2) sensitivities of CTMs input and parameter
              uncertainties; and (3) the comparison of model predictions and atmospheric
              measurements. These computational tools have the promise to move the field of
              atmospheric chemical modeling to the next plateau of understanding the extent
              to which model predictions encompass available measurements, an understanding
              that is currently hampered by the absence of systematic theory and general
              analysis tools. These techniques and analysis tools will be applied both to the
              interpretation of observational data and to forecasting activities.
 
The
              research approach will entail: (1) Development of novel and efficient
              algorithms for 4-dimensional-Var data assimilation in CTMs; (2) Development of
              general software support tools to facilitate the construction of discrete
              adjoints to be used in any CTM; and (3) Application of these techniques to
              important applications including: (a) analysis of emission control strategies
              for Los Angeles; (b) the integration of measurements and models to produce a
              consistent/optimal analysis data set for the ACE-Asia intensive field
              experiment; (c) the inverse analysis to produce a better estimate of emissions;
              and (d) the design of observation strategies to improve chemical forecasting
              capabilities.

The objective of this project is the development and
              utilization of Information Technology Research (ITR) tools to integrate
              measurement and modeling analysis with the goal of providing an optimal
              analysis state of the atmosphere, that is an intimate and close integration of
              modeled and measured quantities. This improved estimate of the state better
              defines the spatial and temporal fields of key chemical components in relation
              to their sources and sinks. This information is critical in designing
              cost-effective emission control strategies for improved air quality, for the
              interpretation of observational data such as those obtained during intensive
              field campaigns, and to the execution of air-quality forecasting. The
              development of the tools to integrate measurements and models is also critical
              to the challenge of a full utilization of the vast amounts of satellite
              chemical data in the troposphere that are now becoming available, and which
              will become more prevalent in the coming years. In addition to these broader
              impacts in the fields of information technology, atmospheric chemistry, air
              quality, and global change, this project will provide opportunities for
              students and post-docs to participate in a highly interdisciplinary and
              collaborative activity.
