Title       : Mathematical and Theoretical Biology Research Program for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0205985

Award Number: 0205985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Castillo-Chavez cc32@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is to provide a first-rate research experience to
              students who otherwise are extremely unlikely to get get it at their home
              institutions or elsewhere. The sequential research experiences focus on the
              applications of mathematics to the biological sciences. The Mathematical and
              Theoretical Biology 
Institute (MTBI) scientific undergraduate program is
              carried out primarily through consecutive summer research experiences that have
              been specifically designed to train, mentor,  encourage and support Chicano,
              Latino, Native American and African American who have the potential to pursue 
              careers in applied mathematics or in scientific field where serious
              quantitative training is fundamental.  MTBI's main goal of increasing the pool
              of underrepresented minorities getting advanced degrees in quantitative fields
              is best achieved through  the selection of participants who come from
              non-selective universities. The effectiveness of this NSF funded project is
              being measured by the number of students who enroll in graduate school, the
              
number who get advanced degrees and the ability of some MTBI alumni to gain
              access to selective graduate programs in these fields. MTBI promotes its goals
              and objectives through its intensive multiple-summer research training program,
              GRE preparation program and long-term mentorship and support programs for its
              alumni.  Students receive four weeks of intensive training in mathematical and
              computational techniques before developing their own research project (10
              technical reports per year have been generated, on the average,  since 1996).
              MTBI summer research experiences opens the doors for underrepresented
              minorities in fields of genomics, theoretical and computational biology,
              bio-statistics, applied mathematics and many 
others. The success of the
              consecutive summer research experiences is based on various factors that
              include "unlimited" student access to faculty and support personnel (12 to 16
              hours a day) and a collaborative learning environment that enhances and
              nurtures the learning experiences of all participants. Explicit summer outcomes
              include: the completion a formal research paper (25-40 pages), a public oral
              presentation and the preparation of a poster.  The typical activities of most
              MTBI alumni include the presentation of their MTBI work in poster sessions at
              two national conferences: the SACNAS annual meeting and  the joint AMS/MAA
              winter meeting.
