Title       : Implementation and Analysis of Neuromorphic Motor-Pattern Generating Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0131612

Award Number: 0131612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. DeWeerth steve.deweerth@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Butera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1162,1519,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The generation of rhythmic movement is essential to locomotion and many other
              activities in most animals.  The pattern-generating networks in the brain that
              control these movements are efficient and reliable, and so provide a platform
              to study a critical set of biological control paradigms, and offer the
              potential to inspire engineered systems that exploit these underlying
              principles.  Neuromorphic engineering is the development of hardware-based
              systems that are inspired by circuit architectures found in biological nervous
              systems.  The goals of this collaborative project are to develop neuromorphic
              systems that emulate the control and production of such rhythmic movements, and
              to use nonlinear dynamical analysis to gain a better understanding of the
              production of these movements.  Building on prior development of very
              large-scale integrated (VLSI) circuits that mimic motor patterns, and
              channel-based model neurons using such circuits, this project will create
              neuromorphic oscillators based on the dynamics of ionic channels in biological
              neurons, combine these oscillators with mechanical actuation and sensory
              feedback, and expand these systems to include heterogeneous populations of
              neurons.  The models will test the engineering validity of some principles
              inferred from biological designs, and will in turn allow quantitative testing
              of how varied parameters, sensory feedback, and heterogeneous model populations
              may have effects in actual complex biological systems.
   Results from this
              work will extend beyond neuroengineering, to a better understanding of motor
              control and feedback in neurobiology, and to potential applications in robotic
              design.  This collaborative project also continues training of students from
              various backgrounds and at various levels in laboratories with a solid history
              of interdisciplinary training.


