Title       : Spectroscopic Investigations of Vibrational Potential Energy Surfaces and
               Molecular Structures in Singlet and Triplet Electronic Excited States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0131935

Award Number: 0131935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaan Laane laane@mail.chem.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Proposal : CHE-0131935
PI : Laane, J.

   There has been great
              interest in potential energy surfaces (PESs) in recent years, particularly in
              those for electronic excited states, since they can provide a wealth of data on
              molecular structure, bonding, and photochemical and photophysical processes.
              However, very few experimental PESs, rigorously determined from vibronic data,
              have been reported. Several different spectroscopic methods will be used to map
              the vibronic energy levels for structurally and conformationally important
              vibrations.  The computational methodology for kinetic and potential energy
              calculations will be applied to determine the PESs of several types of
              electronic excited states in several different kinds of molecules.  For singlet
              states (generally S1) laser induced fluorescence (LIF) spectroscopy of
              jet-cooled molecules and ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy will be utilized
              to establish the vibronic levels while far-infrared and Raman spectra will
              provide the complementary ground state data.  A time of flight mass
              spectrometer, which allows mass resolution, will be used for ionization
              detection and resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) studies.  This
              will allow access to non-fluorescing states and to transitions forbidden in
              one-photon LIF studies.  Two-color experiments will be carried out to study
              higher singlet states.  Considerable use will be made of sensitized
              phosphorescence excitation spectroscopy (SPES) for studying triplet states.
              Aryl ketones will be thoroughly investigated as these molecules show strong
              phosphorescence and are thus ideal for SPES studies of triplet states. The
              triplet and higher singlet states for molecules in the indan family will also
              be investigated. Several molecules with unusual bonding properties, such as the
              anomeric effect, will also be studied in ground and excited states in order to
              ascertain the effect of the electronic transitions on the bonding and
              structure.

Spectroscopic methods using lasers for the absorption of light
              will be used to study the structures and energies of molecules in both their
              normal and "excited" forms.  The excited forms are produced when electrons are
              excited by light to attain higher energies.   Photochemistry, such as
              photosynthesis, typically occurs only after molecules have been excited in this
              manner.  The goal of this research is to characterize the excited molecules and
              to compare them to their normal forms. The results of this work can prove
              beneficial to a variety of areas based on the interaction of light with
              molecules, such as the development of solar energy devices or the design of
              photochemical reactions. Students and postdoctoral research associates will
              participate in this research and will receive training to prepare them for
              entry into the scientific/technical workforce.

