Title       : Plant PolIII Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0131348

Award Number: 0131348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Folk folkw@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Elegant studies of human and yeast RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription
              machineries have contributed extensively to our current understanding of the
              mechanism and regulation of gene expression.  In contrast, the plant Pol III
              machinery is virtually undescribed.  An in vitro transcription system from
              whole cell extracts of Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cell cultures has been
              developed that will permit purification and biochemical analysis of the plant
              Pol III machinery.  This project has the following objectives:1) To assemble a
              biochemically defined in vitro plant Pol III transcription system capable of
              transcribing tRNA and other genes; of particular interest are the plant TFIIIC
              subunits, which are highly divergent between yeast and human, and that differ
              dramatically in structure and the capacity to acetylate chromatin; and 2) To
              define whether the plant TFIIIC has histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity
              and if so, to determine whether such activity is important for Pol III
              dependent gene transcription in vitro and in vivo.  Approaches that will be
              used include: 1) capturing the Pol III machinery on tRNALys1 gene fragments
              immobilized on magnetic beads; and 2) expressing and purifying Pol III
              machinery from transformed suspension cells. Components will be reconstituted
              into a robust in vitro system capable of transcribing tRNA genes. A variety of
              functional assays, in combination with reconstitution experiments, will be used
              to define the minimal plant Pol III machinery, and the properties conferred on
              the complex by accessory factors. Components of the plant Pol III and
              transcription factor complexes will be assayed for HAT activity, known to be
              important for modifying chromatin.  If HAT activity is found, the responsible
              proteins and domains will be identified, mutated to eliminate the HAT activity,
              and the mutated proteins expressed in transgenic A. thaliana to assess the
              consequences of HAT inactivation on in vivo activity of Pol III and on plant
              growth and development.

The results of this project are expected to
              significantly advance current understanding of gene expression in plants and
              other eukaryotes, supplying important information and tools for both further
              basic and applied research in the plant sciences.  The project will support
              educational experiences for undergraduates and for a postdoctoral fellow, and
              will contribute to the environment responsible for training students for
              professional careers. These opportunities will be enhanced by institutional and
              other federal programs also intended to increase the diversity of
              underrepresented scientists in the workforce. 
