Title       : Upgrade of High Pressure Mineral Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0131874

Award Number: 0131874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Smyth joseph.smyth@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0131874
Smyth

This grant provides partial support to upgrade the laboratory
              for high-pressure X-ray diffraction and mineral physics studies in the
              Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Colorado. The laboratory
              currently comprises a Siemens/Bruker 18KW rotating-anode X-ray generator,
              automated single-crystal and powder diffractometers, laser ruby fluorescence
              pressure measurement facility, X-ray precession cameras for crystal
              orientation, and three Merrill-Bassett type diamond anvil cells. The laboratory
              works in close collaboration with Hartmut Spetzler's group on Gigahertz
              Ultrasonic interferometry on combined X-ray and ultrasonic equation of state
              measurements of natural and synthetic high pressure minerals. The upgrade for
              the rotating-anode generator includes a new Mo anode, backup turbo pump,
              roughing pump, and vacuum valves and gauges. The upgrade for the single-crystal
              diffractometer system includes a control computer, LINUX workstation, and some
              salary support for adaptation and installation of new diffractometer control
              software. The upgrade of the powder diffraction system includes new computer
              and control software. The upgrade of the laser pressure measurement facility
              includes a safety door interlock system, computer upgrade, binocular
              microscope, and optical bench for a new basement lab facility required for
              laser safety. The upgrade of high-pressure diamond anvil cells includes two new
              cells, one four-pin Be seat cell and one wide-aperture carbide-seat
              high-temperature cell. The upgrade of the sample preparation facilities
              includes tools for preparation of oriented, faceted single crystals for
              ultrasonic studies, and facilities for preparation of high-pressure synthesis
              runs in collaboration with the group at Bayerisches Geoinstitut in Bayreuth,
              Germany.
*** 

