Title       : Fluid Dynamics of Crossflow Filtration in Suspension-Feeding Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0131293

Award Number: 0131293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Sanderson slsand@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project will investigate the fluid dynamics of crossflow filtration in
              suspension-feeding fishes such as menhaden, anchovy, and carp.  These fishes
              filter massive volumes of water to extract suspended food particles that are as
              small as 5 micrometer to 1 mm in diameter.  Although they comprise
              approximately 25% of the world fish catch and have filtration efficiencies
              approaching those of industrial filters, the mechanisms that they use to trap
              their tiny prey remain largely unknown.  A miniature fiberoptic endoscope has
              been used recently to observe particle movement inside the oral cavities of
              live suspension-feeding fishes.  These data, combined with computational fluid
              dynamics simulations in fish oral cavities, have led to the development of a
              new model involving crossflow filtration in suspension-feeding fishes. 
              Although crossflow filtration is a multi-billion dollar industry for the
              manufacture of products that we use every day (e.g., dairy products, beer and
              wine, pharmaceuticals), this filtration mechanism had not been recognized
              previously in any vertebrate.  During crossflow filtration in fishes, particles
              are concentrated inside the oral cavity as filtrate exits between the gill
              rakers, but particles are not retained on the rakers.  Instead, the
              high-velocity crossflow along the rakers carries particles away from the raker
              surfaces and transports the particles towards the esophagus.  Equations from
              the industrial filtration engineering literature could be used to calculate the
              hydrodynamic forces on particles and the resulting particle velocities and
              trajectories during crossflow filtration in fishes.  However, values that are
              appropriate for suspension-feeding fishes must be used in place of the
              variables in the equations.  The empirical data needed for the first
              quantitative analysis of biological crossflow filtration will be provided by
              laboratory experiments involving sonomicrometry, pressure transduction,
              fiberoptic endoscopy, high-speed video, and flow velocity measurement with
              micro-thermistor probes.  This analysis will provide insight into the process
              of crossflow filtration as it determines the sizes and densities of particles
              that suspension-feeding fishes retain.  The study will engage undergraduate and
              Masters students in interdisciplinary research that has important ecological,
              evolutionary, and engineering implications.  





