Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Process for Preparing Nanometer-Sized Ceramic Particles at High
               Production Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0131395

Award Number: 0131395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen C. Huang Huang2001@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Junhai Liu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nanotek Instruments, Inc.
	      1214  43rd St. NW
	      Fargo, ND  58102    701/277-1772

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
              and commercialize a new technology for mass producing nanometer-sized ceramic
              powders at dramatically reduced costs. The technology, Combined Atomization and
              Reaction Technique (CART), involves providing an atomizing gas medium
              containing a reactant element such as hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen,
              chlorine, fluorine, boron, or sulfur; preparing a metal alloy melt super-heated
              to a spontaneous reaction temperature at which the alloy can undergo a
              self-sustaining reaction with the selected reactant element; and introducing
              reactant gas to concurrently mix, atomize, and react with the critically
              super-heated alloy melt to form ultra-fine ceramic particles in an atomizer
              chamber. This Phase II project will design and build a prototype pilot-scale
              CART apparatus to demonstrate the commercial viability of the technology as
              applied to the synthesis of nano-sized oxides of selected metals that are
              deemed to have the greatest commercial potential. 

The commercial potential
              of  ultrafine powders are in the production of catalysts, coatings and films,
              conductive pastes, cosmetics, electromagnetic components, electronic devices,
              fire retardant materials, magnetic fluids, sintered and injection-molded parts,
              ceramic composites, magnetic storage media, phosphors, pigments, polishing
              media, and toners. Indium-tin oxide (ITO) powders are used to prepare
              sputtering targets for deposition of transparent films for use in flat-panel
              display technology. Nano-grained materials can be employed to replace various
              load-bearing and non-structural parts in automobiles, infrastructures,
              off-shore structures, piping, containers, electronic equipment housings, etc.
              Nano-grained cermets and ceramics are outstanding cutting tool materials.
              Transparent nano-grained ceramics can be utilized in a broad array of
              applications, including transparent ceramic appliance components, clear
              "glassware" and artistic artifacts. Transparent ceramics may also be used in
              ballistic protection armor by law enforcement, security police and armored car
              personnel.

