Title       : Dissecting the Molecular Pathways that Coordinate Lateral Root Initiation with
               Environmental Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0131690

Award Number: 0131690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jocelyn Malamy jmalamy@bio.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants are completely dependent on the resources that are available in their
              immediate vicinity.  Unfortunately, nutrient availability and distribution are
              in constant flux in the environment.  Plants must be able to sense these
              changes and respond appropriately.  This developmental plasticity can be
              clearly observed in the plant root system.  The root system is a highly
              branched structure that extracts water and nutrients from the soil.  Both the
              number and placement of lateral roots are dramatically affected by
              environmental cues.  This allows the plant to optimize its root system to its
              unique habitat, compete effectively for soil resources and survive adverse
              conditions.  Lateral roots are formed from mature pericycle cells in the parent
              root.  We have almost no understanding of how pericycle cells are triggered to
              re-enter the cell-cycle and re-differentiate to create the lateral root
              primordium.  Similarly, very little is known about how certain pericycle cells
              are selected to proliferate while their neighbors remain quiescent.  Finally,
              it is unclear how external conditions are sensed and the information integrated
              into decisions about where and when a new lateral root will be formed.  The
              objective of this proposal is to dissect the mechanisms that regulate the
              initiation of lateral roots.  Our main strategy involves the analysis of a
              lateral root initiation mutant, lin1, that we have recently isolated in
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  While wild-type Arabidopsis plants drastically repress
              lateral root initiation under certain environmental conditions, the lin1 mutant
              maintains a highly branched root system.  Furthermore, lin1 shows altered
              patterns of accumulation of auxin, a hormone known to be critical for lateral
              root initiation.  We will clone the LIN1 gene and characterize the LIN1 pathway
              using genetic, physiological and genomic approaches.  These studies will begin
              to shed light on one of the fundamental mysteries in plant biology: How are the
              decisions made that coordinate plant development with environmental cues?  They
              will also impact our understanding of how plants are able to selectively
              activate cell proliferation and organogenesis during vegetative growth.  By
              focusing on the root system, our work will also provide important insights into
              plant adaptation to water and nutrient stress and may lead to the development
              of crops able to survive under adverse conditions. 
