Title       : Chemical and Physical Control of Ectopic Contractile Rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0131286

Award Number: 0131286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287609             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Bement wmbement@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fascinating and important properties of living systems is their
              ability to cope with physical damage. This property is manifest in both single
              cells and multicellular systems, and is broadly conserved not only in a number
              of different animal phyla, but in plants as well. Because of its obvious
              clinical importance, multicellular wound healing has long been the subject of
              intense scrutiny.  In contrast, repair of plasma membrane wounds in single
              cells has been overlooked until relatively recently. At least two mechanisms
              have been described: an extremely rapid membrane fusion event that provides an
              immediate block to the inrush of ions that would otherwise kill the cell, and a
              slower contractile response in which a circumferential ring of actin filaments
              and myosin-2 assembles around the wound and then closes. The primary goal of
              this project is to characterize the mechanisms that regulate assembly and
              closure of this ectopic contractile ring. Using Xenopus oocytes as a model
              system, a combination of physical, microscopic, and recombinant DNA-based
              approaches will be employed to test relationships between cell tension, local
              increases in rho class GTPase activity, and intracellular free calcium, in the
              recruitment of actin filaments and myosin-2 to the wound border. In addition to
              providing information directly relevant to the basic biological process of
              repair of damage to the plasma membrane, the proposed studies have the
              potential to provide insights into processes which resemble ectopic contractile
              ring assembly and closure, such as animal cell cytokinesis.
