Title       : Mechanstic and Exploratory Organic Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0131322

Award Number: 0131322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard E. Zimmerman zimmerman@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The emphasis of this work is two fold: 1) development of new photochemical
              reactions and 2) the theoretical as well as experimental understanding of
              mechanisms of organic photoreactions.  On the synthetic organic photochemistry
              side, several new photochemical rearrangement reactions will be explored as
              well as some new heterocyclic photochemistry that should lead to a
              photochemical beta-lactam synthesis.  Host-guest or solid state photoreactions
              which occur within a crystal lattice will continue to be explored.  Three
              different theoretical methods for predicting and modelling organic
              photochemical processes will also be studied.

   With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              Howard E. Zimmerman of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Wisconsin.  Dr. Zimmerman will explore new  organic photochemical reactions and
              work to theoretically predict and model the outcomes of existing photochemical
              reactions.  The photochemical reactions studied will serve as the foundation
              for new synthetic organic procedures and thus have potential applications for
              the preparation of antibiotics (particularly the heterocyclic photochemistry to
              be studied) and other pharmaceuticals.  Students educated during the course of
              this work will be broadly trained in theoretical and experimental organic
              chemistry and preparative photochemistry and gain skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical industry. 



