Title       : Determinants of Conjugative Transposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0131471

Award Number: 0131471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon G. Churchward   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Movement of conjugative transposons from one bacterial host to another requires
              transposon excision from the donor chromosome, conjugal transfer of the excised
              transposon from donor to recipient and integration of the transposon into the
              recipient chromosome. The best-studied conjugative transposon is Tn916.
              Movement of Tn916 is catalyzed by the transposon-encoded bivalent Int protein,
              whose domains recognize and bind to two distinct DNA sequences.  Tn916 does not
              mobilize adjacent chromosomal genetic markers and expression of the genes
              involved in conjugal transfer is dependent upon excision and circularization of
              the transposon. Thus, the first step in conjugative transposition of Tn916 is
              excision of the element, and conjugal transfer does not occur prior to
              excision. A second transposon encoded protein that is required for excision,
              Xis, plays a regulatory role in transposon excision and a model for Xis
              function has recently been suggested. This model will be tested. Transposon
              excision and transfer can be dissociated by expression of Int and Xis from a
              heterologous promoter.  Transposon excision occurs at a greatly elevated
              frequency in the donor cell population but the frequency of conjugative
              transfer and integration remain unchanged under these conditions. This implies
              that the step of conjugal transfer may also be regulated. The Int recombinase,
              in addition to its binding and cleavage of the transposon ends, has been shown
              to bind specifically to the origin of conjugal DNA transfer, oriT. Whether Int
              is required for conjugal transfer of Tn916, or if Int plays a regulatory role
              in this process will be determined. Examinion of Int binding to oriT has
              suggested that the N-terminal DNA binding domain of Int may exert an effect on
              the activities of the C-terminal catalytic domain. The possible role of such
              interactions between the two DNA binding domains of Int will be
              examined.

Conjugative transposons such as Tn916 have the remarkable property
              of being not only able to move from place to place in the genome of a single
              bacterial species, but to transfer themselves between an amazingly large number
              of diverse bacterial species. They also have the ability to mobilize other
              genetic elements that normally are not self-transmissible.  These properties
              mean that conjugative transposons are likely to be of major importance in
              promoting genetic exchange in the complex microbial communities that exist in
              natural environments. These complex communities have a great impact on human
              activities. The study of agents of genetic exchange in these communities will
              increase our understanding of how microbial populations adapt to changing
              conditions and prosper.


