Title       : CAREER: Robust Digital Model-Based Fault Detection and Isolation for Nonlinear
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a0131809

Award Number: 0131809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos Kazantzis nikolas@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Nikolaos Kazantzis 
Institution:  Worcester Polytechnic
              Institute
Proposal Number: 0131809

The main area of the planned research
              project is the development of a systematic, comprehensive and practical
              framework for digital monitoring, and fault detection and isolation (FDI), of
              chemical, biochemical, microelectronics, etc. manufacturing facilities.  In
              particular, the primary objectives include:
(i) The study of the fundamental
              problem of the design of reliable robust digital model-based monitoring and FDI
              systems for nonlinear processes in the presence of model uncertainty and
              unknown disturbances.
(ii) The development of the appropriate software tools
              for the effective digital implementation of the planned process monitoring and
              FDI scheme.
(iii) The real-time experimental implementation of the results of
              the aforementioned theoretical and computational studies on a pilot-scale
              polymerization reactor, as well as a bioreactor.

An integral part of this
              project is the realization of educational goals that could complement and
              enrich these research activities.  Aligned with the principles and vision of an
              innovative educational framework being developed at the Worcester Polytechnic
              Institute (WPI), the primary educational objectives are:
(i) The formulation
              of open-ended projects with a concrete flavor and orientation towards process
              dynamic modeling, monitoring and diagnostics, that will be jointly defined by
              professional practitioners in industry and the PI.  These projects will be
              conducted on the industrial site, and occasionally, in an international
              setting.
(ii) The utilization of recent advancements in computing and
              communications technology in order to provide a virtual learning environment
              that can (a) enhance the learning experience of current WPI students by
              elucidating key concepts in process modeling, dynamics, monitoring and
              diagnostics through animation and advanced graphics, and (b) be remotely
              accessed by educational institutions in socioeconomically distressed zones in
              the state of Massachusetts with a large minority student population.  The
              objective is to provide direct remote access to real, as well as a virtual
              process control, monitoring and diagnostics laboratory, in order to enhance
              scientific literacy and awareness, and to broaden current educational
              opportunities for those who need them most.



