Title       : RUI: X-Chromosome Meiosis in Caenorhabditis Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0131321

Award Number: 0131321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Meneely pmeneely@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Early in meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair, exchange, and synapse.  Both the
              number and the location of exchange events are highly regulated in a poorly
              understood process called crossover control. Crossover control is postulated to
              be closely related to chromosome compaction, although direct proof of this
              postulate has been lacking. Mutations that alter the number or the distribution
              of crossovers have been identified in many organisms, including C. elegans. 
              Recessive mutations in the autosomal gene him-5 reduce the number of crossovers
              on the X chromosome and alter the distribution of the residual crossovers. 
              Preliminary molecular evidence indicates that the predicted HIM-5 protein has a
              region of homology to RCC1, a well-known protein involved in chromosome
              compaction in vertebrates.  Direct proof that this gene corresponds to him-5
              will be obtained by determining the structure of transcripts from the locus and
              sequencing these in him-5 mutants.  The expression pattern of the gene will be
              determined in both sexes, and in various mutant strains affecting meiosis and
              germ-line development. Using immunofluorescence, the location of the HIM-5
              protein in the gonad will be determined in order to infer the meiotic processes
              affected.  A closer homologue of RCC1 has also been shown to affect meiosis in
              C. elegans, but the gene involved has not been studied.  Mutations of this gene
              will be identified and characterized genetically and cytologically.  The
              expression of this gene will be studied as well.  Epistatic relationships
              between this gene and him-5, as well as other meiotic mutants, will be used to
              clarify the functional relationships among the genes.  As RCC1 is well-known in
              other organisms, the characterization of its role in meiosis in C. elegans
              could make a direct connection between chromosome structure and crossover
              control. One familiar genetic manifestation of crossover control is the
              phenomenon of interference, whereby one crossover prevents the occurrence of a
              second crossover nearby.  Previous work has shown there is extremely high
              interference in C. elegans, and that most chromosomes have exactly one
              exchange.  Interestingly, all of the known double crossover exceptions had one
              of the crossovers in a region of the X chromosome known to have other unusual
              meiotic properties.  Genetic mapping experiments, combined with analysis from
              the genomic sequence, will be used to examine the unusual meiotic properties in
              this region and to ask if these have a common basis.
Undergraduate students
              under the direction of the principal investigator will conduct all of these
              experiments. Because meiosis is a fundamental process whose main
              characteristics have been known for decades, most students are familiar with
              the basic properties.  However, the molecular basis for crossover control is
              quite obscure.  Therefore, the students will be carrying out significant
              research on a fundamental and familiar process.


