Title       : Function and Regulation of Arabidopsis Tracheary Element Peptidases, XCP1, XCP2
               and XSP1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0131386

Award Number: 0131386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Beers ebeers@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Candace H. Haigler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Xylem is the wood-forming and water-conducting tissue in vascular plants.  Xylem
              is a complex tissue consisting of both living and nonliving cells.  The most
              characteristic xylem cells are the water-conducting tracheary elements. 
              Tracheary elements undergo a remarkable differentiation process that involves
              extensive secondary cell wall modification, cell suicide and complete
              autolysis.  The complete autolysis that occurs in tracheary elements contrasts
              with the selective autolysis that occurs during the differentiation of two
              other vascular tissue cell types, laticifers and sieve elements.  Protoplast
              degradation in tracheary elements is preceded by cell death and the release of
              vacuolar contents and is dependent on the activity of papain-like cysteine
              peptidases.  XCP1 and XCP2 are Arabidopsis papain-like cysteine peptidases that
              localize to tracheary elements and are therefore likely to be required for
              autolysis.  XCP1 and XCP2 are also the first recognized orthologs of the
              best-known laticifer peptidase, papain.  As such, they represent the first
              known genetic link between a complete autolysis program and a selective
              autolysis program.  The selective autolysis program in papaya (Carica papaya)
              laticifers preserves the plasmalemma and cell turgor but degrades the nucleus
              and all organelles, replacing them with latex-containing vesicles.  For this
              project, transgenic plants expressing a reporter gene under the control of the
              XCP1 promoter have been mutatgenized and they are being screened for altered
              reporter gene expression.  Positional cloning from resulting mutants will
              identify genes required for regulation of autolysis in tracheary elements and
              that may be relevant to other autolytic programs.  XSP1 is an Arabidopsis
              subtilisin-like serine peptidase that is secreted from tracheary elements. 
              XSP1 is also under investigation for this project. Post-transcriptional gene
              silencing and gene knockout experiments will be conducted for XCP1, XCP2 and
              XSP1 to provide direct evidence for their functions in tracheary elements. 
              Electron microscopic immunolocalization of XCP1, XCP2 and XSP1 will also be
              conducted.  

Wood formation and latex accumulation are two economically
              important processes that depend on developmentally programmed autolysis. 
              Revealing the roles of XCP1, XCP2 and XSP1 in the differentiation of tracheary
              elements may lead to the development of tools for engineering qualitative and
              quantitative changes in wood.  A comprehensive description of subcellular
              localization for XCP1 and XCP2 compared with published immunolocalization data
              for orthologous papain from papaya laticifers will yield valuable clues
              regarding the roles of subcellular trafficking and compartmentation in
              regulating selective and complete autolysis. The improved understanding of
              autolysis gained from this project may lead to strategies for induction of
              selective autolysis as part of an engineered subversion of plant metabolism
              toward production and packaging of selected polypeptides or other desired
              metabolites in storage vacuoles that replace all other organelles, such as
              occurs naturally during differentiation of laticifers in some species. 

