Title       : Cooperative Interactions in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0131241

Award Number: 0131241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $670000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernesto Freire ef@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-range objective of this research is to develop a fundamental
              description of protein interactions and the mechanisms by which these
              interactions elicit long-range cooperative effects existing at the core of
              signaling processes.  The goal of this project is to study the interactions of
              the HIV protein Nef with Lck and Fyn SH3 domains. The following issues will be
              addressed: 1) The coupling of binding affinity to long range cooperative
              effects.  The proline-rich Nef peptide, the conserved core of Nef, and full
              length Nef, all bind to SH3 with similar binding affinity but different
              thermodynamics (different enthalpy/entropy balance; 2) The structural
              stabilization of Nef by inter-domain interactions; 3) The coupling of binding
              and inter-domain interactions.  These studies will involve a combination of
              approaches such as experimental thermodynamics (isothermal titration
              calorimetry and differential scanning calorimetry), hydrogen/deuterium exchange
              studies, statistical thermodynamic analysis and structure-based thermodynamic
              computations.  The identification and separation of interactions that
              contribute to binding affinity and cooperative effects from those contributing
              to binding affinity only, will permit the design of ligands that elicit
              variable cooperative effects and are able to better modulate protein
              function.

Cells are not bags containing different biological macromolecules
              performing their function in a random and chaotic fashion.  On the contrary,
              biological macromolecules are tightly regulated by an intricate net of
              interactions.  Different macromolecules communicate with each other through
              interactions among themselves or with small molecules.  These interactions
              provide the foundation to all the regulatory processes found within living
              organisms.  The long-range objective of this project is to develop a
              fundamental description of protein interactions and the mechanisms by which
              these interactions elicit the responses existing at the core of signaling
              processes.  

