Title       : Centromeric Chromatin and Chromosome Segregation In Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0131480

Award Number: 0131480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ines Pinto ipinto@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,1154,1156,1228,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The faithful transmission of chromosomes during cell division is essential for
              the well-being of an organism and the maintenance of the species.  During cell
              division a complex set of structures work in concert to ensure the accurate
              transmission of chromosomes to daughter cells.  A key structural component in
              this process is the centromere, the specialized DNA region within each
              chromosome where a complex of proteins, the kinetochore, assembles to attach
              the chromosome to the mitotic spindle.  Many studies have provided evidence
              that chromatin structure is critical in maintaining the fidelity of chromosome
              transmission, but its roles are not understood.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to understand how chromatin structure affects chromosome
              segregation, in particular the role that histones, the protein components of
              the nucleosome, have in this process.  This study uses the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae as a eukaryotic model organism.  The simple gene organization in S.
              cerevisiae, the ease of genetic manipulations, and the strong evolutionary
              conservation of the histone proteins and nucleosome structure make this yeast
              an excellent model system to study histone function.  Current evidence
              indicates that histone H2A, one of the four histones that form the core of
              chromatin, is essential for normal centromere function.  This project aims to
              identify factors that interact with histone H2A in the formation of a
              functional centromere-kinetohore complex, using genetic and biochemical
              approaches.  The first major goal is to isolate and identify factors that
              suppress the increase-in-ploidy defect caused by a mutant histone H2A. 
              Previous work showed that the ploidy increase caused by the H2A mutant is
              associated with defects in chromosome segregation and an altered centromeric
              chromatin structure.  Thus, suppressors of the ploidy increase will provide
              important information about the components required for the formation of
              centromeric chromatin and their interactions with kinetochore proteins.  The
              second major goal is to characterize two previously isolated suppressors of the
              increase-in-ploidy defect of the H2A mutant.  These suppressors, PLO1 and PLO2,
              encode two new and uncharacterized proteins with significant homology to each
              other, and both proteins share limited sequence similarity to the mammalian
              centromere-binding proteins CENP-E and CENP-F, respectively.  The
              characterization of PLO1 and PLO2 will determine the relevance of this homology
              with respect to their function.  Preliminary work indicates that PLO1 is
              involved in some aspect of chromosome segregation.  

These studies will
              advance our knowledge of the factors that interact with histones and
              kinetochore proteins at the centromere, and will help to elucidate the
              mechanisms by which centromeric chromatin controls chromosome segregation. 
              Ultimately, this work will provide insight into a basic cellular process
              essential to maintain the integrity of an organism's genetic information.

