Title       : Dictionary of American Regional English
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0131882

Award Number: 0131882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan H. Hall jdhall@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joan Houston Hall and the staff of
              the Dictionary of American Regional English (DARE) will continue their
              documentation of regional and social variation in American English.
              Specifically, they will concentrate on entries to appear in Volume V of DARE
              (Sl-Z), which is projected for publication in 2008. Three volumes of DARE have
              been published by the Belknap Press of Harvard University Press (A-C, 1985;
              D-H, 1991; I-O 1996), and the fourth (P-Sk) is expected late in 2002. DARE is
              based both on an extensive program of fieldwork conducted in 1,002 communities
              across the United States between 1965 and 1970, and on a massive collection of
              written sources (including materials such as diaries, letters, newspapers,
              novels, folklore collections, government documents, and electronic collections)
              that document our language from the seventeenth century to the present. 
              

The Dictionary of American Regional English provides full historical
              treatment of the words, phrases, and pronunciations that vary from one part of
              our country to another or that characterize the usage of one social group or
              another. Unique to DARE is the inclusion of maps (adjusted to reflect
              population density rather than geographic area) showing distributions of words.
              Although language change is inevitable over time, and though some have
              predicted the "homogenization" of American English, DARE makes it clear that
              regional words and phrases are still very much alive in our language. The
              published volumes of DARE and the tape recordings and other materials collected
              for the project have been used by linguists, sociolinguists, and other
              lexicographers. They have also proved useful to forensic linguists, who have
              used them to help identify crime suspects; to physicians, who may not be
              familiar with the folk terms for ailments and diseases; and to psychiatrists
              and gerontologists who often use diagnostic tools that ask patients to give the
              names of everyday objects - in such cases, not knowing that there are regional
              terms for the objects can skew test scores, resulting in misdiagnoses. The DARE
              volumes are also widely used by teachers, researchers, librarians, journalists,
              historians, and playwrights, as well as by readers who simply delight in our
              American English language.

