Title       : Optical Studies of Condensed Phase Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0131524

Award Number: 0131524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1103665            (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham R. Fleming fleming@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Graham R. Fleming of the University of California at Berkeley is funded for
              his research on optical studies of condensed phase dynamics by a grant in the
              Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division.  He will develop and
              apply new ultrafast laser spectroscopic methods to the dynamics of complex
              condensed phase systems.  Specifically, he will develop heterodyne-detected,
              two-dimensional Raman spectroscopy, and two-color resonant photon echo
              spectroscopy for the study of liquid and glass dynamics, and the study of
              multichromophoric molecular complexes, respectively.  Undergraduate, graduate,
              and postdoctoral students will receive training and education in experimental
              design, measurement, and theoretical analysis.  Students will be prepared to
              lead independent research programs at major research universities, National
              Laboratories, and private industry.

Exceedingly short pulses of laser light
              with duration of a few thousandths of a trillionth of a second will be used to
              follow the motions of molecules during chemical reactions, and to study the
              processes involved in the collection and transfer of solar energy in nanoscale
              devices designed to mimic and extend the light harvesting function of the
              natural photosynthetic system of plants.  The long range goals of this research
              are to reveal the design principles necessary for renewable energy sources
              based on solar energy, to provide new analytical methods for the study and
              optimization of chemical processes, and to train the next generation of U.S.
              scientists. 

