Title       : CAREER: Near-infrared Intersubband Transitions in Low-dimensional Semiconductor
               Structures: Material, Devices and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0131945

Award Number: 0131945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holger Schmidt hschmidt@soe.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              True excellence in a career as university professor requires commitment,
              creativity and excellence in both research and education. In this proposal, a
              plan for implementing a research and education program in Electrical
              Engineering at the University of California, Santa Cruz is presented.

In the
              research part of the proposal, the investigation of intersubband transitions in
              low-dimensional semiconductor quantum structures in the near-infrared
              wavelength range is put forward as an area of research activity with long-term
              potential for advancing materials science, engineering and physics. As optical
              networks become a reality and solutions for higher data bit rates are sought,
              intersubband transitions are an attractive alternative to currently existing
              technologies for pushing the limits of optical communications to higher
              bandwidths. Increasing the bandwidth is essential for building faster and less
              costly communication products and systems. The material properties of
              antimony-based heterostructures for near-infrared intersubband transitions will
              be studied. This includes determining band offsets and optical nonlinearities
              as well as the growth of self-assembled quantum dots. Secondly, new devices
              such as ultrafast wavelength converters and photodetectors will be designed and
              realized. Finally, new physics can be explored. Examples are nonclassical light
              emission from quantum dots at room temperature and quantum interference effects
              such as electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) in intersubband
              transitions.

The educational aspects of this proposal are tailored to
              improve the educational programs in Electrical Engineering at the Universitt of
              California, Santa Cruz, on several levels: within the University -lf, the local
              community, as well as the global scientific community at large. To this end, a
              number of measures are proposed for each community. Within UC Santa Cruz, the
              emphasis lies on building up the educational program of a very new department
              by developing new classes for the curriculum and introducing new ideas for
              classroom instruction. Activities involving the local community have a special
              emphasis on interaction with students who are at critical points in their
              school careers. Examples are open houses for high school seniors and lectures
              and demonstrations at middle schools to expose students at a younger age to
              science. Finally, the paramount importance of global interaction between
              students and scholars is recognized by proposing a number of programs, which
              institutionalize and foster relations, that will be beneficial to all
              participants. This includes establishing partner schools for exchange programs
              and joint educational projects, for example with the German Academic Exchange
              Service
(DAAD).


