Title       : What Do Lake Malawi Cichlid Fishes See?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0131285

Award Number: 0131285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Carleton karen.carleton@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The cichlid fishes of the Great Lakes of East Africa are a classic example of
              rapid adaptive radiation.  Hundreds of species of these fishes have evolved
              from a common ancester in the past one million years.  Their rapid speciation
              is thought to result in part from sexual selection, in which female mate
              preferences drive the evolution of male color patterns.  As male color patterns
              change to better match the preferences of females, fish with these new color
              patterns become new species which no longer interbreed with fish having the old
              color patterns.  In order to understand how this happens, we need to know how
              cichlids choose mates.  This requires an understanding of t he visual
              sensitivities of these fish and whether visual sensitivities differ among
              species.  

This project will examine several aspects of visual communication
              in the cichlid fishes of Lake Malawi, Africa.  First, we will quantify the
              diversity of visual sensitivities in a broad range of cichlid species by
              sequencing the five cone opsin genes and measuring their relative expression
              levels in the retina. We already know that some Malawi cichlids are sensitive
              to ultraviolet wavelengths while others are not.  This survey will determine
              whether ultraviolet sensitivity is widespread in this group and how it evolved.
               Second, we will measure the hues of cichlid color patterns as compared to
              their natural environment.  This will determine whether color patterns also
              contain significant contributions in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum.
              Third, we will relate the visual system and color patterns in order to
              determine the conspicuousness of the color patterns as seen"through cichlid
              eyes."  These studies will be related to ecological or behavioral factors to
              determine whether color usage is modified in different localities or under
              different social situations.  We will also examine the importance of water
              quality and optical transmission for visual communication.  Lake Malawi has
              historically been one of the clearest lakes in the world.  Maintaining its
              clarity may be an important factor in preserving the spectacular diversity of
              these fishes.

The proposed effort will provide important scientific
              contributions to our understanding of how species diversity arises and is
              maintained.   In addition, this work will integrate biological and physical
              approaches to understanding visual communication.  It will also support the
              scientific training of a minority graduate student who will be fully funded by
              this project.   

