Title       : Numerical Simulations of Topological Defects in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2002   
File        : a0131573

Award Number: 0131573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Pelcovits pelcovits@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George B. Loriot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on
              topological defects in liquid crystals. The PI seeks to elucidate the structure
              and dynamics of topological defects in liquid crystals with the use of
              large-scale numerical simulations of phenomenological liquid models of liquid
              crystals. Topological defects will be created by molecular dynamics simulations
              of rapid quenches to ordered phases of systems consisting of 500,000 or more
              liquid crystalline molecules. A variety of methods will be used to locate
              defects, including finite element analysis and visualization techniques.
              Particular attention will be paid to the core structure of defects and the
              effects of hydrodynamic flow on the dynamics of the defects. Students will be
              trained in the arts of parallel programming, scientific simulation, and
              visualization.

This award supports theoretical research and education on
              liquid crystals which are materials with properties intermediate between those
              of solids and liquids. They are important for technological applications such
              as display devices, and layered liquid crystalline structures are relevant to
              biological research on lipid bilayers. The phase diagrams of liquid crystalline
              materials are particularly rich, as is their topological defect structure.
              Topological defects play an important role in a range of condensed matter
              physics phenomena including equilibration processes, certain phase transitions,
              and confined systems. The PI seeks to elucidate the structure and dynamics of
              topological defects in liquid crystals with the use of large-scale numerical
              simulations of phenomenological liquid models of liquid crystals. Topological
              defects will be created by molecular dynamics simulations of rapid quenches to
              ordered phases of systems consisting of 500,000 or more liquid crystalline
              molecules. A variety of methods will be used to locate defects, including
              finite element analysis and visualization techniques. Particular attention will
              be paid to the core structure of defects and the effects of hydrodynamic flow
              on the dynamics of the defects. Students will be trained in the arts of
              parallel programming, scientific simulation, and visualization

