Title       : Molecular and Genetic Dissection of Hyphal Anastomosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0131355

Award Number: 0131355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $630000             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Louise Glass lglass@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Filamentous fungi grow by tip extension, branching and hyphal fusion to form a
              hyphal network that makes up a fungal individual.  Although tip growth and
              branching have been extensively studied in filamentous fungi, essentially
              nothing is known about the mechanism of hyphal fusion or the function of the
              formation of a hyphal network.   Studies by this laboratory on the hyphal
              fusion process using live cell imaging and confocal microscopy in the
              filamentous fungus, Neurospora crassa, have revealed a complex and carefully
              regulated biological process with obvious consequences to the fungal
              individual.  Hyphal fusion is a way to increase cytoplasmic flow and
              interconnectedness of hyphae, which may be important in intra-hyphal
              communication that influences hyphal pattern formation and developmental
              processes.  Hyphal fusion in filamentous fungi is comparable to cell fusion
              events in other organisms, such as fertilization events between egg and sperm
              and somatic cell fusion events that result in syncytia, such as myoblast fusion
              during muscle differentiation. The hyphal fusion process must be carefully
              regulated because inappropriate cell wall breakdown would result in lysis of
              the hyphae.  N. crassa  is the best filamentous fungus to assess the process
              and function of hyphal fusion in filamentous fungi because of its tractability
              for live cell imaging techniques (http://www.neurospora.com/), full genome
              sequence information
              (http://www-genome.wi.mit.edu/annotation/fungi/neurospora/), the availability
              of hyphal fusion mutants, and the ease of genetic and molecular techniques. 
              Preliminary results indicate that a series of signaling events are required for
              hyphal fusion, one of which is mediated by a map kinase pathway.  Hyphal fusion
              mutants show physiological and developmental defects, suggesting that the
              failure to form a hyphal network has physiological consequences.  The
              objectives of this project  are to characterize hyphal fusion mutants using a
              combination of live cell imaging via confocal microscopy, and genetic and
              biochemical analysis to elucidate the mechanism of self-signaling, polarization
              and membrane fusion.  The ultimate goal is to understand how the formation of
              the hyphal network allows a fungal individual to perform the physiological and
              developmental processes required to complete its life cycle.  Understanding the
              hyphal fusion process in filamentous fungi will not only reveal the function of
              the formation of the hyphal network, but will provide a model for cell fusion
              events in other eukaryotic organisms. 

