Title       : Generalized Electrical Response for Extended Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0131932

Award Number: 0131932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford E. Dykstra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Clifford Dykstra of Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis is
              supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program for research
              that aims to provide new and more detailed understanding of molecular
              electrical response, both for isolated molecules and for extended assemblies of
              molecules.  This effort includes a series of high-level ab initio evaluations
              of properties, and the modeling or representing of these properties through
              transferable tensor quantities associated with specific atoms in specific
              bonding environments.  Applications will include learning how external
              electrical environments can control or affect nucleation and conformational
              changes in molecules, the alignment of aggregating molecules, and electrically
              operated molecular switches.  Other applications involve the affects of the
              surrounding molecular medium on response properties of molecules, in particular
              on nonlinear response to applied fields.  The outcomes of this research are
              expected to enable a generalized response analysis of interactions necessary
              for a variety of useful predictions, yet be simple enough for large-scale
              molecular simulations.  Useful applications to nanoscale data storage
              technology are anticipated. 

This project will enable better models of
              intermolecular interaction to be built, including those systems that are
              amenable to both quantum and classical description.  Research outcomes are
              expected to enable useful applications to nanoscale data storage technology via
              electronic control of molecular orientation and conformation.
