Title       : Collaborative Research: Variation in Control Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0131993

Award Number: 0131993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95615              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Potsdam potsdam@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Maria Polinsky and Eric Potsdam
              will conduct two years of linguistic research on the omission of redundant
              information in sentences with a particular syntactic structure. In sentences
              with predicates such as 'try' and 'intend', the subject of trying/intention is
              identical to the subject of the sentence describing the intended event. Such
              identity is called a Control relation. This research project will
              systematically document the ways that natural languages realize the Control
              relation, something that has not been done before. The project also includes
              the development of a database of representative Control patterns in the world's
              languages. The research team will conduct fieldwork on three little-described
              languages: Malagasy (spoken in Madagascar) and Rutul and Tsaxur (spoken in
              Dagestan, NE Caucasus). The empirical findings will inform syntactic theory,
              which should be constrained so as to permit and model all and only the observed
              range of Control structures.

This research will enhance scholarly
              understanding of several under-documented languages and advance linguistic
              theory by motivating modifications to account for Control structures. The
              project will also provide training for future researchers by involving graduate
              and undergraduate students in a unique collaboration between the University of
              California in San Diego and the University of Florida. Finally, the project
              will serve to establish contacts between linguists in the United States and
              linguists in Madagascar and Dagestan, where fieldwork for the project will be
              conducted.

