Title       : Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0131326

Award Number: 0131326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The prevalence of water-insoluble compounds in biological systems has driven the
              evolutionary development of families of hydrophobic ligand carrier proteins.
              Just as there are carrier proteins that function to solubilize and deliver
              hydrophobic molecules in the circulatory system (e.g., lipoprotein particles,
              albumin, etc.), there exists a homologous family of proteins that are found
              intracellularly. These proteins, which have been termed the fatty acid binding
              proteins (FABPs), are responsible for the solubilization and delivery of
              hydrophobic ligands within a cell. The FABPs bind most avidly to fatty acids
              and retinoids. The signature feature of all FABPs is a Beta-barrel fold forming
              an internal, water-filled cavity that serves as the ligand-binding domain. A
              1:1 non-covalent complex is typically formed between the protein and the ligand
              and once inside, the ligand is sequestered from the external milieu.  The
              adipocyte FABP (FABP4) has been studied in detail as a model for
              structure-function relationships of the fatty acid binding proteins. The
              investigators hypothesize that FABP4 functions to donate insoluble long chain
              fatty acids to acyl CoA synthetase producing a soluble lipid (acyl CoA). To
              test this hypothesis, they will: (I) evaluate the effect of FABP4 on the
              catalytic activity and ligand binding properties of very long chain acyl CoA
              synthetase and (ii) examine the physical interaction of FABP4 with the acyl CoA
              synthetase using microcalorimetry and map the interaction site(s).

