Title       : Bubbles, Drops, and Vortices in Cryogenic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0131111

Award Number: 0131111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Williams gaw@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project investigates the properties of transient,
              laser-produced bubbles that are created in liquids such as water, ethanol, and
              liquid argon.  As the bubble collapses, the gas inside is compressed and
              heated, giving rise to emission of a fast pulse of luminescence at the
              minimum-radius collapse point.  The spectrum of the luminescence will be
              measured, and high-resolution studies of the bubble dynamics near the collapse
              point should lead to a detailed understanding of the nature of the
              light-emission mechanism and its relation to sonoluminescence.  A second area
              of interest is superfluid fog generated by an ultrasonic transducer under the
              surface of liquid helium.  These novel aerosols will be investigated to examine
              if there are significant differences from normal fogs.  Sound attenuation
              measurements in the fog will be undertaken to examine the coupling to the
              superfluid second-sound mode in the droplets.  The third area of interest is
              the superfluid phase transition of submonolayer helium-4 films adsorbed on a
              new mesoporous silica ceramic substrate known as MCM-41.  This substrate has
              long uniform cylindrical pores, and materials can be fabricated with pore
              diameters between 18 and 100 Angstroms.  This will allow theories of the
              superfluid transition involving quantized vortex pairs to be be tested, and
              should allow a measurement of the vortex core size in these submonolayer
              superfluids.  This research will contribute to the Ph.D. training of several
              graduate students.  They will learn a broad range of skills useful in many
              different fields of science and technology, including cryogenic techniques,
              acoustics methods, and applications of lasers and optical spectroscopy.

This
              condensed matter physics project involves three different activities.  In one,
              a pulsed laser focused to a point is used to create bubbles in liquids such as
              water, ethanol, and liquid argon.  As the bubble collapses, the gas inside is
              compressed and heated, giving rise to a fast pulse of light.  The spectrum of
              the light will be measured, and the bubble motion will be studied.  This will
              allow an understanding of the nature of the light emission, and how it is
              related to a similar phenomenon known as sonoluminescence.  In the second
              project, the properties of fogs generated in the vapor above liquid helium will
              be investigated.  Since the droplets making up the fog are superfluid, this
              system is different from ordinary fogs.  The attenuation of sound in the fog
              will be measured, to examine if there is any coupling to the superfluid waves
              in the droplets. In the final project superfluid properties of very thin helium
              films (less than an atomic layer in thickness) will be studied.  These films
              are adsorbed on a new type of substrate, a silica ceramic, which has long
              cylindrical pores, with very fine pore diameters that are only tens of atoms in
              diameter.  The work will test theories of the superfluid properties in the
              ceramic, and will allow fundamental parameters of the superfluid to be
              measured.  This research will contribute to the Ph.D. training of several
              graduate students.  They will learn a broad range of skills useful in many
              different fields of science and technology, including cryogenics, acoustics,
              and applications of lasers and optics. 

