Title       : Workshop on the Correlates of Verb-Initial Word Order; Tucson, Arizona; February
               2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0131761

Award Number: 0131761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Carnie carnie@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi B. Harley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Collberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A classic means of grouping languages typologically is in terms of the order of
              their basic constituents:  subject, object, and verb.  In traditional
              typological literature, these groups are thought to correlate with other
              syntactic phenomenon.  Most research on these correlates has focused on western
              European languages, which primarily exhibit subject-verb-object (SVO) or
              subject-object-verb (SOV) orders.  Although these studies has been fruitful,
              more attention needs to be given to languages that display other orders,
              particularly verb-subject-object (VSO) ordering.  VSO ordering characterizes
              less than nine percent of the world's languages.  Examples of VSO languages are
              Irish, Welsh, Arabic, Chamorro, Berber, Breton, Samoan, and Tongan. VSO
              ordering relatively rare, and it is highly problematic in terms of theoretical
              syntax.  This has led to considerable controversy among scholars with respect
              to the degree to which most or all of the VSO languages share specific
              syntactical properties.  This award will support a workshop that will bring
              together about 18 leading scholars representing diverse language families and
              different theoretical orientations to share their findings regarding
              verb-initial word-order correlates and to discuss the implications of
              structural approaches to word order and to the predictive power of analyses to
              word-order correlations.  The workshop is scheduled to be held in Tucson,
              Arizona, in February 2003.  In addition to invited speakers, participation also
              will be open to other individuals who submit abstracts of presentations for
              anonymous review beforehand.  Outcomes are the workshop are expected to be in
              the form of a compilation of papers presented in a special issue of a journal
              or in a book.

This workshop will help advance linguistics by increasing
              communication among linguists who have employed different theoretical
              perspective and by increasing knowledge of how expanded understanding of VSO
              languages can advance understanding of syntax and linguistic theory as a whole.
               The workshop also will advance understanding about VSO languages, many of
              which, like Irish, are in danger of extinction.

