Title       : The Mechanism of RNA Binding by the U1A Protein: A Model for Understanding the
               Kinetics of RNA/Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0131782

Award Number: 0131782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ite Laird-Offringa ilaird@hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              RNA-binding proteins are critically important to many regulatory processes in
              the cell. The
largest family of RNA-binding proteins carries one of more RNA
              recognition motif domains
(RRMs). RRM-containing proteins occur in all living
              organisms, and play a role in most
processes involving RNA, including
              splicing, RNA export, translation, and mRNA decay. U1A
is a spliceosomal
              protein that carries two RRMs. Its N-terminal RRM mediates tight and
              specific
binding to its RNA hairpin target (U1hpII)in U1 small nuclear RNA.
              U1A is one of the most
extensively studied RNA-binding proteins and has been
              used as a paradigm for specific and tight
RNA recognition by RRM-type
              proteins.  However,  to date the knowledge of the mechanism of
RNA-binding by
              U1A and other RNA-binding proteins has been largely limited to a static
image,
              in which the dynamics underlying the interactions are poorly understood. This
              project is
aimed at obtaining detailed kinetic insight into the U1A/U1hpII
              interaction using powerful state-
of-the-art BIACORE technology to observe, in
              real time, the assembly and dissociation of the
RNA/protein complex.  Analysis
              of the kinetics of the U1A/U1hpII interaction will help elucidate
the sequence
              of events that occurs during binding. More importantly, it will also provide
              general
insights into the dynamics of RNA/protein interactions, an area that
              has thus far remained largely
unexplored. Knowledge of the kinetics of
              RNA/protein interactions is highly relevant, since
biological systems are
              dynamic; the rates of binding and release can affect the sequential
assembly
              of RNA/protein complexes and the function and intracellular localization of
              RNA-
binding proteins, as well as their ability to compete for binding sites
              on RNA.
