Title       : Existentials at the Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0131767

Award Number: 0131767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75118              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Chung schung@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James McCloskey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Sandra Chung and James McCloskey
              will conduct three years of linguistic research on the form, meaning, and use
              of expressions of existence in five languages whose linguistic profiles differ
              radically from English. Previous research has established that these
              expressions fall into a small range of types, closely connected in form to
              expressions of location, possession, and impersonality. Relatively little is
              known about variation in the meaning and use of such expressions. Consistent
              with the intuition that existence is a fundamental concept, many linguists and
              philosophers hold that sentences expressing existence have a constant function,
              whatever their form. But most previous research involved a small number of
              well-known and closely related languages. Broader investigation is needed to
              reveal whether differences in form are correlated with specific differences in
              meaning and in patterns of use in these expressions. Chung and McCloskey's
              research team will investigate these questions in three languages of the
              Pacific (Chamorro, Maori, and Samoan) and two languages of Europe (Breton and
              Irish). Data collected through fieldwork with native speakers, from written
              language materials, and in naturally occurring discourse will address these
              questions: (1) In each language, what linguistic forms express existence? (2)
              How are these forms used in discourse? In narrative, for instance, can
              sentences expressing existence introduce new characters or reintroduce familiar
              characters? (3) What meaning restrictions, if any, are imposed on expressions
              of existence? Can they be used to assert the existence of a particular object,
              of a kind of object, of every object of a certain kind? (4) Does the linguistic
              form of these expressions correlate with their meaning or function?

This
              research is important for several reasons. First, it will broaden the range of
              languages whose expressions of existence are studied in depth. Second, it will
              contribute insights into the cross-linguistic interaction of linguistic form,
              sentence meaning, and discourse function. Third, the five languages to be
              investigated are endangered. This research will contribute significantly to
              their documentation, which is especially important in the under-studied areas
              of meaning and language use.

