Title       : One Site Fits Both: Catalysis in R67 Dihydrofolate Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0131394

Award Number: 0131394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth E. Howell lzh@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) is an important enzyme in folate metabolism as
              its reaction product, tetrahydrofolate, is required for the synthesis of
              numerous metabolic intermediates. Inhibition of DHFR results in blockage of DNA
              synthesis, leading to cell death. Type II DHFR, typified by R67 DHFR, is
              unrelated genetically and structurally to chromosomal DHFRs. The active R67
              DHFR is a homotetramer, with a toroidal (doughnut) shape and a single pore that
              contains a single active site. The presence of only one active site per
              oligomer is because only two molecules can bind concurrently to the active
              enzyme, most likely due to steric constraints. Among several possible
              complexes, the productive complex is the one containing the substrate
              (dihydrofolate) and cofactor (NADPH) bound to the active enzyme. The
              constraints imposed by the symmetry of the oligomer as well as the absence of
              catalytic bases suggest R67 DHFR may be a primitive enzyme. R67 DHFR's ability
              to form multiple ligand complexes as well as the dual roles for several active
              site residues supports the hypothesis that R67 DHFR uses a variation of 'hot
              spot' binding which is focused in an enzyme active site rather than at
              protein-protein interfaces. The hot spot strategy is an excellent design for a
              primitive enzyme to adopt. A drawback of the symmetry is that binding to NADPH
              and dihydrofolate cannot be independently optimized. To further evolve R67 DHFR
              function would require a gene duplication event, followed by divergence of the
              gene copies. In this project, recombinant DNA technology has been used to
              produce quadruplicated R67 DHFR gene, resulting in a single polypeptide
              possessing the essential structure of tetrameric R67 DHFR. The goal of this
              research is to introduce asymmetric mutations that will allow independent
              manipulation of each half of the active site pore, leading to favorable
              interactions with NADPH on one side and complementary interactions with
              dihydrofalate on the other. This strategy may result in a more efficient
              enzyme.
