Title       : Antimicrobial Peptide Defenses in Amphibian Skin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0131184

Award Number: 0131184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise A. Rollins-Smith louise.rollins-smith@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,1155,1305,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Global declines of amphibian populations are a source of great concern.  Several
              decades ago, Rachel Carson drew the attention of the world to the plight of
              wild birds suffering from the effects of DDT.  Her book raised the grim
              prospect of a "silent spring" without the optimistic choruses of song birds.
              Today, we are faced with the prospect of a new silent spring as the world's
              populations of colorful and remarkable amphibians continue to decline and even
              disappear.  The causes of global amphibian declines are unknown.  Recent
              studies have implicated one or more skin-invasive pathogens in the declines. 
              Among the immune defense mechanisms used by amphibians is the production of
              antimicrobial peptides in specialized granular glands (also called poison
              glands) in the skin.  These packets of natural antibiotics can be emptied onto
              the skin when the amphibian is injured or when danger is sensed.  Although the
              antimicrobial peptides made and secreted by amphibian skin are thought to play
              a role in protection from environmental pathogens, there is very little direct
              evidence to demonstrate this.  The studies proposed here are designed to test
              the hypothesis that antimicrobial peptides produced in the skin are
              synthesized, processed, stored, and secreted in sufficient concentrations to
              play a role in defense of the skin from pathogens present in the immediate
              environment of the skin. The project will address a number of specific
              questions about these immune defenses and provide greater insight into this
              important innate immune defense mechanism.  
The first objective is to examine
              the relative abundance and pattern of secretion of antimicrobial peptides on
              the skin surface of model amphibians at rest in comparison with the levels
              present following maximal secretion induced by agents that stimulate the
              sympathetic nervous system and thus mimic a natural attack by a predator.  This
              analysis will be accomplished by using mass spectrometry (MS) in which a highly
              sophisticated instrument separates individual peptides from a mixture of
              peptides based on their unique molecular weights.  These studies will establish
              reproducible sampling and analysis protocols and provide baseline data for
              additional studies.  Other experiments are designed to deplete antimicrobial
              skin peptides in some frogs and examine the susceptibility of these frogs to
              infection by skin pathogens in comparison with other frogs that contain the
              full set of skin peptides.
The second objective is to study the synthesis of
              precursors of antimicrobial peptides in the skin of model amphibians at rest
              and following discharge of peptides.  The immediate precursors of peptides are
              messenger RNAs that have been transcribed from DNA.  These studies will examine
              the levels of steady state synthesis, and kinetics of induction of new
              synthesis following secretion of peptides.  They will provide baseline data for
              studies of how environmental factors may affect the synthesis of antimicrobial
              peptides.
The third objective is to examine the effects of cold temperature,
              glucocorticoid hormones (stress hormones), and local inflammatory responses on
              synthesis and secretion of antimicrobial peptides in the skin. These studies
              are designed to determine whether environmental "stressors" may inhibit the
              natural production of antimicrobial peptides and thus render the amphibian host
              more susceptible to disease.

