Title       : REV Gene Family and Meristem Initiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0131492

Award Number: 0131492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clark clarks@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0131492
Clark	

All above ground post-embryonic development in Arabidopsis
              occurs through the initiation of organs at shoot and flower meristems. Thus,
              the initiation of shoot and flower meristems is a fundamental prerequisite for
              subsequent pattern formation and cell differentiation.  The role of the
              REVOLUTA (REV) gene in the initiation of lateral shoot and flower meristems has
              recently been described.  Genetic and molecular analysis suggested that REV
              acts early in the process of lateral meristem initiation, and is required, at
              least indirectly, for the reactivation of known meristem regulators, such as
              the CLV loci, WUS and STM, at lateral positions.  REV encodes a type III HD-zip
              protein, containing a putative DNA-binding  homeodomain, a leucine zipper
              domain likely involved in dimerization, and a START sterol/lipid binding
              domain.  Other analysis has revealed that REV is also required for normal
              vascular organ development.  Consistent with these developmental roles, REV is
              expressed early in vascular tissue, organs and lateral meristems.
REV is a
              member of a closely related gene family consisting of five genes in
              Arabidopsis.  The variable expressivity of rev mutant phenotypes and the lack
              of phenotypes for loss-of-function alleles of other gene family members suggest
              that these genes may exhibit functional redundancy.  Indeed, other gene family
              members have been implicated in organ development/polarity and vascular
              development through the analysis of gain-of-function alleles.  Functional
              redundancy is likely to be very common among plant genomes, where the level of
              gene duplication is significantly higher than among animal genomes.  However,
              little is known about the nature of functional specification among an entire
              gene family that has evolved multiple developmental roles.  The REV gene family
              thus makes an excellent system in which to determine the relationships between
              the various gene family members and the potentially overlapping roles that each
              plays in plant development.
This proposal seeks to use the REV gene family to
              characterize a functionally interrelated gene family, as well as advance
              understanding of lateral meristem development.  Loss-of-function alleles have
              been identified for each family members and genetic analysis will determine to
              which development processes each gene contributes.  The mRNA expression
              patterns of each gene will be assessed, as well as the functional equivalence
              of the proteins encoded by each gene.  Potential downstream targets will be
              characterized.  This work will provide a critical comprehensive understanding
              of the relationships, and perhaps origins, of a functionally interrelated gene
              family.  This will be of significance to other plant developmental systems in
              which the action of redundant genes are important.  Furthermore, the roles of
              key regulators of lateral meristem initiation will be characterized.



