Title       : Controlling the Pathway of Electron Transfer in Bacterial Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0131776

Award Number: 0131776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Su Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen K. Taguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Light-initiated electron transfer within the photosynthetic reaction center is
              the primary event in solar energy conversion by photosynthetic organisms.  The
              core of the photosynthetic reaction center from purple nonsulfur bacteria is a
              quasi-symmetric heterodimer, providing two potential pathways for transmembrane
              electron transfer.  Past measurements have demonstrated that only one of the
              two pathways (the A-side) is used to any significant extent upon excitation
              with red or near infrared light.  Recently, Dr. Woodbury has found that
              excitation with blue light into the Soret band of the reaction center gives
              rise to photochemistry along the alternate or B-side pathway apparently within
              a 200 fs laser pulse.  The spectral signature of the states formed, and their
              long (nanosecond) lifetime at low temperature, are characteristic of charge
              separated states involving the anion of the B-side bacteriopheophytin.  This
              opens the door to a whole new array of measurements attempting to understand
              both the mechanism and the function of B-side electron transfer in the reaction
              center.   This research project centers around the interplay between the free
              energy of the charge separated states, which can be varied over a large range
              using mutants that alter the P/P+ potential, and the energy of the photon used
              in excitation.  Preliminary data suggests that the more favorable the
              energetics of B-side electron transfer, the lower the energy of the photon that
              is required to initiate B-side transfer. The physiological function of B-side
              electron transfer is not yet known.  One possibility is that it could rapidly
              quench the excited states formed from blue or UV light absorption by reaction
              center cofactors and surrounding tryptophan residues.  Several experiments
              involving mutants that disrupt B-side transfer are planned to see if reaction
              centers are more susceptible to UV and blue light damage without functional
              B-side photochemistry.  Finally, in order to generate a series of new mutants
              with spectrally defined functional properties (loss or A-side electron
              transfer, increased B-side transfer, etc.), Dr. Woodbury will develop a
              directed evolution methodology that utilizes entirely optical means of both
              screening and selecting cells from a large library of reaction center
              mutants.

