Title       : Conference: Macromolecular Organization & Cell Function to be held August 4-9,
               2002 at Queens College, Oxford University, England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0131022

Award Number: 0131022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda S. Winkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1154,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Gordon Research Conference on Macromolecular Organization and Cell Function
              has met biannually since 1987. This award will provide partial funding for the
              ninth conference in this series (and the fourth consecutive one to be held at
              Queens College, Oxford University), which is scheduled for August 4-9, 2002.  
              The first conferences concentrated on the role of enzyme organization in
              metabolic regulation, but the subject matter  has been greatly broadened over
              the years. The conference now deals with virtually all aspects of cell
              function, focusing on the intracellular organization of cellular components,
              the mechanisms underlying and controlling this organization, and the essential
              role of intracellular organization in cell function. Conference topics continue
              to evolve in relation to the questions that can be effectively addressed by new
              technologies and the integration of different disciplines.  For example, many
              of the focus areas of the conference are now especially relevant for the
              application of emerging technologies in proteomics and structural biology.
              Sessions in the upcoming conference include "Nucleic acid super-structures and
              gene expression," "Organization of cellular metabolism," "The cytoskeleton and
              cell function," "Organization of translation," "New technologies for the 
              post-genomic era," "The virtual cell," and "Molecular imaging in intact living
              systems." This is a truly interdisciplinary conference that has, throughout its
              history, successfully promoted the exchange of ideas among scientists with
              diverse backgrounds, expertise, and interests. These range from the areas of
              biochemistry, cell biology, and molecular biology to biophysics, physics, and
              instrumentation, as well as theoretical biology and mathematical modeling. 
              Discussion leaders help to integrate the various presentations into cohesive
              themes and speakers are asked to provide basic background information to enable
              those in other disciplines to understand the material. Ample time for general
              discussion at the end of each session typically leads to a lively exchange of
              ideas and provides topics of conversation for poster sessions and mealtimes. A
              priority is also placed on facilitating the participation of young scientists,
              not only junior faculty members, but also postdocs and graduate students. This
              has been accomplished both by providing supplemental funding (for 11 students
              and 14 postdocs in 2000) and, starting with the 2000 conference, by
              establishing a session of "poster flashes" in which junior attendees are
              invited to make a brief oral presentation to promote interest in their posters.
              The conference has consistently received high ratings in surveys completed by
              the participants and attendance has been steadily increasing.


