Title       : Changing Substrate Recognition by the S. meliloti DctA Transporter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0131376

Award Number: 0131376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Kahn kahn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Legume plants like alfalfa, soybean and peanut, can obtain the nitrogen
              compounds needed for growth through a symbiotic association with
              "nitrogen-fixing" bacteria.  These bacteria are able to take relatively inert
              dinitrogen gas from the atmosphere and biochemically convert it into a more
              useful form.  This conversion has a cost-the bacteria require plant-derived
              carbon compounds that can be metabolized to obtain energy for the nitrogen
              fixation reactions and a microaerobic environment in which the biochemistry can
              occur.  It is thought that the bacteria receive a major fraction of their
              nutrition in the form of dicarboxylic acids and their ability to import
              dicarboxylic acids using the bacterial DctA protein has been shown to be
              essential to bacterial nitrogen-fixation.  After traversing a plant membrane,
              dicarboxylic acids are imported by symbiotic bacteria using the DctA
              dicarboxylate transporter, a member of a glutamate transporter family of
              proteins better known for their role in neurotransmitter metabolism.  In
              free-living growth, DctA can transport a number of physiologically important
              compounds, including malate, fumarate, succinate, aspartate and oxaloacetate. 
              It is unclear how important each of these is in symbiosis. Mutations of the
              Sinorhizobium meliloti DctA protein will be isolated that have altered
              specificity or affinity for the different substrates in order to discover more
              about the transport properties of DctA.  Various mutant isolation strategies
              will be used, including isolation of functional mutants resistant to a toxic
              DctA substrate, mutants with higher transport rates with dicarboxylic acids for
              which DctA has low affinity, and mutants able to compete well for limiting
              amounts of dicarboxylic acids.  Transport properties of the mutants will be
              determined and, in addition, the mutants will be tested on their alfalfa host
              plants for the ability to support symbiotic nitrogen fixation.  In this way,
              the mutants function as in vivo probes of nodule function.  Analysis of the
              mutants should contribute to the understanding of the relationship of DctA
              sequence to substrate recognition and thus provide a novel view into one class
              of this important family of transport proteins. 
