Title       : Collaborative Research: Chemical Orientation in Turbulent Environments Above
               Natural Stream Substrates: The Role of Bed Roughness and Turbulence Structure
               on Search Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0131320

Award Number: 0131320
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Moore pmoore@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative proposal describes research that links stream hydrodynamics,
              turbulent transport of odor signals, and the sensory ecology and behavior of
              the crayfish Orconectes rusticus.  Crayfish use water-borne chemical signals
              ("odor plumes") as navigational cues for locating food, burrows, or mates, and
              for avoiding predators.  The nature of the spatial and temporal variability
              ("structure") of the odor plumes depends on the hydrodynamic conditions, which,
              in turn, depends on the physical characteristics of the stream.  The goal of
              the proposed research is to understand how crayfish use odor plumes to locate
              underwater objects.  In particular, we plan to investigate how the crayfish
              navigational behavior varies under different hydrodynamic conditions
              (associated with different types of stream substrate materials). By focusing
              our attention to the changes in odorant structure and associated orientation
              behavior over different substrate types, we hope to gain insight into the
              specific algorithms and information cues used by the animals.  

Ultimately,
              the knowledge gained from the proposed study could be used to design robotic
              vehicles to search for dangerous underwater objects, or to protect crayfish
              habitat in managed ecosystems.  Environmentally, crayfish are keystone species
              for many stream habitats and understanding the physical, biological, and
              chemical factors that influence their behavior will lead to a broader
              understanding of stream ecology and the human impact on stream ecology. In
              particular, detailed knowledge of how stream habitats influence the
              distribution of chemicals will provide the information necessary to understand
              not only crayfish and stream ecology, but will help elucidate the physical
              mechanisms behind pollution transportation in streams and their possible impact
              on stream ecosystems.

The work outlined in this proposal is a collaborative
              effort between a biologist and engineer that will lead to cross-disciplinary
              training of both graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, new
              technical advances will be achieved through the development of high-speed and
              fine-scale three-dimensional measurements of chemical concentrations in
              different natural flow regimes. The development and quantification of these
              techniques will benefit a wide array of fields from oceanography to
              environmental engineering. 

