Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0131112

Award Number: 0131112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Ewing age@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ayusman Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry R. Allcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Weinreb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Mallouk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at Pennsylvania State University will
              acquire a X-ray diffractometer with CCD detector and stereo microscope for
              small molecule diffractometry. This equipment will enhance research in a number
              of areas including the following: single crystal and fiber diffraction of
              phosphazene-based compounds and molecular inclusion clathrates; design and
              characterization of multi-dimensional covalent networks; novel methods of
              molecular recognition and the preparation of fluorescent chemical sensors;
              structural relationships between bioinorganic analogues and metalloprotein
              active sites; molecular recognition and artificial photosynthesis in lamellar
              and zeolitic solids; relating structural details to the mechanistic aspects of
              organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis; structural characterization
              of complex natural products and their synthetic precursors; and
              structure-function relationships in enantioselective catalysts.

The X-ray
              diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three
              dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
              it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule
              relative to the neighboring molecules.  These studies will have an impact in a
              number of areas, including the preparation of more efficient catalysts,
              chemical sensors, and biochemistry.  
