Title       : Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Spatio-temporal Models of
               Biogeophysical Fields for Ecological Forecasting: A Cross-Disciplinary
               Incubation Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0131937

Award Number: 0131937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey M. Henebry ghenebry@calmit.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Chomicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tony Fountain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1718,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
EIA-0131937
Henebry, Geoffrey
University of Nebraska - Lincoln

BDEI:
              Spatio-temporal models of Biogeophysical Fields for Ecological Forecasting:
A
              Cross-Disciplinary Incubation Activity 

Summary



We are now in an era
              of intensive earth observation: orbital platforms generate myriad remote
              sensing
datastreams across a range of spatial, temporal, spectral, and
              radiometric resolutions. The number and
variety of "eyes in the skies" are
              scheduled to increase significantly over the next few years. This
veritable
              data deluge necessitates new ways of thinking about transforming remote sensing
              data into
information about ecological patterns and processes. These
              datastreams hold the promise for
environmental decision support. Yet, there is
              a critical need for theories and tools that will enable efficient
and reliable
              characterization of spatio-temporal patterns contained in image time series. We
              think that
such tools must be based on ecological expectations of land surface
              dynamics, analogous to
climatological expectations. Ecological expectations
              would summarize across specific regions the typical
temporal development of
              spatial pattern in biogeophysical fields. We have a robust principal method
              for
extracting ecological expectations from remote sensing datastreams:
              projecting image time series into
pattern metric spaces. To make ecological
              forecasting an operational possibility, we need the capability
to establish
              and to update complex spatio-temporal baselines that will enable prediction of
              the usual and
identification, quantification, and assessment of the unusual. A
              recent NASA workshop on Earth Science
data mining identified anomaly detection
              as a key characteristic of scientific data mining; yet, there are
relatively
              few examples of spatio-temporal data mining of biogeophysical data. Our
              approach is spatio-temporal datamining that is informed by relevant domain
              expertise. Representation of the spatio-temporal
entities and fields in
              databases must support sophisticated spatio-temporal queries: a capability that
              does
not currently exist.


