Title       : Neutral Lipids in the Flowers of Arabidopsis Mutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0131358

Award Number: 0131358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Huang anthony.huang@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              				

	Sexual reproduction in plants is a dynamic process, and its mechanism
              and control are complicated.  Research into the molecular basis of flowering
              and fruiting is intellectually intriguing as well as practical in agriculture. 
              Promoting sexual reproduction could enhance the yield of fruits and seeds. 
              Suppressing the process could increase the yield of vegetable produce.  Other
              possible manipulations include utilizing male sterile genes to produce hybrid
              seeds, generating seedless fruits, and promoting self fertilization.

	A
              major step in sexual reproduction is the interaction between the male
              sperm-containing pollen and the female egg-containing part in the flowers. 
              This interaction is initiated largely by the molecules on the pollen surface. 
              The pollen coat contains water-insoluble lipids and semi-water-soluble proteins
              as the major constituents.  These lipids and proteins originate from
              subcellular particles in the parental cells enclosing the maturing pollen.  The
              laboratory of Professor Anthony Huang at the University of California at
              Riverside will study these subcellular particles in Arabidopsis, a model plant
              of the cabbage family.  The studies will emphasize the lipid and protein
              constituents in terms of their selective degradation and retention, their
              transport to and deposition on the pollen surface, and their function in the
              pollination and fertilization process.  Arabidopsis mutants deficient in the
              lipids and proteins will be employed to dissect this parent-to-pollen
              pathway.

	The results will delineate the mechanism of the control that the
              parental cells have  over pollen maturation, especially on the pollen coat
              formation.  They will also define the functions of the abundant lipids and
              proteins in the pollen coat in pollination, pollen germination, and tube
              penetration into the stigma.

