Title       : Processing Conversational Utterances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0131877

Award Number: 0131877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194258             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Holtgraves 00t0holtgrav@bsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ball State University
	      
	      Muncie, IN  47306    317/289-1241

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Conversation is the most basic site for language use; it is the primary site for
              language acquisition and most likely the context within which language emerged.
              Despite its fundamental importance, research on the cognitive processes
              involved in the comprehension of conversational utterances has remained
              relatively rare. Instead, past empirical research has focused primarily on how
              readers comprehend and remember narrative or expository text. However,
              conversations differ from texts in fundamental ways, and understanding how
              people process conversational contributions will require attention to these
              differences. This research program is an attempt to contribute to our
              understanding of the social-cognitive processes involved in conversation
              comprehension. This will be accomplished by focusing on conversational
              utterances as intention-based, interpersonal, collaborative acts and examining
              how these acts are produced and understood. A series of experiments employing a
              variety of measures (reading times, interpretation speed, memory) will be
              conducted to examine how, and in what way, people comprehend and remember the
              actions that speakers perform with their conversation turns. An important
              aspect of this research will be the development of a method for examining
              participants' (rather than observers') on-line processing of their
              conversations. This will be accomplished with the development of an artificial
              conversation agent that can simulate human language use.

