Title       : Symposium: "Physiological Ecology of Rocky Intertidal Organisms: From Molecules
               to Ecosystems," Anaheim, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0131317

Award Number: 0131317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Helmuth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this symposium is to assess the role of physiological performance in
              driving the ecology of populations and communities in a key ecosystem, the
              rocky intertidal zone.  Physiological performance and its genetic determinants
              have long been considered important determinants of community structure and of
              species' distribution within the intertidal.  However, an understanding of how
              interactions between the physical environment and organismal physiology drive
              community dynamics has remained elusive.  With the advent of new molecular and
              biochemical techniques, the potential for using physiological indicators of
              state to address ecological questions is of increasing interest to ecologists. 
              Conversely, physiologists are actively investigating the role of complex
              environmental signals (as opposed to constant conditions) in influencing
              organismal physiology. This symposium will bring together researchers from a
              range of disciplines to educate workers about the potential strengths and
              limitations of each other's approaches. 

This symposium has three main
              goals:  (1) to assess the state of knowledge in the field of intertidal
              physiological ecology, and to determine what questions have yet to be
              successfully addressed, (2) to introduce ecologists to the strengths, and
              potential pitfalls, of using physiological indicators of state (e.g., heat
              shock proteins, RNA:DNA ratios, etc) for examining ecological questions, and
              (3) to discuss how best to merge studies conducted under necessarily
              simplified, controlled conditions, with those conducted under more complex,
              time-varying conditions in the field.  This symposium will be hosted by the
              annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)
              from January 2-6 in Anaheim, California. 

