Title       : Evolution of a Fundamental Morphogenetic Process in the Volvocine Algae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0131565

Award Number: 0131565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirk kirk@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0131565
Kirk

Our goal is to determine how an essential morphogenetic process
              requiring extensive intercellular coordination arose as multicellular Volvox
              evolved from a unicellular ancestor resembling its closest unicellular
              relative, Chlamydomonas.  In order to be able to swim, at the end of
              embryogenesis Volvox must turn right-side-out in a gastrulation-like process
              called "inversion,"  which involves coordinated cytoskeletal rearrangements and
              changes in cell shape and motility.  Transposon tagged mutants with a variety
              of  inversion (inv) defects have been generated.  The first of these to be
              analyzed was Inv61, in which inversion is arrested at the halfway point as a
              result of a transposon insertion in invA, a gene encoding a novel kinesin that
              is localized in the embryo near the cytoplasmic bridges that play a key role in
              inversion.  We have cloned the C. reinhardtii orthologue of invA (iarA) and
              found that it encodes a kinesin (IarA) that is >90 % identical in aa sequence
              to InvA in both its motor and tail domains. 
Because invA encodes a
              microtubule motor, whereas invA mutants resemble wild-type embryos exposed to
              actomyosin inhibitors, we will explore the possibility that InvA acts as a link
              between the actin- and tubulin-based cytoskeletons in Volvox.  Meanwhile, we
              will study expression and localization of its orthologue, IarA, throughout the
              Chlamydomonas cell cycle, and will study the effects of blocking IarA function,
              using a dominant negative construct, antibody inhibition, or RNA interference. 
              We will use nuclear transformation to determine whether iarA can rescue the
              invA mutant.  If it does not, we will test chimeric iarA-invA constructs to
              define regions of InvA that are required to confer an inversion function on
              IarA.  The functional significance of such structural differences will then be
              tested with appropriate kinesin binding and/or motility assays.  If iarA does
              rescue invA, we will compare the proteins with which IarA interacts in
              Chlamydomonas versus those with which it interacts in Volvox.

