Title       : Vesicle Associated Myosin-V Motor Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0131470

Award Number: 0131470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449547             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Langford george.m.langford@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Our nervous system contains over a billion nerve cells. Nerve cells are
              specialized to transit electrical signals from cell to cell and from nerve cell
              to an effector cell such as a muscle cell. Nerve cells are able to store
              information in the form of learning and memory. To accomplish these tasks, the
              terminals of nerve cells, the sites of communication between cells, change in
              response to electrical activity. Actin filaments mediate the structural changes
              of the nerve terminal. Actin filaments also serve as tracks for the movement of
              cargo to the nerve terminal. An understanding of the mechanism by which actin
              filaments remodel nerve terminals and support the movement of membranous cargo
              to terminals are required to understand the processes of learning and memory.
              This project is designed to study how cargo is transported to the nerve
              terminal by the motor protein myosin-V. The nervous system of the squid, a
              marine invertebrate, will be used for these studies. The giant nerve fiber of
              squid is chosen for these studies because it is large enough to be dissected
              for observation without damaging its activity. The principal goal is to
              determine the mechanism by which transport of cargo is regulated. The proposal
              is divided into 3 projects. The first project is designed to understand how
              myosin-V binds to its cargo. The second project is to determine if binding of
              the motor to its cargo changes it from an inactive to an active state. The
              third project is to purify myosin-V in association with its binding partners
              and to identify the proteins that link the motor to its cargo. A combination of
              biochemical and cell biological experiments will be performed. FRET, a form of
              fluorescence microscopy that detects the direct binding of one protein to
              another will be used to determine whether regulatory proteins that bind to it
              affect the activity of myosin-V. Chemical cross-linking and antibody
              precipitation experiments will be used to identify protein partners of myosin-V
              that link it to its cargo. These studies will advance our understanding of the
              mechanisms of learning and memory.
