Title       : Steroid-Induced Gene Expression: A link to Ca[2+]-Regulated Exocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0131907

Award Number: 0131907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Andres   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1114,1132,1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Steroid hormones are small lipophilic regulatory molecules that profoundly
              influence basic processes of growth, homeostasis, and disease progression in
              developing organisms.  Unlike peptide hormone signals, most of the
              physiological responses mediated by steroids occur though a nuclear action of
              the ligand/receptor complex on responding genes (a genomic mechanism). 
              Although much has been learned over the past decade concerning the molecular
              details of receptor activation and transcriptional regulation of
              steroid-responsive DNA targets, little is known about how the qualitative
              differences in gene expression lead to long-term physiological changes in the
              responding tissue. This remains a fundamental question of cell biology. 
              

The fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, has contributed much to our
              understanding of the conserved processes of developmental signaling. It is also
              an attractive system in which to study steroid responses because only one
              steroid, 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone), is known to regulate the important
              postembryonic developmental transitions of molting and metamorphosis. 
              Furthermore, the salivary gland of the third larval stage offers a unique
              opportunity to correlate changes in gene expression with a tissue-specific
              physiological response. This is possible because the chromosomes within this
              tissue are polytenized. Thus, hormone targets are easy to identify because they
              often form puffs on the chromosomes (areas of local chromatin decondensation)
              in response to ecdysone. In addition, it is known that the salivary gland will
              respond to hormone by secreting massive amounts of glue proteins, which are
              later used by the animal to cement itself to a solid surface during
              metamorphosis. Because glue secretion and chromosome puffing occur over the
              same time interval, it has been suggested that one or more products of the
              puffing cascade control the secretion response.  

Work conducted in Dr.
              Andres' laboratory has confirmed the above hypothesis. By investigating the
              function of the puff genes in a secretion assay in which a GFP-tagged glue
              protein is used, they have identified a role for E63-1. This protein is
              directly induced by ecdysone, regulated by calcium ions, and associated with an
              unconventional myosin that is required for glue secretion.  The project
              supported by this award will test the hypothesis that, as part of the genomic
              response of the salivary gland to ecdysone, E63-1 is induced and cytoplasmic
              calcium levels are elevated, and that once E63-1 is complexed with calcium, it
              acts as a bona fide light chain for myosin VI to influence the movement of
              secretory granules.  

The aim of the work is to define the biochemical
              interaction between the E63-1 and myosin VI proteins, and to identify key
              molecules important in the ecdysone regulation of calcium levels using genetic
              screens. The project has the potential to make important contributions to a
              basic, but not well understood, mechanism of cell biology involving the
              integration of steroid and calcium signaling pathways. In addition, since most
              of the personnel conducting this work will be students, the project offers them
              a unique learning and training experience using a multi- disciplinary approach
              employing genetic, molecular, biochemical, and pharmacological methodologies

