Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution and Development of Retinal Organization in
               Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0131370

Award Number: 0131370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88148              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance L. Cepko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We know very little how evolution produces new species adapted to particular
              ecological niches.  This project is to study two closely related species, one
              diurnal and the other nocturnal.  The nocturnal animal has more rods for night
              vision, fewer cones, a bigger eye and a different eye conformation than the
              diurnal one.  How many and what kind of genetic changes produce this
              constellation of differences?

We hypothesize that a relatively simple
              change, an alteration of when maximal cell proliferation occurs to favor rods
              over cones in the nocturnal species, is the essential genetic change, and the
              rest of the alterations in eye conformation are "epigenetic" as eye growth
              patterns fall under the control of rods.  To test this, we bring the together
              the expertise of three laboratories.  The Finlay lab at Cornell University has
              developed the quantitative techniques for comparing the developmental schedules
              and morphologies of different animals; the Cepko lab at Harvard Medical School
              has pioneered studies of cell proliferation and differentiation of the eye; the
              Silveira lab of the Federal University of Para, Amazonia, Brazil has produced
              the fundamental descriptions of the visual systems of these species.  We will
              investigate the development of the retina and the eye in both species, looking
              at the expression of developmental control genes, regulators of the cell cycle,
              and markers of cell type to see exactly what has changed between the two.  At
              the heart of the project lies the question whether genes, over evolutionary
              time, have produced coordinated patterns in response to repeatedly encountered
              challenges like the shift from diurnal to nocturnal living.

As a
              multi-institutional  international collaboration, this project has special
              features.  The universities of the north of Brazil struggle economically, so
              this project provides a link for the researchers and students of Amazonia to
              new technologies, research resources and ideas.  All of the students, North
              American and Brazilian, benefit from the exposure to different educational
              systems and expectations; we plan to provide more formal means for student
              exchange in the near future.  Financial support for the animal center is also
              very important: in addition to its role as a research facility and breeding
              colony, the center serves as a cachement center for animals confiscated by
              poachers and those endangered by natural or man-made ecological challenges.
              




