Title       : RUI: Genetic Analysis of Conjugation in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0131175

Award Number: 0131175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Cole COLEE@STOLAF.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tetrahymena thermophila, a freshwater ciliated protist, is uniquely well suited
              for ana-lysis of nuclear and chromosomal events associated with both the cell
              division cycle and conjugation (sexual reproduction).  Ciliates exhibit an
              unparalleled richness of developmental landmarks during mitosis by virtue of
              the precisely controlled proliferation and patterning of basal bodies that form
              the ciliated oral apparatus in the cell cortex.  This cortical program is
              coupled to both nuclear division and cytokinesis and provides an easily
              visualized, richly detailed "clock" of developmental events during cell
              division. This developmental program offers unique opportunities for
              understanding the genetic control of nuclear-cortical interactions that
              regulate a cell's progress through this cell-cycle dominated landscape. Three
              features recommend this system for developmental analysis: a wealth of
              developmental landmarks, the ability to carry and express mutations with lethal
              phenotypes, and the ability to study mutations that target both mitotic and
              meiotic mechanisms without affecting cell viability.  The goals of this project
              are three fold:  1) Build and screen an "antisense" library to search for genes
              involved in conjugal development,  2) Launch a biochemical investigation into
              "fenestrin" and other proteins associated with the pronuclear exchange
              junction,  3) Uncover the cytogenetic basis of the developmental "checkpoint"
              associated with conjugal  arrest in "star"-cell lines that abort normal
              conjugal development. 
Work involving these 3 methods of analysis will shed
              light on the genetic basis of sexual development in the ciliate Tetrahymena
              thermophila and its integration with the cell division cycle.  This project
              will also help to link events occurring at the cell surface with events
              occurring within the cell's nucleus during the cell division cycle while
              providing a superior research training experience for undergraduate students. 
              

