Title       : Theoretical Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2002     
File        : a0131780

Award Number: 0131780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465782             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshiko Ichiye ichiye@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1956,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research, funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program
              in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
              Computational Program in the Division of Chemistry, is to understand the
              influence of water on the structure and function of proteins.  To accomplish
              this, Dr. Ichiye is developing fast and accurate treatments of solvent for
              computer simulations of biological macromolecules.  This project focuses on the
              development of the soft, sticky dipole (SSD) potential energy model of water. 
              The single-site SSD model is a considerable advance over three-site models
              commonly used for biological simulations because it has better structural,
              dielectrical and dynamical properties and yet is four times faster in molecular
              dynamics simulations.  The SSD model represents a water molecule as a
              Lennard-Jones sphere, a point dipole, and a tetrahedral "sticky" hydrogen bond
              potential.  Therefore, the interaction energy between two water molecules
              depends only on the position and orientation of each molecule in the SSD model,
              whereas it depend on the positions of the oxygen and the two hydrogens of each
              molecule in the three-site models.  The aims in developing the model are (1) to
              investigate its pure water properties further, (2) to improve the water-solute
              interaction, (3) to implement it into a molecular mechanics computer program
              for biological macromolecules, and (4) to add electronic polarizability.  The
              scientific aims are (1) to characterize water in and around rubredoxin and
              other iron-sulfur proteins, particularly near the metal site, and (2) to
              determine the physical origins of the anomalies in the temperature-dependence
              of water density and in the dynamics of supercooled water.  Since these issues
              require very long simulation times and may depend crucially on the hydrogen
              bond potential, SSD is ideal for these studies.

The development of the SSD
              model will impact many areas of research.  For the scientific community as a
              whole, the development of fast but accurate models of water for computer
              simulations is important for understanding the complex behavior of water as
              well as for greatly improving the speed and accuracy of simulations involving
              solutes (including biological macromolecules) in aqueous solution.  In this
              research, the accurate characterization of the structure and dynamics of water
              near the metal sites of iron-sulfur proteins is crucial because it strongly
              affects their electron transfer properties.  Specifically, computer simulations
              will be used to investigate whether water entering the protein via "water
              gates" serves as a mechanism for controlling electron transfer specificity in
              these proteins.

