Title       : Analysis of a Bifunctional Plastid Nucleoid Protein: Ferrodoxin-Sulfite
               Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0131269

Award Number: 0131269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine Heinhorst sabine.heinhorst@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The importance of chloroplast-encoded genes for plant growth and productivity is
              unquestionable, yet surprisingly, many aspects of molecular biology and
              biochemistry of the organelle, such as the control of chloroplast development
              and intracellular communication of signals related to this process are only
              poorly understood.  The sequencing of several higher plant plastomes has
              provided valuable information of types and number of genes that are encoded by
              ctDNA and has greatly increased our knowledge of organellar gene regulation on
              the transcriptional and translational level.  On the other hand, higher-level
              structural determinants that very likely have profound effects on the
              expression of plastome-encoded genes are essentially unknown.  Since the
              plastome is associated with proteins that condense the multiple genome copies
              into compact complexes termed nucleoids, rearrangements of nucleoids must occur
              to allow transcription, replication, recombination and repair to take place. 
              While nucleoid protein composition is known to change with plastid development,
              the molecular details of these remodeling events and the way(s) in which they
              affect the fundamental aspects of plastid nucleic acid metabolism are unknown. 
              This project addresses the molecular basis of nucleoid structure and function
              by studying expression and regulation of interaction with DNA of a major
              structural protein of plastid nucleoids.  Through a combined genetic,
              biochemical and cell biological approach, the biological significance of the
              association of DCP68/SiR with the plastid nucleoid will be assessed.  DCP68/SiR
              appears to be a bifunctional plastid protein that fulfills dual roles in the
              organelle as a nucleoid constituent and an enzyme of the sulfate reduction
              pathway that leads to the biosynthesis of cysteine and other sulfur-containing
              metabolites.  Because of the intriguing possibility that regulation of nucleoid
              structure and function is connected with that of the assimilatory sulfur
              metabolism, the results from this study will contribute to an understanding of
              the molecular processes and regulatory strategies in the plant cell that govern
              organellar development and function.  The study will begin to elucidate the
              contribution of nucleoid structure in regulating plastid gene expression and
              plastome transmission and maintenance, and will thereby aid future efforts to
              develop efficient plastome genetic manipulation strategies.

The
              photosynthetic organelles (chloroplasts) of plant cells contain their own
              genetic material (DNA) that encodes many products of great importance for plant
              growth and productivity.  Chloroplast DNA is bound to proteins that condense it
              into so-called nucleoids whose structure and, presumably, function, change
              during plant growth and development.  This project addresses the effects
              chloroplast DNA-compacting proteins have on the ability of the organelle's DNA
              to provide a template for duplication and for information retrieval.  The study
              focuses on the chloroplast nucleoid protein DCP68, which condenses DNA and
              plays the additional role in the chloroplast of converting sulfur minerals to a
              form that is usable by the plant.  The study will examine how environmental and
              internal signals affect the interaction between DCP68 and chloroplast DNA and
              might connect nucleoid structure and function with other metabolic aspects of
              the organelle.
