Title       : Capturing Data in the Field: An Application Framework for Easily Creating Custom
               Data and Metadata Entry Forms on Handheld and Desktop Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0131178

Award Number: 0131178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $887634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Gaines gaines@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Blanchette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Schildhauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ecologists investigate a number of critical and diverse environmental issues,
              ranging from global climate change to the loss of biodiversity.  The data
              needed to support this range of research are highly complex and variable, and
              the data are often labor-intensive to collect.  These characteristics present
              distinct challenges for the collection and management of ecological data that
              are not being met by the range of available software tools.    Prospects for
              the preservation and re-use of ecological data are further compromised by their
              tendency to be poorly described and inadequately archived. As a result,
              potentially relevant data that have been collected in the past are often
              difficult to find or difficult to interpret because of ambiguities in how they
              were collected. The bottleneck is a lack of standard methods or formats for
              data documentation or easy-to-use frameworks that assist in these
              functions.
These data management and access problems will be solved by
              reducing inefficiencies and errors during the process of capturing
              environmental data in the field. This will be achieved through the design and
              building of a set of flexible, easy-to-use software tools for handheld field
              devices, as well as desktop computers-that will streamline field data
              collection, data entry and data documentation.   These software tools will
              assist in the creation of data entry forms that are well-structured,
              unambiguous, and visually pleasing-thus eliminating the need for customized
              database development for each new project, or the often haphazard and
              error-prone entry of data into "free-form" spreadsheets.  Finally, researchers
              and students will be trained in the use of these new tools.
There is a growing
              need for synthetic ecological studies that will provide for a more powerful
              understanding of living systems, over larger spatial scales and longer time
              periods. Such syntheses require integrating environmental data collected from a
              number of sources. To achieve this goal, it is imperative to pay more attention
              to how the raw data are collected and preserved.  The research should have
              major impacts on the scientific community by doing this-facilitating the
              capture, documentation and accessibility of ecological and environmental data. 
               This software is not only intended to simplify the process of collecting data,
              but also to promote sound data practice by enforcing logically consistent data
              structures.  

