Title       : Conference: Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and Segregation; June 28 -
               July 3, 2002, Snowmass Village, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0131278

Award Number: 0131278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Li   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted A. Weinert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Research into the structure of yeast chromosomes and the mechanisms and control
              of their replication and segregation continues at a rapid pace. To bring
              together scientists working in this area, the Federation of American Societies
              for Experimental Biology (FASEB) will sponsor the seventh convening of the
              research conference "Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication and Segregation"
              to be held June 28-July 3, 2002, at Snowmass Village, Colorado.  The goal is to
              provide a forum where members of all subdisciplines studying the metabolism,
              structure and behavior of yeast chromosomes can meet to exchange ideas. This
              conference has a strong tradition of presenting primarily unpublished results
              and is attended by most of the leaders in the field.  Principal investigators
              are present for, and actively participate in, the entire meeting.  This small
              conference provides a good balance of students, postdoctoral fellows, and
              junior and senior researchers, with an informal atmosphere that contributes
              greatly to interactions between younger and older scientists.  

This is the
              only conference that is specifically devoted to this topic and brings together
              its diverse subdisciplines. Integration across research fields has become ever
              more critical, and assembling experts from separate but related fields provides
              a unique opportunity for the intellectual cross-fertilization, insight and
              understanding that can lead to discoveries beneficial to all society. 


