Title       : Theoretical Studies of State to State Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0131998

Award Number: 0131998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342700             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Schatz SCHATZ@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              George Schatz of Northwestern University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop new theoretical methods for
              describing the dynamics of chemical reactions that take place in the gas phase.
               The overall project goal is to advance computational methods that provide a
              quantitative description of measurable properties of reactions involving atoms
              and small molecules (up to 6 atoms).  Three interconnected research topics will
              be explored.  First, reactions where spin-forbidden processes due to
              intersystem crossing are important will be described.  Second, the effect of
              reagent vibrational excitation on the rate constants for reaction will be
              characterized, with particular emphasis on determining what kinds of reagent
              excitation are needed in order to achieve the most efficient reaction rates
              enhancements.  Third, approaches for generating global analytical potential
              surfaces for simulating reactive processes will be explored.  Research outcomes
              are expected to be useful for characterizing chemical reactions that are
              important in atmospheric and combustion chemistry, and in addition will find
              applications in describing laser chemistry and molecular beam experiments.
              

The dynamics of chemical reactions in the gas phase continues to be a
              vibrant area of basic research.  This project has relevant applications to
              atmospheric and combustion chemistry, as well as providing a fruitful meeting
              ground between theory and experiment.  Ultimately, the outcomes of this
              research will spill over into other fields, including dynamics in liquids,
              biomolecular simulation, gas-surface dynamics, and materials chemistry.
