Title       : Regulated DNA Deletion in Tetrahymena thermophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0131421

Award Number: 0131421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Chalker dchalker@biology2.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila excises an estimated 6000
              specific DNA segments from its somatic nucleus during development.  This
              project aims to understand the regulation of this massive genome reorganization
              and ultimately learn fundamental principles governing chromosome structure and
              genetic stability.  Understanding how particular DNA segments, called deletion
              elements, are selectively excised is challenged by the fact that they are quite
              diverse in size and sequence.  The PI's approach toward understanding how the
              cell recognizes these diverse sequences has been to understand in detail the
              mechanism of deletion of two DNA segments, called the M and R deletion
              elements, and thus identify common regulatory properties.  In this work, these
              elements will be mutagenized in order to identify the specific sequences that
              target these DNA segments for elimination.  Mutant deletion elements will be
              integrated into the genome such that their excision can be monitored during the
              process.  This will allow the determination of mutations in the identified
              cis-acting sequences that abolish the association between the element and
              proteins involved in excision.  A major goal of these mutational analyses is to
              delimit the sequences that activate the non-genic transcription of deletion
              elements and determine whether transcription is required for DNA deletion.  To
              further explore the molecular basis of epigenetic regulation of these DNA
              rearrangements, the minimal requirements for this regulation will be defined. 
              Several prior genetic studies support a model that RNA copies of the element
              produced from parental nuclei act as inhibitory signals that block DNA deletion
              of the homologous element.  This and other possible explanations will be
              tested. Combining studies that address both genetic and epigenetic regulatory
              components will expedite a comprehensive understanding of this process.
              

This project investigates a process of regulated DNA rearrangement that
              occurs during development of the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila. 
              The cellular machinery that accurately rearranges the Tetrahymena genome likely
              involves many of the components that ensure the proper genetic stability of
              this organism.  This research aims to understand how particular DNA segments
              are targeted for elimination.   Its long-term goal is to learn how removal of
              these DNA segments affects the normal genetic stability of the somatic genome. 
               Investigation of this process in Tetrahymena should provide fundamental
              insight into genetic mechanisms that operate in all organisms. 
