Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0131482

Award Number: 0131482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel M. Bowman bowman@euch4e.chem.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Joel Bowman of Emory University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to investigate improved computational
              methodologies with the aim of performing molecular dynamics calculations more
              efficiently than is currently possible.  This research will avoid a major
              computational bottleneck by using a novel method based on Hermite interpolation
              that will provide information on molecular motion using much sparser data.  The
              new codes, to be developed in collaboration with a numerical analyst, will be
              made available to the scientific community.  The new methodologies will be
              applied to studies of ketene photodissociation and the vibrational energies of
              the hydronium ion.  Research outcomes are expected to advance computational
              methods and the ability to understand molecular processes of importance in
              chemistry and biochemistry.  

Powerful computer programs currently exist to
              predict realistically the rates of chemical processes of importance in the
              diverse areas such as atmospheric chemistry, environmental chemistry,
              combustion chemistry, protein folding, and enzyme catalysis.  The methods and
              software that will be developed in this project will enable faster and more
              efficient use of these programs to predict, interpret, and guide experiments
              that explore useful chemical and biochemical phenomena.
