Title       : Bacterial Reaction Centers with New Photochemical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0131764

Award Number: 0131764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Allen jallen@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              JoAnn Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project, modifications of the photosynthetic reaction center from the
              purple bacterium, Rhodobacter sphaeroides, will be designed to incorporate
              original oxidation reactions involving the primary electron donor, a
              bacteriochlorophyll dimer.  This strategy has already been shown to be
              successful in elevating the oxidizing capacity of the reaction center, enabling
              the oxidation of nearby tyrosine amino acid residues.  A variety of techniques
              such as vibrational, magnetic resonance, and transient optical spectroscopy
              will be employed in the characterization of the modified reaction centers. 
              Specific goals include:  (1) To understand the role of proton transfer in the
              generation of amino acid radicals.  Recently developed hydrogen abstraction
              models have proposed a critical role for protons in the function of tyrosyl
              radicals.  The involvement of specific protons will be identified by performing
              measurements on mutants with alterations of possible proton-accepting amino
              acid residues. (2) To incorporate binding sites for manganese compounds that
              can be oxidized by the reaction center.  Water oxidation in photosystem II
              takes place at a manganese cluster that remains a challenging aspect of
              photosynthesis to understand at the molecular level.  The ability of the highly
              oxidizing reaction centers to oxidize manganese at increasingly more complex
              levels will be characterized. (3) To increase the yield of electron transfer in
              the highly oxidizing reaction centers by replacement of bacteriochlorophyll
              with chlorophyll in the dimer.  The yield of the modified reaction centers is
              presently restricted because the bacteriochlorophyll dimer uses relatively low
              energy near infrared radiation for excitation.  This limitation will be
              overcome by incorporation of chlorophyll, which absorbs higher energy visible
              radiation, into this site.  

In all photosynthetic systems, the primary
              conversion of light into chemical energy occurs in pigment-protein complexes. 
              By coupling the primary process in these complexes to secondary events, the
              photosynthetic apparatus is capable of creating energy-rich compounds. 
              Although the specific pathways vary among organisms, the general pattern of
              energy conversion is remarkably conserved, and an understanding of this process
              serves as the basis for current designs of artificial systems that mimic the
              photosynthesis.  The expansion of the capabilities of the reaction center by
              the design of reactions involving amino acid radicals, metal complexes, and
              alternate pigments will not only provide a novel strategy for studying
              reactions that are crucial in photosynthesis and other biological processes,
              but also will lead to the development of a well-controlled system for oxidation
              of specific substrates.

