Title       : Continuation of Scholarships for Archaeological Training for Native Americans
               and Native Hawaiians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0131236

Award Number: 0131236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miranda Warburton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Amer Archaeology
	      900 2nd St. NE #12
	      Washington, DC  200023557    202/232-8800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Miranda Warburton and the Society
              for American Archaeology will expand their Arthur C. Parker fellowship program
              which provides archaeological training for Native Americans and Native
              Hawaiians. Currently the fellowship provides $3,000 yearly to permit one
              student to participate in a summer archaeological field school or similar
              training activity. The NSF award allow an additional three awards to be made
              each year for a total of five years. Thus an additional 15 individuals will be
              supported. The program is administered by the Society for American Archaeology
              which has established rules for the competition, organizes evaluation of
              proposals and selects the awardees. The Society also widely announces the
              availability of these funds.  The most immediate goals of the fellowship are to
              encourage Native Americans and Hawaiians to pursue archaeological careers and
              also to gain insight and understanding which will be useful to the communities
              in which they reside.

Native Americans and Hawaiians are under-represented
              in the ranks of professional archaeologists and in part this is because of lack
              of familiarity with the field. Unfortunately Native American and Hawaiian
              communities are often at odds with archaeologists over who should control
              cultural remains and how these should be treated. In good measure this
              situation results from lack of mutual understanding in both communities. It is
              essential for the future of archaeology in America that links between the two
              groups be strengthened and that a corps of individuals who are familiar with
              both worlds be developed. The Society for American Archaeology program should
              help to accomplish these goals.

