Title       : Linking Ecology, Physiology and Human Land Use: The Impact of Environmental
               Stress on Disease Susceptibility in Larval Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0131229

Award Number: 0131229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Kiesecker jmk23@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa K. Belden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the role that infectious diseases play in natural communities is a
              key question in community ecology. Host-pathogen interactions, perhaps more so
              than other types of interactions  (e.g. predator-prey & competition), are
              largely determined by the physiological condition of the host.  To gain a
              predictive understanding of the impact that infection may have on host
              population dynamics requires a detailed understanding of host physiology and
              immunology.  Freshwater wetlands are primary habitat for snails serving as
              intermediate hosts for a variety of helminthic parasites including digenetic
              trematodes. Trematodes are responsible for hundreds of thousands of cases of
              human disease each year (e.g., schistosomiasis) and have been linked with
              developmental abnormalities in amphibians. Amphibian deformities, in particular
              those related to limb development, have now been reported throughout North
              America.  The widespread nature and apparent increase in the prevalence of
              deformities has lead to substantial interest from scientists and the general
              public. While preliminary laboratory experiments suggest that infection by
              trematodes can cause some deformities, researchers have pointed out that there
              is a need for more fieldwork to evaluate the association in nature.  In
              addition, some research has suggested that land use changes in wetlands, such
              as increased eutrophication and altered hydrology, may precipitate outbreaks of
              deformities by increasing abundance of intermediate hosts (snails).  We propose
              to examine the role of the host's hormonal response to land use changes
              (environmental stress) in terms of how it can regulate disease susceptibility. 
              The proposed project will complement an ongoing study examining how land use
              changes affect snail (intermediate host) abundance and therefore influence
              amphibian infection rates. This proposal will add significantly to our
              knowledge of how free-living animals respond physiologically to anthropogenic
              land use changes, and the data generated on host susceptibility will add
              significantly to the development of a predictive model for disease outbreak in
              this host/parasite system.  
