Title       : Effect of a Unique Maize Defense Proteinase on Caterpillar Midgut Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0131328

Award Number: 0131328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn S. Luthe dsluthe@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tibor Pechan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1148,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              When plants are attacked by herbivorous insects, they often respond by producing
              proteins that protect them from being eaten. We have shown that a unique
              enzyme, a protease, coded for by the gebe mir1, accumulates in certain
              insect-resistant corn lines when they are attacked by the fall armyworm
              caterpillar. We have transferred the gene, mir1, into other plant cells using
              genetic engineering technology. When caterpillars eat these transgenic plant
              cells, their growth is retarded by 60 to 80%.  It appears that caterpillars
              feeding on resistant plants or transgenic plant cells cannot use the nutrients
              in the plant for growth. Our hypothesis is that the protease damages the insect
              gut and prevents normal nutrient utilization.   The purpose of this research
              project is to determine if the unique corn protease damages specific structures
              in the insect gut.   To test this we will make mutations in mir1 that will
              change the characteristics of the enzyme.  One mutation will eliminate protease
              activity, the other will remove a unique region of the enzyme.   The mutated
              forms of mir1 will be transferred to plant cells. Transgenic plant cells that
              express mutated proteases will be fed to caterpillars.  Then growth and gut
              structure of caterpillars fed transgenic plant cells expressing normal and
              mutated proteases will be assessed.  If the protease activity is required to
              retard caterpillar growth and damage gut structure, then we expect that the
              normal protease will harm the caterpillars and the mutated forms will not.  In
              addition, we will make pure preparations of the normal and mutated proteases by
              expressing mir1 and its mutated forms in insect cells.  The purified proteases
              will be directly fed to the caterpillars to determine if they attack the insect
              gut. If the unique protease does specifically attack the insect gut, it may be
              possible, in the future, to use mir1 to genetically engineer plants to resist
              insect feeding.  


