Title       : Mitochondrial Function During Insect Programmed Cell Death
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0131523

Award Number: 0131523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Chamberlin chamberl@oak.cats.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,1155,1168,9109,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The dramatic and predictable changes in external and internal structures during
              molting and metamorphosis make insects ideal systems for studying the
              mechanisms underlying animal development. During the developmental process,
              tissues are restructured and obsolete cells are destroyed by a process called
              programmed cell death (PCD), which destroys specific cells in a manner that
              does not damage neighboring cells.  It is now clear from studies on mammalian
              cells that mitochondria, organelles that provide most of the energy (ATP) for
              the cell,  play a key role in the early steps of PCD. It is not known, however,
              if these organelles play a role in this process in insect cells.  The proposed
              research will reveal changes in insect mitochondrial function during PCD by
              studying the mitochondria isolated from the midgut epithelium of the tobacco
              hornworm (Manduca sexta). This epithelium is an ideal system for studying
              mitochondrial function during PCD because the larval midgut dies at a
              predictable time in development and the epithelium's large size allows for
              biochemical studies not possible on small tissues or single cells. If insect
              mitochondria are involved in PCD in a manner similar to that in mammalian
              cells, then early in the PCD process the mitochondrial membrane potential (DY)
              will depolarize (dissipate) and the organelle will release a small protein,
              cytochrome c,  into the cytoplasm. To test this hypothesis, mitochondria will
              be isolated from the midguts of larvae at different stages of metamorphosis,
              before and after the process of PCD begins. The DY of isolated mitochondria
              will be determined by monitoring the transmembrane distribution of a lipophilic
              cation. In addition, the cytochrome c content of the mitochondria as well as
              the cytoplasm will be measured to determine if release of this protein into the
              cytosol is an early event in insect PCD. The fact that changes in mitochondrial
              function occur early in PCD presents an interesting dilemma for cells.  The
              process of PCD requires ATP, yet the organelle that generates ATP is being
              altered during the cell death process. In order to understand how cells deal
              with this problem, the proposed research will employ metabolic control analysis
              to quantify how oxidative phosphorylation, the process by which mitochondria
              make ATP, is altered during PCD. In addition to studying mitochondrial
              function, the proposed studies will use electron microscopy to reveal how the
              structure of midgut mitochondria changes during metamorphosis and PCD. Finally
              it is hypothesized that the molting hormones, the ecdysteroids, are ultimately
              responsible for initiating PCD in the midgut epithelium. This hypothesis will
              be tested by studying whether an ecdysteroid agonist effects structural and
              functional changes in midgut mitochondria similar to those seen during
              metamorphosis. 
