Title       : Developmental Regulation of Axon Pathway Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0131647

Award Number: 0131647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine E. Beattie beattie.24@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Beattie
Lay Summary
Movement is controlled by connections established during
              development between motor neurons and muscle cells.  Motor neurons extend
              processes called axons out from their cell bodies, which leave the spinal cord
              and extend through the developing embryo to contact the appropriate muscle
              fibers.  This process, referred to as axon guidance, is a fundamental component
              of development and is essential for survival.  Axon guidance is highly precise
              with growth cones, the growing tip of axons, making few navigational errors as
              they extend along stereotyped routes or pathways.  While numerous examples of
              axon guidance events in vertebrates have been described at the cellular level,
              less is known about the molecules that control these events. The goal of this
              research is to elucidate the molecules and mechanisms that control motor axon
              guidance in vertebrates.  To this end, the experiments outlined in this
              proposal focus on mutations that disrupt motor axon guidance in the embryonic
              zebrafish.  Zebrafish is an excellent model system for studying vertebrate
              motor axon guidance due to its relatively simple nervous system, the ability to
              study embryos at early stages of development, and the capability to induce,
              recover, and clone mutations.  The mutation stumpy dramatically and
              specifically affects the ability of motor axons to reach their target muscles. 
              Instead of progressing along
their pathways, motor axons in stumpy mutants
              stop at intermediate targets; places along the pathway where growth cones
              normally pause, branch, or turn.  Stumpy functions to enable growth cones to
              proceed past intermediate targets and to reach their target muscle fibers.  A
              series of genetic, cellular, and molecular approaches will elucidate what kind
              of molecule stumpy is and how it is functioning.  Moreover, another mutation
              has been identified that interacts with stumpy at the genetic level indicating
              that these genes work together to promote normal motor axon guidance. Studying
              these mutations will provide novel insights into the genetic control of
              vertebrate motor axon guidance and will identify molecules that function in
              this essential developmental process.

