Title       : Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of the RNA Polymerase Specificity of Small
               Nuclear RNA Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0131151

Award Number: 0131151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Stumph   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) known as U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 comprise a
              highly abundant class of metabolically stable, non-polyadenylated RNA molecules
              that are required for pre-messenger RNA splicing in eukaryotic organisms. 
              These snRNAs are all synthesized by RNA polymerase II, with the exception of
              U6, which is synthesized by RNA polymerase III.  Despite this difference in RNA
              polymerase specificity, U6 genes and the RNA polymerase II-transcribed snRNA
              genes utilize similar cis-acting regulatory signals and overlapping sets of
              transcription factors for their expression.  The main goal of this project is
              to gain an understanding of the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for
              the selection of the correct enzyme (either RNA polymerase II or RNA polymerase
              III) at individual snRNA gene promoters.  In higher eukaryotes, transcription
              of both classes of snRNA genes requires an essential proximal sequence element
              (PSE) within the region 40-75 base pairs upstream of the transcription start
              site.  In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the PSE is recognized by the
              PSE binding protein (termed DmPBP) that contains three distinct subunits that
              closely approach the DNA.  Previous work in the principal investigator's lab
              has led to a working model in which the U1 and U6 PSEs act as differential
              allosteric effectors of DmPBP.  Conformational differences in DmPBP, in turn,
              are believed to be responsible for the subsequent downstream recruitment of the
              correct RNA polymerase.  Two distinct yet highly synergistic approaches will be
              undertaken to test the validity of this model.  First, germline transformation
              and Drosophila genetics will be employed to select mutants that have an altered
              RNA polymerase specificity at snRNA gene promoters.  The second approach
              involves targeted in vitro mutagenesis of the genes that code for the subunits
              of DmPBP.  The biochemical mechanisms, including conformational differences in
              DmPBP, that lead to changes in RNA polymerase specificity will be examined. 
              Particular interest will be focused upon identifying functional domains or
              amino acid residues required specifically for the recruitment of one RNA
              polymerase but not the other. 

For the genetic information that resides in
              DNA to be correctly read out, it is critical that the correct RNA polymerase
              must be recruited to any particular gene of interest.  This project will shed
              light on how this is accomplished at the molecular level.  The system under
              investigation in the principal investigator's laboratory also serves as a
              general model for macromolecular assembly and for understanding how subtle
              changes in macromolecular interactions can lead to significantly different
              biological outcomes.  The project will help us to understand how decisions
              among alternative biological pathways are made within cells.  Research training
              will be provided for students engaged in acquiring their B.S., M.S., and Ph.D.
              degrees in biochemistry and molecular biology.  Students with disabilities and
              from underrepresented groups will be active participants. 
