Title       : Molecular Control of Shh/Gli Signalling in the Vertebrate CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0131264

Award Number: 0131264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Matise matisemp@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0131264
Michael P. Matise

One of the greatest challenges to modern biology
              is to understand how complex, multi-cellular organisms such as humans develop
              from a single cell, the fertilized egg.  This single egg, the zygote, has
              virtually unlimited potential to generate all the millions of different cell
              types that are found in an adult mammal.  However, during development, the
              potential of cells becomes increasingly restricted as cell division and growth
              differentiate cells from one another in the adult organism.  One important
              mechanism that appears to distinguish cells from one another during embryonic
              development involves secreted signalling molecules that provide spatial
              information which is critical for establishing their position and hence their
              specific function or fate in the mature organism.  One such signalling molecule
              is known as Sonic Hedgehog.  Sonic Hedgehog activates a cascade of responses in
              cells that receive this signal.  A family of genes that have a central role in
              interpreting Sonic Hedgehog-supplied positional information are known as Gli
              genes.  Studies in the fruitfly have provided important insights into the
              mechanisms by which Gli family proteins transduce the Sonic Hedgehog signal. 
              In addition, mutations in Sonic Hedgehog and downstream genes, including Gli,
              have recently been implicated in cancers.
	This proposal seeks to utilize
              mouse genetics in order to explore the function of Gli genes in the development
              of the central nervous system. Some of the experiments proposed are designed to
              test whether aspects of the model for the role of Gli proteins in Sonic
              Hedgehog signalling developed in fruitflies are applicable to mammals.  By
              addressing basic issues relating to the regulation of this pathway, a greater
              understanding of the development of the central nervous system will be gained. 
              These insights will also provide valuable insights to our understanding of the
              mechanisms of cancers that involve Sonic Hedgehog and Gli gene
              abnormalities.


