Title       : Acquisition of a Pulsed Fourier Transform Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0131048

Award Number: 0131048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Wasielewski wasielew@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Hupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary A. Godwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick D. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities
              (CRIF) Program, the Department of Chemistry at Northwestern University will
              acquire a Pulsed Fourier Transform Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
              Spectrometer.  The new instrument will support research in the following areas:
               a) mapping electronic coupling within photogenerated radical ion pairs at
              fixed distances using time-resolved EPR spectroscopy (Wasielewski); b) direct
              observation of guanine cation radical in duplex DNA (Lewis); c) time-resolved
              applications in energy conversion chemistry: finding and identifying electron
              traps at photo-active interfaces (Hupp); d) time-resolved EPR of electron
              transfer within protein complexes (Hoffman); e) EPR studies on cobalt
              (II)-substituted zinc-binding domains (Godwin); and f) EPR studies of monoamine
              oxidase (Silverman).  

An electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer
              is an instrument used to obtain information about the molecular and electronic
              structure of molecules. It may also be used to obtain information about the
              lifetimes of free radicals which are often essential for the initiation of
              tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions.  These studies will have
              an impact in a number of areas, in particular the chemistry of photofunctional
              materials and biophysical chemistry.  

