Title       : A Proposed Enhancement of the Rhode Island Network for Computational Chemistry
               and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0131114

Award Number: 0131114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Williard Paul_Williard@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmie D. Doll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Stratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Departments of Chemistry at Brown University and at the University
              of Rhode Island will acquire a computer system to enhance the Rhode Island
              Network for Computational Chemistry and Physics.  The system will consist of
              Internet-2 linked computing clusters at Brown and URI.  Clusters at each
              institution will have a hybrid structure composed of two distinct layers. 
              Layer-I, the natural compute server for CPU-intensive, communications-tolerant
              applications, will consist of a larger number of loosely coupled processors. 
              Layer-II, designed for more communications-intensive applications, will be a
              smaller, more tightly coupled sub-cluster.  This equipment will enhance
              research in the following areas:  a) structure structure (Freeman); b) the
              dynamical behavior of liquids (Stratt); c) the generation of excited states of
              strongly quantum systems (Nightingale); and d) many-body quantum dynamics
              (Doll).    

A cluster of fast, modern computer workstations is vital to
              serving the computing needs of active research departments. Such a "computer
              network" also serves as a development environment for new theoretical codes and
              algorithms, provides state-of-the-art graphics and visualization facilities,
              and supports research in state-of-the-art applications of parallel processing. 
              
