Title       : Cellular Structure and Biology of the Helicosporidia: A Unique and Unknown Group
               of Invertebrate Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0131017

Award Number: 0131017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Drion G. Boucias dgb@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Byron Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Becnel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,1171,9169,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Helicosporidia are a unique assemblage of pathogens isolated from a diverse
              group
of invertebrates with only one named species-Helicosporidium
              parasiticum. Morphologically,
this group is defined by the production of an
              unusual cyst stage that encloses three ovoid cells and a single elongate,
              filamentous cell. These organisms were at one time considered to be 
protozoa
              or fungi but have been unclassified since 1931. Experiments outlined in this
              project
utilize the expertise of three research teams to explore the structure
              and function of this novel
pathogen. The approach taken in this project,
              dictated by the lack of biological information on
this organism, will provide
              a combination of morphology, life history, and molecular data. The
outlined
              objectives include a complete analysis of the in vitro developmental cycle of
              the
Helicosporidium sp. with an emphasis on the ultrastructure and replication
              of vegetative cells and
the morphogenesis of the infectious cyst. Preliminary
              examination has revealed that
Helicosporidia possess many unique cytological
              features, such as a pellicle that is formed by both
vegetative and cyst
              phenotypes, nuclei that enclose the cytosol, a number of undefined
              cell
organelles, and a harpoon-like filamentous cell. The combination of
              high-resolution light and
electron microscopy will provide detailed insight on
              the composition and structure of the surface,
wall structure, and internal
              morphology of this organism. Under controlled in vitro conditions,
time-lapse
              microscope studies will provide details on the developmental cycle of this
              pathogen.
Secondly, the in vivo infection process, development, and host range
              of the Helicosporidium sp
will be examined. Throughout the course of this
              study, cell-tracking technologies will be
optimized to analyze the ingress of
              this pathogen through the midgut barrier and its subsequent
development in the
              hemocoel. Unlike many insect diseases, Helicosporidium sp., although
isolated
              from an aquatic environment, can infect a wide range of terrestrial insect
              hosts. For
comparative purposes, both mosquito and lepidopteran larvae will be
              used to document the in
vivo cell cycle. To date, sequence data generated on
              rDNA and two proteins, actin and tubulin,
have demonstrated that Helicosporida
              belongs within the Chlorophyta and, as such, it represents
the first record of
              an insect-pathogenic alga. It should be noted that Helicosporidia
              nests
hierarchically within a group of organisms with radically different
              morphologies and life history
traits, allowing for comparative studies that
              can shed light on genes and structures that were
modified to achieve
              parasitism. Molecular studies will be directed at generating
              sequence
information on select genes from the Helicosporidium sp. and on EST
              libraries. A primary goal is
analyze the relationship between the genera
              Helicosporidium, Prototheca, and other members of
the Trebouxiaphyceae in
              order to gain a better understanding of the morphological, molecular,
and
              genetic changes that are correlated with the evolution of parasitism.
              Furthermore, analysis of
this sequence data in conjunction with morphological
              (ultrastructural) features will define the
taxonomic status and phylogeny of
              this organism. This project will provide support and training
for two graduate
              students and two undergraduate research assistants. The goal is to leverage
              the
combined talents of this group to provide students interdisciplinary
              training in molecular systematics,
histology, and pathology. These skills are
              crucial for the discovery, characterization, and
evaluation of microbials for
              applications to a broad range of scientific disciplines such as new
pest
              control technologies, novel protein and small molecule discovery, etc.

