Title       : SBIR Phase II: A New Digital Video Surveillance System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0131228

Award Number: 0131228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : JunTech, Inc.
	      2027 E. Newton Ave.
	      Shorewood, WI  53211    414/332-8349

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              digital video surveillance system prototype.  Over the past few years, video
              surveillance systems have been moving from analog to digital.  The success of a
              digital video surveillance system depends on three key enabling technologies:
              compression, search and retrieval and network transmission.  Existing
              commercial systems generally use standard video compression techniques, which
              often result in higher memory and bandwidth requirements and jerky object
              motion.  In current video search and retrieval, the existing systems offer only
              search-by-time and no search-by-content.  In network transmission, today's
              systems use relatively simple techniques that tend to make remote monitoring
              slow and sluggish.  The company is using a highly efficient compression
              algorithm that exploits the special characteristics of surveillance video and
              is based on a segmentation technique.  This technique, when applied to video
              search and retrieval, leads to search-by-content, which is more efficient and
              effective in practical applications.  Finally the proposed system will employ
              fast network transport protocols and scalability techniques to make remote
              monitoring faster, uninterrupted by network traffic surges, and to allow
              display on a range of user devices.

This digital video surveillance system
              can be used to maintain the security of banks, airports, government buildings,
              corporate sites, homes, and small businesses.  It can also be used to monitor
              the performance and operating conditions of machines and equipment.
