Title       : Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Overcoming nomenclatural
               complications while searching in a distributed database environment: One step
               toward true interoperability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0131928

Award Number: 0131928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meredith A. Lane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven O. Shattuck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1718,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0131928
Lane, Meredith 
Academy of Natural Sciences -
              Philadelphia


BDEI: Overcoming nomenclatural complications while searching
              in a distributed database environment: One step toward true
              interoperability.

Summary

With biological information content growing
              exponentially on the Web, the average member of the public
(and for that
              matter, many scientists) may not be able to access all of the high-quality
              information actually
available and/or that they need because organisms are
              often known by more than one scientific name (many of which will perhaps be
              unknown to the user), and different information providers may use different
              names for the same organism.

Important international projects such as the
              Global Biodiversity Information Facility (see www.gbif.org)
have identified
              organism names as the core means for interconnecting databases from different
              domains
(e.g., specimen databases with GenBank or ecological databases, etc.)
              because the organism name is
highly likely to be the only database field
              common to both databases. True interoperability among
databases is required to
              answer complex biological questions. This goal cannot be reached without
              a
mechanism to allow access to all available information on a particular
              organism.

Therefore, a foundation component in the development of the GBIF
              and associated national efforts
must be a means to provide a list of all the
              names that should be searched for a given organism. The need
for this
              component of interoperability was clearly recognized by the proposers of GBIF,
              but to date there
have been no efforts specifically directed at providing
              software tools to make it possible. In this project,
we will implement such a
              mechanism. It will allow even the most naive Web user to obtain
              biological
information without needing to understand the complexities of
              nomenclature and associated arcana. To do
this, we will develop a query
              interface/portal understandable to any user; a set of standards and protocols
              for representing search requests (which will be sent as a URL) and result sets
              (which will be returned as XML using HTTP) that is platform-independent; and a
              set of platform-specific translators and search routines for retrieving data
              from participating
nomenclatural data providers.


