Title       : Regulation of the Cytosolic Chaperonin Complex by Phosducin-like Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0131361

Award Number: 0131361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry M. Willardson barry_willardson@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Eukaryotic cells have developed elaborate signal transduction pathways to
              respond to changes in their environment. The phosducin-family of proteins is
              believed to play a role in cellular signaling. This family consists of
              phosducin (Pd), which is expressed principally in the retina and pineal gland,
              and phosducin-like protein (PhLP), which is found in almost all tissues and
              cell types. Both Pd and PhLP bind to G proteins and other effectors. Pd and
              PhLP are regulators of G protein signaling pathways. Recent evidence suggests
              that Pd and PhLP also have other functions in the cell. Both have been found to
              interact with the SUG1 subunit of the 26S proteasome. Immunoprecipitation
              experiments and mass spectrometry identify proteins that co-immunoprecipitate
              with PhLP. These include subunits of the cytosolic chaperonin complex
              containing TCP1 1 (CCT). This chaperone is required for the folding of actin
              and tubulin and several other proteins. Thus, CCT is required for eukaryotic
              cell to produce essential protein products in their native state. PhLP binding
              inhibits the ability of CCT to fold these proteins.

This research will
              elucidate the interaction of PhLP with CCT and investigate its physiological
              role in regulating CCT activity. The specific objectives are:
1) To test the
              hypothesis that PhLP is a physiological negative regulator of CCT activity;
2)
              To determine the mechanism of PhLP protein degradation and its role in
              regulating CCT activity;
3) To biochemically characterize the interaction
              between PhLP and CCT.

The methodology includes a variety of biochemical and
              molecular biological techniques including gene silencing, analysis of
              site-directed mutants and chimeric proteins, cross-linking studies,
              immunological methods and mass-spectrometric approaches to elucidate PhLP
              functions and interactions. This study explores a totally novel function of
              PhLP and a unique mechanism that regulates CCT activity. Thus, it has the
              potential to forward our understanding of the regulation of protein folding in
              a major way as well as to elucidate the regulation and processing of proteins
              necessary for cell survival. This project also provides a research experience
              for undergraduates since a unique opportunity exists for undergraduate
              researchers to participate in this significant research project.

