Title       : C4 Photosynthetic Mechanisms: Requirements and Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0131098

Award Number: 0131098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald E. Edwards edwardsg@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During evolution of terrestrial plants, the atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide
              (CO2) declined, resulting in a limitation on the capacity for photosynthesis,
              especially under higher temperatures, drought and/or saline conditions. 
              Consequently, some plants evolved a biochemical inorganic carbon pump through a
              C4 cycle, so they are called C4 plants. While C4 plants account for less than
              10% of terrestrial species, they are estimated to account for about 30% of
              global terrestrial productivity because of their success under extreme climatic
              conditions.  This is due to their effectiveness in carbon assimilation and
              efficiency of water use.  Unfortunately, most crops lack this carbon pump,
              which limits their productivity and our ability to extend production into less
              favorable habitats.  Plants not possessing C4 photosynthesis have one
              photosynthetic cell type in their leaves.  The dogma for about 35 years has
              been that photosynthesis occurs in all terrestrial C4 plants by the cooperative
              function of two photosynthetic cell types: an outer layer of palisade cells,
              where atmospheric CO2 is captured by the C4 cycle, and an inner layer of bundle
              sheath cells, where the CO2 is concentrated through the C4 cycle and used in
              carbon assimilation (called "Kranz anatomy"). However, we have shown recently
              that C4 photosynthesis can function in a single photosynthetic cell based on
              studies on a member of the family Chenopodiaceae.  The results suggest that
              Kranz anatomy is not required for function of the CO2 concentrating mechanism,
              and that two types of chloroplasts, each with specialized functions, can occur
              within a single photosynthetic cell.  In this project we will determine the
              mechanism and efficiency of single cell C4 photosynthesis considering
              biochemistry, compartmentation of required enzymes within the photosynthetic
              cell, characteristics of oxygen production and CO2 exchange. Information on
              biochemistry and spatial compartmentation will be used to develop a mechanistic
              model to test how C4 photosynthesis can function in a single photosynthetic
              cell. Since little is known about genetic control of development of Kranz type
              C4 plants, we will also study, by mutational analysis, whether single genes
              control development of their specialized anatomy and biochemical
              compartmentation. There is great interest in the potential for genetic
              engineering of crops, such as rice, to perform C4 photosynthesis.  Our project
              will suggest rational strategies for genetic modifications to increase
              productivity via increased capacity for photosynthesis. 



	

