Title       : The Influence of Fluctuating Countervailing Selection in Maintaining within
               Population Variation in Sexually Selected Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0131728

Award Number: 0131728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Bertram sbertram@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  Susan Bertram  0131728

This research addresses how heritable
              variation may be maintained within a population. Research on heritable
              variation is important because it has implications for biodiversity: extinction
              removes species, speciation adds them; and heritable variation is the fodder
              for speciation. While data suggests that genetic variation in traits that
              enhance fitness is quite common, current theory predicts almost no heritable
              variation in fitness conferring traits. This inconsistency between theory and
              data reveals the importance of determining the underlying mechanisms
              responsible for maintaining heritable variation. 

The goal of this research
              is to investigate how heritable variation may be maintained in sexually
              selected traits by directly testing the hypothesis that heritable variation in
              mating signals can be maintained by temporally fluctuating and opposing forces
              of sexual and natural selection. The Texas field cricket, Gryllus texensis, is
              an ideal system to test this hypothesis as male crickets display extensive
              mating signal variation, all signaling components measured to date exhibit high
              heritabilities, and signals are easily measured. Further, female crickets
              discriminate between potential mates based on mating signals, and signaling
              males are often attacked and killed by acoustically orienting parasitoids.
              Crickets have two breeding seasons, spring and fall.  In the spring cricket and
              parasitoid densities are low, in the fall they are high. Density influences the
              intensity of selection, because in the low-density spring populations female
              crickets discriminate between mates with different songs. In the high-density
              fall populations selection appears reversed, with female crickets selecting
              mates randomly and signaling males being targeted by parasitoids. To test
              whether temporally fluctuating natural versus sexual selection can maintain
              variation, my research will first confirm that the mating signals are
              heritable. Selection experiments will then determine how natural and sexual
              selection influence variation in calling behavior over several generations. The
              proposed research will be the first experimental test of the hypothesis that
              conflicting selection forces shape mating signal variation within a
              population.

