Title       : RUI: Self-organization and the Acquisition, Representation, and Processing of
               Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0131829

Award Number: 0131829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Li pli@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An ordinary adult speaker has active control of tens of thousands of words in
              any given language.  Unlike a dictionary that lists words alphabetically, the
              mental dictionary organizes words in the mind in complex ways according to
              their uses in language, for example, their grammatical and semantic functions. 
              This research will address how such organization arises in childhood, settles
              in adulthood, and sometimes breaks down in disordered minds.  The research will
              provide an alternative approach to current neural network models of language,
              because it aims at developing a cognitively and neuropsychologically plausible
              model that relies on self-organizing principles.  Self-organization, a dynamic
              process of human learning, allows the learner to gather information about the
              "input space" (i.e., the limits, constraints, and possibilities of things) and
              to continuously organize the information in ways optimal for the task at hand. 
              Building on Li's developmental lexicon model (DevLex), the new model will
              incorporate properties of self-organization, Hebbian learning, lexical
              co-occurrence learning, and dynamic growth.  These computational properties
              should make the model well suited for the study of the human mental lexicon,
              its structure, representation, and processing in children, normal adults,
              second language learners, and brain-injured patients.  The model will attempt
              to account for a wide variety of phenomena in language use.  In particular, its
              design characteristics will permit the evaluation of important problems from a
              number of domains:  (1) the development of structurally organized
              representation as a function of learning the linguistic input, and the impact
              of the organizational structure on linguistic generalization (child language
              acquisition); (2) the distinct versus integrated nature of bilingual lexicon,
              and crosslinguistic differences in bilingual lexical representation and
              acquisition (bilingual language processing); (3) the development of lexical
              ambiguity and grammatical ambiguity, and the processing of ambiguity in
              patients (lexical ambiguity processing); (4) the interaction between
              orthography, phonology, and semantics in reading acquisition, and the
              crosslinguistic differences in normal reading and developmental dyslexia
              (normal and impaired reading); and (5) the acquisition of category-specific
              representation, and the structure of lesioned semantic representations in
              patients (category-specific language impairment).  Results from the modeling of
              these aspects will provide significant insights into theoretical and empirical
              issues in psycholinguistics and cognitive science.  Understanding of normal and
              disordered processes in different languages will also have significant
              implications for language education.
