Title       : Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Reconfigurable Wireless Sensor
               Networks for Dense Spatio-Temporal Environmental Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0131691

Award Number: 0131691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Flikkema Paul.Flikkema@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Sisk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1718,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0131691
Flikkema, Paul 
Northern Arizona University

BDEI:
              Reconfigurable Wireless Sensor Networks for Dense Spatio-Temporal Environmental
              Monitoring

Summary

Improving understanding of ecosystem processes
              requires the acquisition of multi-component
environmental time series at high
              spatial resolution. Current environmental sensing systems typically rely on
              stand alone data loggers or wired sensor arrays. Research and resource
              management that depend on such
systems are currently limited by initial cost
              and/or the effort required to acquire the data. The nexus of this project is to
              integrate cutting-edge, low-cost circuit and system technology into a wireless
              environmental sensing network based on an evolvable architecture that will meet
              an immediate and critical need: to dramatically improve coverage and spatial
              density while greatly reducing the total cost. This first-generation network
              will also serve as an experimental testbed for fundamental research in wireless
              sensor networking that targets the unique characteristics of environmental
              monitoring applications. This research includes distributed, adaptive source
              coding of spatio-temporally correlated vector processes, multi-hop protocols
              with inter-layer interaction, and coded macrodiversity for energy-constrained
              multi-hop networks.

Since this project brings together wireless networking
              and ecosystems and microclimate researchers, it also provides an opportunity to
              initiate the development of a new interdisciplinary program of study: Ecosystem
              Sciences and Informatics. This program will educate a new generation of
              students who can develop and use technology for ecosystem monitoring and
              modeling.


