Title       : Synthesis of Templates for Nucleation of Alpha-Helices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0131250

Award Number: 0131250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Kemp kemp@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research has two immediate objectives and both rely on a novel approach to
              the study of peptide helicities.  This tool consists of a series reporting
              conformational templates(RTC's) that can be linked to a peptide at its
              N-terminus to initiate a helix and monitor its stability.  The first objective
              of this project is the design, testing, and optimization of new capping
              structures that can be linked to both N and C-termini of peptides to
              substantially stabilize their helical conformations.  The second objective is
              to define rigorously the functional dependence of fractional helicity on the
              experimental value of the circular dichroism ellipticity [theta]222 measured
              for the peptide at 222 nm.  NMR methods applied to RCT-peptide conjugates will
              be used to calibrate [theta]222 definitively. 

With this renewal award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              Daniel S. Kemp of the Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology.  The work aims at a complete description at a chemical level of the
              folding process for the important case of folded peptide helices.  Folding in
              water can convert a highly flexible linear polypeptide, defined by its ordered,
              linked sequence of particular amino acids, into a compact, relatively rigid
              structure that can bind tightly to other biomolecules. Understanding the
              structures and energetics of the folded forms of proteins and shorter
              polypeptides is a fundamental problem of modern structural biology and
              bioorganic chemistry.  Helices provide key structural subunits formed by local
              peptide sequences within most globular proteins.  Moreover the docking of
              folded, helical signal peptides to proteins found at cell surfaces have been
              shown recently to control growth of abnormal cells found in a significant
              number of human disease states.  Success with the objectives of this proposal
              is expected not only to allow a better predictive understanding of these
              docking events but also to provide hitherto unavailable practical methods for
              tuning, controlling and inhibiting such signal processes. The potential
              relevance to improvements in cancer diagnosis and treatment is significant.

