Title       : Collaborative Research: Accessing Brain Collection Information and Images Via
               the Internet, CD-ROM and Centralized Location
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0131826

Award Number: 0131826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368448             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Connor connorj@afip.osd.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrianne Noe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Archie Fobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Registry of Path
	      6825 16th Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20306    202/576-2980

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Knowledge of brain structure is essential to understand brain function.  The
              evolution of mammals has resulted in many differences in brain anatomy, but we
              know very little about how those differences correlate to the wide diversity of
              animal behavior.  This collaborative project is to consolidate and make more
              accessible for research and education two major collections that form a unique,
              extensive, remarkably preserved assembly of mammalian brain specimens for
              comparative and evolutionary studies.  Together they contain more than 275
              sectioned and stained brains, including over a half million microscope slides,
              representing over 150 species, from 50 families in 17 different orders of
              Mammalia.  Many specimens are irreplaceable, from rare or endangered species,
              and provide critically unique data for questions about biodiversity and
              evolution as well as neuroscience.  The collections are being brought to a
              national museum facility in Washington DC to join complementary extensive human
              brain collections and establish a single site with long-term stability for
              storage, curation, and research on comparative mammalian brain neuroanatomy. 
              An electronic website is being developed for worldwide access to images. 
              Researchers can use the images directly, or decide whether to visit the museum
              itself to examine the original preserved biological material.  The impact of
              this project is high.  First, it safely preserves for future research an
              irreplaceable resource that represents a scientific investment of more than 50
              years of exacting work by dozens of people.  Second, it promotes
              multidisciplinary research on comparative neuroscience, behavior, evolution and
              systematics to understand the diversity in the most complex organ known. 
              Third, using technology of digital imaging and multidimensional databases, it
              provides a working base as well as a model for how to handle and share complex
              morphological data with other collections, including those on non-mammalian
              vertebrate brains.  Fourth, the project will continue to have educational
              impact by providing easy website access for schools and informal science
              education about the vertebrate brain in the context of biodiversity.



