Title       : Subcellular Organization of the Flavonoid Enzyme Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0131010

Award Number: 0131010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda S. Winkel winkel@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Enzymes function within cells to catalyze biochemical reactions, thereby
              controlling the amounts and types of products that are produced by different
              types of cells under different conditions.  Work in many laboratories has
              provided evidence that enzymes that cooperate in biosynthetic pathways and
              other coordinated systems, such as DNA replication and protein synthesis, are
              often physically associated as macromolecular complexes.  This organization has
              the potential to dramatically enhance the biochemical efficiency of living
              cells as well as providing mechanisms for sequestering toxic or volatile
              intermediates, regulating competition among branch pathways, and coordinating
              interdependent processes.  Some of these systems, such as the machinery of
              protein and nucleic acid biosynthesis, are extremely stable and can be
              extracted from cells as intact multienzyme structures.  Others, such as the TCA
              cycle and the glycolytic pathway, are organized as "dynamic" complexes that may
              dissociate and reform in response to environmental or physiological stimuli. 
              However, there are only a few cases in which a specific physiological function
              for this organization has been documented.  At the same time, very little is
              known about the molecular basis of enzyme complex formation and localization. 
              This project aims to address these questions using the flavonoid biosynthetic
              pathway in the plant, Arabidopsis, as an experimental system.  Numerous
              genetic, molecular, and biochemical tools are available for this system,
              including cloned genes for seven major flavonoid enzymes, purified recombinant
              enzymes produced in bacterial cells, polyclonal antibodies against many of
              these proteins, and a collection of mutants that includes null alleles for
              several key enzymatic steps.  The major goals of the current project are to 1)
              determine the three-dimensional structures of two of the flavonoid enzymes, 2)
              use new technologies to study the interactions between these enzymes, 3) track
              changes in the subcellular locations of the enzymes in response to
              environmental stimuli such as wounding and gravity, and 4) study the
              biochemical and physiological effects of targeting flavonoid enzymes to
              inappropriate locations within the plant cell.  Expanding the knowledge of the
              structure and function of enzyme complexes is essential to developing a
              complete understanding of how cells organize and regulate metabolic activity. 
              This information is crucial for efforts to alter cellular metabolism via gene
              therapy and in the development of transgenic organisms for industrial and
              agricultural applications.  This project will also provide a training ground in
              contemporary molecular genetic and biochemical technologies for undergraduate
              and graduate students.


