Title       : Remote Determinants of EF-hand Divalent Ion Affinity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0131166

Award Number: 0131166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Henzl henzlm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Tanner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The parvalbumins - containing two "EF-hand Ca2+-binding motifs - offer an
              attractive system for examining protein-ligand interactions. Despite extensive
              homology, parvalbumin (PV) isoforms exhibit disparate metal ion-binding
              properties. There is compelling experimental evidence that PV divalent ion
              affinity is influenced by structural features outside the EF-hand motifs. The
              PV molecule consists of a 70-residue ion-binding domain (the CD-EF domain) and
              a 40-residue N-terminal AB domain. Others have previously shown that the
              AB/CD-EF interaction in pike PV is Ca2+-dependent. This project will extend
              this observation, exploring the hypothesis that the AB domain is a primary
              modulator of divalent ion-binding behavior. Recombinant AB and CD-EF domains
              from several a and b parvalbumin isoforms - and select site-specific variants -
              will be purified and characterized. Following examination of the isolated
              domains, the energetics of the AB/CD-EF interaction will be delineated in the
              presence and absence of divalent ions. These issues will be addressed by
              diverse methods: x-ray crystallography, optical spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy,
              analytical ultracentrifugation, surface plasmon resonance, 45Ca2+-binding
              assays, and titration and scanning calorimetries.  

Broadly defined,
              protein-ligand interactions underlie all aspects of protein function - from
              structure to transport to regulation to catalysis. Importantly, the precise
              orientation of the coordinating groups in a ligand-binding site can be
              influenced by structural reorganization events distant from the ligand-binding
              site. These conformationally mediated "action at a distance" phenomena are
              among the most intriguing aspects of protein/enzyme action. The parvalbumin
              molecule - with its juxtaposition of a single EF-hand domain and an autonomous
              structural element - offers an elegant model system for examining the influence
              of remote determinants on ligand-binding events and, conversely, the
              propagation of a ligand-binding signal to neighboring structural elements.
              Thus, the relevance of these studies extends well beyond structure-affinity
              correlations in EF-hand proteins.

