Title       : NSF-EC: Magnetotransport in Layered Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0131883

Award Number: 0131883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Levy levy@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1665,1734,5980,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Office
              of Multidisciplinary Activities, both within the Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences, and the International Division as a cooperative activity
              in materials sciences between the National Science foundation and the European
              Commission (NSF solicitation 01-105).  The project involves the EC Research
              Training Network (RTN) on Computational Magnetoelectronics whose lead
              institutions include Daresbury Laboratory (United Kingdom), FZ Juelich
              (Germany), MSP-MPI Halle (Germany), CNRS Orsay (France), TU Vienna (Austria),
              University of Twente (Netherlands), Uppsala University (Sweden), Academy of
              Sciences - Budapest (Hungary) and Institute of Physics of Materials Brno
              (Czechia). 

This grant will enable the US research group at NYU to
              collaborate with members of the EC RTN.  The NYU group is focused on analytic
              and model calculations in magnetoelectronics, whereas the EC expertise is in ab
              initio calculations of electronic structure and magnetic and transport
              properties of solids. 

The RTN is using ab initio methods to assess the
              importance on the transport properties of magnetic multilayers and tunnel
              junctions of features identified from calculations based on model Hamiltonians.
               Specifically, for metallic multilayers the role of spin flip scattering by
              impurities on magnetoresistance (MR) will be studied, as well as resistivity
              and MR for currents perpendicular to the layers and the role of anisotropy
              compared to giant MR in magnetic multilayers. For magnetic tunnel junctions the
              in-plane lattice constant and the interlayer distance at interfaces will be
              relaxed to determine the effects on tunneling.  In addition, the surface band
              structures at electrode/barrier interfaces, determined by full potential
              methods, will be incorporated into the calculations of junction MR. 
%%%
This
              project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, both within the Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences, and the International Division as a cooperative activity in
              materials sciences between the National Science foundation and the European
              Commission (NSF solicitation 01-105).  The project involves the EC Research
              Training Network (RTN) on Computational Magnetoelectronics whose lead
              institutions include Daresbury Laboratory (United Kingdom), FZ Juelich
              (Germany), MSP-MPI Halle (Germany), CNRS Orsay (France), TU Vienna (Austria),
              University of Twente (Netherlands), Uppsala University (Sweden), Academy of
              Sciences - Budapest (Hungary) and Institute of Physics of Materials Brno
              (Czechia). 

This grant will enable the US research group at NYU to
              collaborate with members of the EC RTN.  The NYU group is focused on analytic
              and model calculations in magnetoelectronics, whereas the EC expertise is in ab
              initio calculations of electronic structure and magnetic and transport
              properties of solids. 
***

