Title       : Biophysical and Behavioral Agents of Natural Selection in a Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0131308

Award Number: 0131308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Hilbish   (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Wethey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Helmuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The structure of hybrid zones depends on the interaction of natural selection
              and dispersal.  Simple models using different forms of natural selection have
              been generated to explain the structure and maintenance of hybrid zones. 
              However, field studies have shown that natural selection can be very complex
              and that an understanding of hybrid zones cannot be obtained through simple
              models.  It is necessary to determine the agent of natural selection and the
              ecological circumstances under which it operates to understand how hybrid zones
              are formed and maintained.  

This study proposes to determine the selective
              forces operating in a hybrid zone formed between two species of marine mussels.
               Results from a previous grant demonstrated that the two species differed in
              their physiological capacity to tolerate elevated silt.  One possible
              adaptation to elevated silt is increased mobility so that the animal can move
              and avoid smothering.  This adaptation may be detrimental in open coast
              environments where silt concentrations are low and mussels may be dislodged by
              exposure to increased wave action.  Mussels that are more mobile may be exposed
              to greater wave action if they migrate to the top of mussel beds or into other
              locations where they are more likely to be dislodged.  This study will test the
              hypothesis that these two species of mussels differ in their behavioral
              adaptations to silt and that these differences result in strong natural
              selection against the more mobile species in open coast environments. 

