Title       : Parental Management of Peers in Three Ethnic Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0131664

Award Number: 0131664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina S. Mounts nmounts@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to examine parental management of adolescents'
              peers in three ethnic contexts (African-American, Latino [primarily Mexican],
              and White).  In recent years, there has been growing interest in examining
              parental management of adolescents' peer relationships.  Given the increase in
              importance of peers during adolescence and given that peer influence is also a
              predictor of school adjustment, drug use, and delinquent behavior, it is
              important to examine the ways in which parents manage the peer relationships of
              adolescents.  Much current research on parental management of peers focuses on
              White adolescents.  More research examining issues of normative development
              among minority populations, such as parental management of peers, is needed. 
              This research will provide new information on the role of parental management
              of peers for adolescents in non-White and White groups and its relation to
              adolescent academic achievement and adjustment (e.g., drug use, delinquent
              behavior, friendship quality, loneliness).  The project will consist of two
              studies.  The first will identify the precursors of parental management of
              adolescents' peer relationships (e.g., parental goals, parental beliefs,
              parental perceptions of adolescents' behaviors) and it will identify the range
              of strategies used by parents in the management of adolescents' peer
              relationships.  Ninety adolescents and their parents (30 African-American, 30
              Latino, and 30 White) will participate in interviews regarding several facets
              of parental management of peers, including precursors to parental management of
              peer relationships.  Information derived from the first study will be used to
              refine and develop questionnaires to be used in the second study.  That study
              will assess the suitability of the measures for use across the three ethnic
              groups, examine the relations between precursors of parental management of
              peers, such as parental beliefs about authority over peer relationships or
              adolescent adjustment, and examine adolescent outcomes (e.g., academic
              achievement, friendship quality, drug use, and delinquent behavior) associated
              with parental management practices.  For the second, a total of 100
              African-American, 100 Latino, and 100 White seventh-graders, their parents, and
              their best school friends will be followed for one year.  All participants will
              complete questionnaires at the beginning of the academic year and at the end of
              the academic year.  Analysis of the data will allow assessment of whether the
              questionnaires function similarly across the three ethnic groups, as well as
              whether particular precursors are related to management of peers and whether
              management is, in turn, related to academic achievement, friendship quality,
              drug use, and delinquent behavior.  The data should ultimately be useful in
              constructing training for parents in peer management techniques that would be
              effective in achieving desired and socially acceptable outcomes.
