Title       : STTR Phase II: Long-Gage Fiber Bragg Sensors for Structural Health Monitoring
               and Damage Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0131967

Award Number: 0131967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean G. Calvert sean@bluerr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Whitten L. Schulz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Blue Road Research
	      Clear Creek Business Park
	      Gresham, OR  97030    503/667-7772

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will further
              explore the use of long-gage fiber Bragg grating strain sensors in conjunction
              with vibration-based system identification techniques for
health monitoring
              and damage identification of civil structures. In phase I, the proof of concept
              was shown based on static and dynamic laboratory experiments on small-scale
              structural models. In this Phase II effort, field tests on bridges identified
              in Oregon and California will be performed to further validate this very
              promising tool for structural health monitoring and damage identification.
              These bridges provide unique opportunities as two of them are scheduled for
              demolition and both State Departments of Transportation have agreed to support
              testing as these bridges are systematically damaged to provide a true
              real-world test of the damage identification system. These field tests will be
              an important step in providing feasibility data for future commercialization of
              the structural health monitoring and damage identification system. Once the
              proposed methods are debugged and validated for field applications, the
              California and Oregon DOT's will strongly consider adopting them for widespread
              use in their structural health-monitoring and bridge rehabilitation
              programs.

The proposed structural health monitoring and damage
              identification system offers very promising advanced solutions to the triple
              problem of: (1) monitoring the state-of-health of the civil infrastructure
              system for optimum allocation of rehabilitation resources, (2) optimally
              designing the rehabilitation scheme for a specific deficient civil structure,
              and (3) evaluating the efficacy of the rehabilitation measure.
