Title       : Biodiversity and Ecosystem Informatics - BDEI - Planning a Community Science
               Approach to Biodiversity Monitoring: Extending the Spatial and Temporal Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0131927

Award Number: 0131927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence Brandt                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49801              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Stevenson robert.stevenson@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1718,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0131927
Stevenson, Robert
University of Massachusetts - Boston

BDEI:
              Planning a Community Science Approach to Biodiversity Monitoring: Extending the
              Spatial and Temporal Scales.

Increasing the spatial scales and temporal
              frequencies at which species occurrences and locations are
recorded is central
              to biodiversity informatics. There are not nearly enough trained scientists to
              do the
job and remote sensing methods have severe limitations for most taxa.
              This project examines the idea
that it is now possible to rapidly build
              communities of people (academic taxonomists, amateur natural
historians,
              environmental educators, concerned citizens and students) and institutions
              (universities,
environmental NGOs, governmental agencies and schools) to
              produce important scientific data about
biodiversity. Building monitoring
              communities is made possible by digital technologies that permit three
key
              advances:
1) Rapid Color Guides, the production on demand of high quality yet
              relatively inexpensive mini color
field guides (here called Rapid Color
              Guides, Foster 1998) that will allow amateurs to correctly identify
many more
              species in the field.
2) Spatial Coordinates, the ability to accurately record
              (within a 3 m radius under the best conditions) the
spatial coordinates of
              individuals or populations using new GPS (Global Positioning System) units.
3)
              E-Vouchers, the availability of very high quality digital cameras that are
              field portable and relatively
easy to use that can capture an electronic
              record of observations in the field.

Along with the wide acceptance of the
              WWW, these advances permit people to gather and share
biodiversity information
              in unprecedented ways. Three studies are planned and prototyped to
              examine
this general claim. First, the variety of taxa recorded during
              Massachusetts Biodiversity Days, a three-
day statewide citizen-based effort
              to monitor biodiversity already established in
              Massachusetts
(http://data.massgis.state.ma.us/Biodiversity/BiodiversityDays.htm) will be expanded. Taxonomic
specialists using digital cameras and printers will design Rapid Color Guides for taxa, which are common
(e.g. ants, bumblebees, spiders, weeds) but rarely recorded by observers because of the lack of a suitable
method to identify them.


