Title       : Microbial Observatories: Evolution and Diversity of Biochemical Pathways: A
               Methylotrophic Microbial Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0131957

Award Number: 0131957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Lidstrom lidstrom@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ludmila Chistoserdova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Mary Lidstrom and Ludmila Chistoserdova at the
              University of Washington to investigate the breadth of diversity in an
              environmentally important group of bacteria, those that grow on simple
              compounds containing one carbon.  These bacteria, called methylotrophs, have
              developed unique biochemical pathways that allow them to grow on compounds such
              as methane (natural gas), methanol (wood alcohol), and a variety of atmospheric
              pollutants such as bromomethane and chloromethane.  Evidence to date suggests
              that these biochemical pathways evolved through a combination of borrowing
              genes from other bacteria and creating new traits specific to methylotrophy. 
              The approach that will be taken in this project is to use the few known genome
              sequences for methylotrophic bacteria and other bacteria in a comparative way
              to develop an understanding of the shared and unique aspects of these bacteria.
               Both laboratory cultures and natural populations of methylotrophs from the
              environment will be studied, to maximize the diversity that is sampled, and
              partial genomes from uncultured environmental methylotrophs will be identified
              and sequenced.  

This work will provide insights into the complex
              communities in natural habitats that are responsible for the cycling of
              one-carbon compounds. These bacteria play an important role in keeping natural
              habitats healthy and thriving, and in addition they are the main consumers on
              earth of a number of compounds that contribute to global warming. 
              Understanding which methylotrophs are present in specific environments and
              relating such information to their natural roles is an important step in
              developing accurate predictions regarding the relationship between natural
              resource utilization and global conditions such as global warming.  In
              addition, the comparative genomics studies that will be carried out will
              provide insights into the evolution of specialized metabolic pathways.  These
              evolutionary approaches are important for making the leap from genome sequences
              to understanding how cells work.


