Title       : Characterizing the Developmental Role and Signaling Specificity of a Novel
               TGF-Beta Related Ligand.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0131736

Award Number: 0131736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kavita Arora karora@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0131736
Arora

A fundamental feature of growth and differentiation in
              multicellular organisms is the ability of one group of cells to influence the
              fate of another through intercellular communication. Thus understanding how
              signaling activity is regulated and modulated contributes to an important
              aspect of developmental biology. A long-term goal of our research is to
              understand the in vivo roles and mechanism of Transforming Growth Factor-B
              (TGF-B) signaling during development in Drosophila. Ligands of the TGF-B
              superfamily control a wide range of biological functions such as cell
              proliferation, axial patterning, tissue specification and morphogenesis in
              systems as diverse as worms, flies, frogs, and mice. Despite the evolutionary
              distance, many components of the TGF-B signaling pathway show remarkable
              functional conservation. Thus studies in a genetically tractable organism like
              Drosophila can provide crucial insights into aspects of TGF-B signaling that
              are relevant to both basic and clinical science.
	One key issue is
              understanding how multiple ligands expressed in the same tissue can act through
              a relatively limited number of receptors and downstream signal transducers to
              elicit a variety of biological effects. This proposal focuses on characterizing
              the mutant phenotype, and determining the signaling pathway utilized by a novel
              ligand Alp. Since Alp is equally related to the Activin/TGF-B and BMP
              subfamilies, it cannot be definitively assigned to a functional pathway based
              on structural similarity alone. Molecular and genetic approaches will be used
              to determine the functional requirement for alp, study how it generates spatial
              pattern, and identify the proteins required for its signal-transduction.


