Title       : Comparative Social Biology of Sponge-Dwelling Snapping Shrimp (Synalpheus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0131931

Award Number: 0131931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250438             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Emmett Duffy jeduffy@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1650,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              COMPARATIVE SOCIOBIOLOGY OF SPONGE-DWELLING SNAPPING SHRIMPS

J. Emmett
              Duffy
School of Marine Science
The College of William and
              Mary


	Eusociality, characterized by cooperative colonies in which most
              members sacrifice individual reproduction, has long presented a fundamental
              paradox for behavioral and evolutionary ecology.  According to Hamilton's rule,
              social behaviors can be understood as solutions to challenges imposed by the
              environment mediated through the genetic relatedness of interactants.  A full
              understanding of social evolution thus entails an accounting of the genetic
              relationships among group members, the basic ecological constraints on
              populations, and some means of assessing the evolutionary consequences of their
              interplay.  This proposal  employs complementary genetic, behavioral, and
              comparative approaches to assess the interplay between kin structure and social
              biology, and some of its macroevolutionary consequences, in fostering social
              evolution in the species-rich and socially diverse sponge-dwelling shrimps
              (Synalpheus), one of the rare animal groups in which eusociality has arisen
              repeatedly among closely related species.  The project has two principal
              objectives:

(1) Assess the influence of breeding system, and consequent
              genetic structure of colonies, on behavioral dynamics and the maintenance of
              extreme reproductive skew in two independently evolved, and demographically
              divergent, eusocial shrimp species Synalpheus regalis and S. chacei.  This will
              be accomplished by genotyping individuals from field-collected colonies of each
              species at eight microsatellite loci, and experimentally assessing levels of
              conflict and cooperation among individuals in captive colonies in the
              laboratory.  This research will characterize the distributions of relatedness,
              aggressive dominance, mating success, and parentage among individuals within
              colonies, and of relatedness within vs. among colonies.  

(2) The
              longer-term evolutionary consequences of these social dynamics will be
              approached in a comparative framework by exploiting the social diversity among
              species of Synalpheus, building on the recently completed phylogenetic
              reconstruction of the sponge-dwelling clade.  Phylogenetically independent
              contrasts will test the association, predicted by theory and empirical studies
              of social insects, among colony size, reproductive skew, and caste
              differentiation.  

This research will provide a new window on the origin,
              adaptive significance, and macroevolutionary consequences of eusociality in a
              unique, socially diverse clade of non-insect invertebrates, and will contribute
              to evaluating the generality at a broad taxonomic level of theories for the
              evolution of advanced animal societies based primarily on data from social
              insects.  


