Title       : Regulation of Leptin Synthesis and Secretion in Pregnant Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0131846

Award Number: 0131846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Widmaier widmaier@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Kunz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Collectively, rodents and bats comprise roughly 75% of all known mammalian
              species. Within the Chiroptera, temperate bats such as the little brown bat
              (Myotis lucifugus) play critical ecological and economic roles in the United
              States and elsewhere. For example, these species are important in controlling
              insect populations, which would otherwise flourish in the absence of
              insectivorous bats. Understanding the regulation of basic reproductive
              processes in these species is therefore of vital concern, but surprisingly many
              fundamental aspects of reproductive control are still unclear in bats. The use
              of a comparative approach will provide information on the ubiquity in nature of
              these regulatory processes.  Recently, the so-called obesity hormone, leptin,
              has been suggested to serve a role in mammalian reproduction.  This hypothesis
              originally arose from the observation that levels of leptin in blood of
              pregnant animals increase considerably.  Leptin's established functions are to
              suppress appetite and stimulate metabolic rate when body weight increases.  As
              fat mass in the body increases, adipose cells secrete leptin into the blood,
              which signals the brain that sufficient fat reserves are available.  Whether
              leptin exerts regulatory effects during reproduction is still uncertain.  Also
              uncertain is the mechanism(s) by which plasma leptin levels are elevated during
              pregnancy.  Recent evidence suggests that both the placenta and adipose tissue
              are important in secreting leptin during pregnancy, and that leptin may not
              only be secreted by the placenta, but may act on it as well (e.g., to promote
              its growth and development).  In this project the regulatory factors that
              influence leptin secretion from both tissue sources during this
              energetically-demanding period of a mammal's life history will be identified. 
              Further proposed experiments will permit determination of whether leptin is
              actively synthesized from placentas of rodents and bats.  Finally, experiments
              will provide tests of the hypothesis that changes in expression of brain leptin
              receptors account in part for observed leptin-insensitivity during pregnancy
              (i.e., the ability of pregnant females to continue eating above a normal amount
              despite elevated levels of this appetite-suppressing hormone). Such experiments
              may help explain why some people are apparently insensitive to the
              appetite-suppressing effects of leptin. These studies will extend our knowledge
              of reproductive processes in Chiroptera, specifically, of the placenta as a
              mammalian endocrine organ, and will also be applicable to other mammalian
              orders, since the control of leptin secretion during pregnancy appears similar
              in bats and humans, for example. Elucidation of the sequence of leptin and its
              receptor in bats will provide useful probes for detecting the presence of
              receptor in brain and placenta, and aid in future phylogenetic and
              structure/function analyses of the protein.  This project will also contribute
              to science education by including numerous undergraduate students who will
              participate in various phases of the project, plus several graduate students or
              post-doctoral fellows.  These students will gain valuable dual experience in
              field and laboratory biology, while engaged in an extremely topical project
              with wide-ranging ramifications and benefits to society at large.  The PI and
              the co-PI have a long and successful history of promoting science  through
              research and teaching at all levels, from K-12 through college, and continuing
              education of high school science teachers.  It is anticipated that this trend
              will continue with this new project.
