Title       : Lipid Metabolism in the Oyster Protozoan Parasite, Perkinsus Marinus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0131108

Award Number: 0131108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Lin E. Chu chu@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly Reece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Diseases caused by parasitic species of the genus, Perkinsus, in bivalve
              mollusks are a worldwide problem.  The parasite, Perkinsus marinus (Dermo) has
              been one of the two most important protozoan parasites causing severe mortality
              in the American oyster, Crassostrea virginica, on the east and Gulf coasts
              since the 1950s.  Although this parasite's host is an ecologically and
              economically important aquatic species, previously no information existed on
              its lipid metabolism and biosynthesis. A previous NSF award, revealed important
              information concerning lipid metabolism in P. marinus in relation to its host.
              Some of the important findings are that this parasite has a capability for
              phospholipid synthesis similar to the Plasmodium spp. that cause malarial
              disease and as most other parasitic protozoans, can acquire and metabolize
              exogenous lipids. However, unlike other parasitic protozoans, which rely on
              their host for essential lipids, P. marinus is able to synthesize a range of
              saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, including the essential fatty acid,
              arachidonic acid. No other parasitic protozoans have been reported to have such
              a capability. Interestingly, this parasite appears to have different metabolic
              phases depending upon whether or not it is associated with its host or not. To
              further elucidate the lipid metabolism in this parasite and its relation to the
              parasite's development, life cycle completion, disease transmission, and
              virulence and pathogenesis of the host, the present project employs advanced
              analytical technology and molecular and genomic approaches to test the key
              hypotheses built on the previous findings. The study addresses not only basic
              lipid metabolism questions with potential application to disease control for
              oyster acquaculture production, but to diseases caused by other Perkinsus spp.
              in other bivalve species such as clams. An in-depth understanding of the
              significance of de novo lipid and fatty acid synthesis in P. marinus may lead
              to the development of parasiticidal drugs to control this parasite and other
              parasitic protozoans, including those species affecting humans. Lipid
              biosynthetic pathways are currently being investigated as potential drug
              targets in several protozoan parasites of humans including Plasmodium and
              Trypanosoma species.  Importantly, this project will provide opportunities to
              post-graduate, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students to receive
              hands-on research experience and training in marine science in general and
              lipid biochemistry, molecular genetics, and parasitology in particular.
              




