Title       : Genetic Analysis of Silenced Chromatin in Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0131383

Award Number: 0131383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric U. Selker selker@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Eukaryotic genomes are more than just the sum of their genes. The chromosomal
              context of genes is important and certain chromosomal parts, including the
              centromeres, telomeres and rDNA regions, serve structural as well as coding
              roles in the cell. Several lines of evidence indicate that the chromatin
              structure of centromeric, telomeric and rDNA regions is more condensed than
              most chromosomal regions and that this "heterochromatic" chromatin causes gene
              silencing. The inactivated X chromosome in women represents an example of gene
              silencing by heterochromatin. Centromeric, telomeric, and rDNA provide
              excellent models to identify critical differences between alternative forms of
              chromatin. Parallels are emerging among organisms whose heterochromatic regions
              have been studied to date (principally yeasts and Drosophila) but significant
              differences have also been detected. The current project will broaden our
              understanding of the silencing that characterizes heterochromatic sequences by
              taking advantage of a model eukaryote, the filamentous fungus Neurospora
              crassa. The study builds on the well developed genetics of this organism and
              the recent availability of the nearly complete sequence of its genome.
              Efficient genetic approaches will be used to identify the important players in
              the cell that result in the formation, and normal function of, heterochromatin.
              Reporter genes will be placed in telomeric, centromeric and rDNA regions of
              Neurospora chromosomes by homologous recombination in a strain bearing a
              mutation in a silencer gene, nst-1. The resulting strains will be used as
              transformation hosts to test candidate genes for involvement in heterochromatin
              silencing. This part of the project takes advantage of a dominant
              post-transcriptional silencing process, quelling, to efficiently screen a large
              number of genes. Approximately 30 candidate genes identified by homology to
              genes of other organisms will be screened initially. In addition, novel
              silencer genes will be sought in a non-redundant set of sequenced cDNA clones.
              Genes showing evidence of involvement in silencing will be selectively
              disrupted using RIP (repeat-induced point mutation). Silenced reporter genes
              will also be used to select new silencing mutants generated by insertional
              mutagenesis. The mutated DNA will be isolated and sequenced to identify
              silencer genes. Finally, centromeric, telomeric and rDNA chromatin will be
              characterized in wildtype Neurospora and in silencing mutants. Both genetic and
              physical methods will be used to identify the nature of the defect(s) of the
              silencing mutants. 

Knowledge gained from this project should both improve
              our understanding of specific mechanisms of gene silencing and shed light on
              mechanisms responsible for normal and abnormal chromosome behavior in a variety
              of eukaryotes. In addition to its scientific merit, this project will serve to
              train students and to advance the use of Neurospora as a practical model system
              for functional genomics.

