Title       : Chiral Catalyst Development and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0131842

Award Number: 0131842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Doyle MDOYLE@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The objective of this work is to prepare new chiral carboxamidate ligands and
              their dirhodium (II) complexes, then use these complexes as asymmetric
              catalysts for a variety of organic transformations.  Chiral catalysts will
              first be used for enantioselective C-H insertion reactions.  Dirhodium (II)
              carboxamidates will then be attached to solid supports and used for
              cyclopropanation as well as C-H insertion catalysts.  Metal catalyzed reactions
              of diazo compounds will then be used for heterocycle synthesis and metal
              catalyzed macrocyclizations of diazo compounds will also be studied.  Lastly,
              these dirhodium (II) carboxamidates will be used as mild Lewis acid catalysts
              for enantioselective hetero Diels-Alder reactions and other Lewis acid
              catalyzed organic transformations.

  With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Michael P.
              Doyle of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Arizona.  Dr. Doyle
              will explore stereoselective, metal catalyzed reactions of compounds which
              contain a functional group (reactive site) known as a diazo group.  Diazo
              compounds can be induced to lose nitrogen by metal catalysts thereby providing
              substrates for new carbon-carbon bond forming reactions.  The catalysts form
              chiral pockets where the bond forming reactions occur and only one of two
              possible stereoisomers of the product is formed.  The ability to form
              carbon-carbon bonds in molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable
              mirror images) and make only one of the two possible forms (a single
              enantiomer) is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical
              industry today.  Students trained during the course of this work will gain
              skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of
              single enantiomer compounds. 


