Title       : Transcriptional Gene Silencing in Chlamydomonas and Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0131357

Award Number: 0131357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heriberto Cerutti hcerutti1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the molecular mechanisms responsible for epigenetic
              transcriptional silencing in plants.  In the unicellular green alga
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, silencing of single-copy transgenes occurs without
              detectable methylation of the introduced DNA.  A WD40-repeat containing protein
              (Mut11p), with homology to the C-terminal domain of the fungal transcriptional
              co-repressor Tup1p, is required for this process.  Similar proteins are widely
              distributed among eukaryotes but their function is unknown. 
              Methylation-independent transgene silencing in Chlamydomonas also requires a
              serine/threonine protein kinase (Mut9p) that appears to be specific to the
              plant kingdom.  Both genes are also necessary for the repression of
              transposable elements, normal cellular growth, and tolerance to radiomimetic
              agents inducing DNA double strand breaks.   Close homologs of Mut9p and Mut11p
              are encoded in the Arabidopsis thaliana genome, albeit as members of small
              multigene families.  Intriguingly, an analysis of the Arabidopsis EST databases
              suggests that some genes, in a given family, are expressed preferentially in
              reproductive tissues.  It is tempting to speculate that in multicellular plants
              some family members are expressed in every cell and play a role in basal
              cellular functions, such as transposon repression.  In contrast, other members
              may have specialized to regulate specific sets of genes at a certain
              developmental stage.  The immediate goals of the study will include:  (1) 
              Characterization of the molecular role(s) of Mut9p and Mut11p in Chlamydomonas
              reinhardtii.  This objective will be achieved through the isolation of proteins
              interacting with the cloned gene products, by a variety of proteomic
              approaches.  The research will also identify potential target loci regulated by
              the silencing machinery, by an analysis of differential gene expression in
              mutant and wild-type strains.  (2)  Characterization of the role(s) of homologs
              of Mut9p or Mut11p in Arabidopsis development.  The expression pattern of all
              homologs in a given multigene family will be examined at different stages of
              development.  Mutants in genes predominantly expressed in reproductive tissues
              will be identified by screening T-DNA tagged lines.  The phenotype(s) of these
              mutants is expected to provide information on the possible functional
              divergence of the various family members.  (3) Characterization of one
              Chlamydomonas mutant (Mut-39), and cloning of the disrupted gene, defective in
              the transcriptional silencing of multiple copy, methylated transgenes.  Since
              the structure of these transgenes resembles a heterochromatic knob, the
              findings may contribute to our understanding of heterochromatin components in
              plants.

In eukaryotes, epigenetic processes, which result in heritable
              changes in gene expression without modifications in DNA sequence, play
              important roles in the control of development as well as in the cellular
              responses to viruses, viroids, transposable elements, and transgenes.  Thus,
              understanding the mechanisms of epigenetic gene silencing may provide insights
              into relatively unexplored but essential features of gene regulation and of
              defense responses against "genomic parasites."  These findings may also have
              practical applications in agriculture and medicine, such as improving
              transgenic technology or enhancing our understanding of the role that
              epigenetic phenomena play in malignant diseases such as cancer.
