Title       : Purchase of Departmental Beowulf Cluster for Computational Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0131132

Award Number: 0131132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hai-Lung Dai dai@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Rappe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry G. Sneddon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Kent Blasie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marisa C. Kozlowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at the University of Pennsylvania will
              acquire a Departmental Beowulf Cluster for Computational Chemistry.  This
              equipment will enhance research in the following areas:  a) polyborane
              catalysis and coordination chemistry (Sneddon); b) computational methods for
              combinatorial protein design and protein folding (Saven); c) computational
              methods in the development of ligands for asymmetric synthesis (Kozlowski); d)
              dynamics of water molecules in anion solvation shells (Klein); e) the role of
              structure and conformational change in biological electron and ion transport
              (Blasie); and f) correlating alloy chemistry with metallic glass formation
              (Rappe).

A cluster of fast, modern computer workstations is vital to serving
              the computing needs of active research departments. Such a "computer network"
              also serves as a development environment for new theoretical codes and
              algorithms, provides state-of-the-art graphics and visualization facilities,
              and supports research in state-of-the-art applications of parallel processing. 
              These studies will have a significant impact in a number of areas, including
              development of more efficient catalysts, biochemistry and materials sciences.  
