Title       : Collaborative Research: Atomic Structure Determination of ADPGlucose
               Pyrophosphorylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0131729

Award Number: 0131729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Meyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Glycogen and starch serve as major energy storage compounds for nearly
              all-
living organisms and are an important energy component obtained
              from
plants. ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (ADPGlc Ppase) catalyzes
              the
conversion of glucose-1-phosphate and ATP to ADP-glucose
              and
pyrophosphate and is a key regulated step in both bacterial glycogen
              and
plant starch biosynthesis. ADPGlc Ppase regulation is mediated by
              the
binding of a number of activators and inhibitors, many of which are
              key
metabolic intermediates. This research utilizes the ADPGlc Ppase
              enzyme
from the bacteria Agrobacterium tumefaciens (Ag.t.) that is regulated
              by fructose-
6-phosphate and pyruvate. This project outlines x-ray crystal
              structural
studies on Ag.t. ADPGlc Ppase to examine substrate binding,
              allosteric
effector binding, and the mechanism of activation. Several
              roadblocks
associated with x-ray crystallography have already been overcome
              including
crystallization and heavy atom derivitization for phase
              determination. Once
the three-dimensional structure of one member of the
              ADPGlc Ppase protein
family is determined homology modeling can be used to
              construct reasonable
structures of the other proteins in the family. As a
              major control point for the
production of renewable and biodegradable carbon
              sources, ADPGlc Ppase
is an attractive enzyme target for protein engineering.
              Understanding the
regulation of the ADPGlc Ppase enzyme family is necessary
              for the
bioengineering of the enzyme and could lead to rational protein
              engineering
of the enzyme to increase starch production

