Title       : Acquisition of Equipment to Establish a High-Pressure Single-Crystal X-Ray
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0131979

Award Number: 0131979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55540              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Lager   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0131979
Lager

A high-pressure, single-crystal X-ray diffraction laboratory
              will be established at the University of Louisville. An existing, fully
              operational CAD4 diffractometer will be adapted for high-pressure use with a
              diamond-anvil cell. The laboratory will also house an electrostatic drilling
              machine and stereomicroscope for loading the cell and a laser spectrometer for
              pressure calibration. A second X-ray unit will also be upgraded with a
              solid-state generator. A precession camera mounted on this unit will be used as
              a check on crystal quality and to determine the orientation of single crystals
              in the pressure cell. The new laboratory will be dedicated to studies of
              hydrous minerals at high pressure. This group of earth materials plays an
              important role in mantle processes related to earthquake activity. For example,
              volume changes associated with phase transitions in hydrous minerals have been
              linked to the localization of stress and the occurrence of earthquakes along
              subduction zones. Experiments in this project will focus on hydrous magnesium
              silicate (OH-clinohumite) and hydrogarnet. Phase-equilbria studies indicate
              that clinohumite is a stable water-bearing phase in subduction zones to depths
              of ~400 km (transition zone). Its high-pressure infrared spectrum shows several
              anomalies at ~13 GPa. The possibility that these anomalies are related to a
              phase transition will be investigated using the converted CAD4 diffractometer
              system. Synthetic Si-free hydrogarnet (katoite) has been used as a model to
              understand how OH is incorporated in silicate garnets that occur in the crust
              and mantle. The katoite structure undergoes a phase transition at 5 GPa. X-ray
              data will be collected with the CAD4 at high pressures to determine if a
              similar transition is observed in naturally occurring hydrogarnets. 
***

