Title       : GerE-dependent Transcription in B. subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0131020

Award Number: 0131020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As the bacterium Bacillus subtilis differentiates from the vegetative form into
              a dormant endospore, complex morphological and physiological changes occur that
              require the sequential expression of many genes. During the process, new RNA
              polymerase sigma factors appear (sF,sE,sG,sK), displacing one another in a
              sequential cascade and conferring on the RNA polymerase a changing specificity
              for the recognition of different classes of promoters. This mechanism of
              altering transcriptional specificity is a fundamental element in the regulation
              of sporulation gene expression. However, during sporulation repressors and
              activators control the use of some promoters by RNA polymerase containing the
              sporulation-specific sigma factors. GerE is a DNA binding protein that is
              required for activation or repression of several specific sK-dependent
              promoters during the final stage of endospore development. GerE is the smallest
              member of the LuxR-FixJ family, a widespread, large family of transcriptional
              activators that includes two-component type response regulators (e.g., DegU,
              ComA, FixJ, and BvgA) and activators regulated by low molecular weight
              cofactors (e.g., LuxR and MalT). Most members of the LuxR-FixJ family contain
              an amino terminal receiver domain linked by a small region to a
              carboxy-terminal domain that contains an amino acid sequence similar to the
              helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif found in other DNA-binding proteins and RNA
              polymerase sigma factors. The 74 amino acid sequence of GerE is similar over
              its entire length to the DNA binding domain of this protein family, including
              the HTH motif.  Moreover, recently the structure of GerE has been solved by
              X-ray crystallography. Therefore, GerE provides a simple model for studies of
              transcription activation by this family. It is not known how GerE stimulates
              promoter activity. However, the small size of GerE makes it somewhat surprising
              that it stimulates transcription from various positions at different promoters.
              The mechanism of GerE-dependent promoter activation will be examined in this
              project by testing a model in which two specific surfaces of GerE interact with
              RNA polymerase during activation of the cotC and cotX promoters, respectively.
              Genetic and biochemical approaches also will be used to test the hypothesis
              that GerE interacts with sK at some promoters, and with other subunits of sK
              RNA polymerase at other promoters to stimulate transcription. 

The results
              of this project are expected to yield insights into the mechanism of promoter
              activation by this important family of transcription factors found in a wide
              variety of bacteria.  Because transcription factors play a key role in
              determining which genes are active in which cells and at what time, their
              importance cannot be overstated. This project will help us understand how they
              work. 

