Title       : Organoiron Complexes in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0131043

Award Number: 0131043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Pearson ajp4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work are two fold.  1) Diene-iron tricarbonyl complexes
              with appended olefins will be coupled to make spirocyclic compounds.  This
              coupling reaction allows stereospecific construction of densely functionalized
              molecules that contain proximal quaternary centers.  This methodology will be
              applied to the synthesis of the core structures of the natural products,
              stemodinone and aphidicolin.  2)  Diene-iron tricarbonyl complexes with
              proximal hydroxyl groups will be used in stereoselective intramolecular
              cyclization reactions.  The diene-iron complex stabilizes cations formed by
              acid promoted ionization of the hydroxyl group allowing stereocontrolled
              intramolecular cyclizations to be effected.  Use of optically pure complexes in
              these cyclizations should lead to asymmetric cascade reactions.

With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Anthony J. Pearson of the Department of Chemistry at Case
              Western Reserve University.  Dr. Pearson will explore stereoselective
              cyclization reactions of organoiron reagents.  The ability to form
              carbon-carbon bonds in molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable
              mirror images) and make only one of the two possible forms (a single
              enantiomer) is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical
              industry today.  When developed, Dr. Pearson's work could be applied to the
              synthesis of natural products such as stemodinone and aphidicolin.  Students
              trained during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of single enantiomer
              compounds. 

