Title       : Learning From Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0131895

Award Number: 0131895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3081665            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. Tubbesing skt@eeri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earthquake Eng Res Inst
	      499 14th St Suite 320
	      Oakland, CA  946121928    /   -

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              For nearly 30 years, the National Science Foundation has provided support for
              EERI's Learning from Earthquakes (LFE) Program. These funds have enabled dozens
              of 
multidisciplinary teams of researchers to carry out field investigations
              of significant 
earthquakes throughout the world, to observe and document
              effects on the natural and
built environment and resulting social, economic
              and policy impacts. Over the years the
program has generated much new
              knowledge, leading to changes in practice and stimulating new research in each
              of the related fields.

As the US leader in post-earthquake investigations,
              EERI proposes significant
revisions to the LFE program to improve the overall
              coordination of NSF funded post-earthquake research efforts and  to incorporate
              new technologies to improve the collection and management of perishable data. 
              During the duration of this award, EERI  will coordinate post-earthquake
              investigations and improve the collection of perishable data in the first weeks
              after the earthquake.   Equipment will be acquired to enhance data collection
              and dissemination, training will be provided to team members, and a new program
              of small grants for follow up research in each of the disciplines that
              contribute to fundamental understanding of earthquake impacts will be
              initiated.   The LFE program will be integrated into the new Network for
              Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES). The LFE program will work with other
              agencies, organizations and NSF funded centers to reach diverse population of
              young people and students to stimulate their interest and involvement in
              science and engineering.   These and other activities  during the five year
              duration of this award will contribute to a fundamental understanding of the
              science and practice of earthquake engineering and the reduction of future
              earthquake losses.

