Title       : Functional Analysis of a Transcription Elongation Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0131414

Award Number: 0131414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel C. Eissenberg eissenjc@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Shilatifard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Control of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) activity is the major mechanism underlying
              cellular differentiation during development. For some genes, this includes
              regulation at the level of transcription elongation. The mammalian Pol II
              elongation factor ELL is distinguished as being able to increase the catalytic
              rate of Pol II in vitro.  ELL homologs are absent from yeast, suggesting that
              the ELL family of elongation factors represents an adaptation of metazoans. The
              long-term goal of this project is to understand the role of the ELL family of
              transcription elongation factors in the regulation of gene expression. The
              Drosophila homolog of ELL (dELL) broadly co-localizes with phosphorylated Pol
              II on polytene chromosomes, is concentrated at sites of active transcription
              and is associated with Pol II in whole fly extracts. Mutations in the dELL
              coding sequence are found in independently isolated mutant alleles of
              Suppressor of triplo-lethal [Su(Tpl)]. Su(Tpl) is an essential gene, and the
              phenotypes of Su(Tpl) mutations are consistent with a defect in a general
              transcription factor. dELL is the only ELL-family protein in flies. This
              project will test whether dELL functions in transcription in living cells, and
              what role it plays in regulating gene expression. Specific Aim 1 will test
              whether dELL is recruited to the body of transcribing genes in vivo. Specific
              Aim 2 will test whether dELL is limiting for gene transcription in vivo. The
              expression of various patterning genes will be tested in early embryos in which
              dELL has been inactivated by RNAi, to see whether loss of dELL results in their
              down-regulation. Specific Aim 3 will test the ability of a dELL transgene to
              complement the recessive lethality of Su(Tpl) mutations, and whether a
              truncated dELL transgene behaves as a dominant negative on a wild-type
              background. These studies will provide the first detailed understanding of the
              role for the ELL-family of proteins and their gene expression in vivo. They
              will also provide the foundation for a genetic dissection of dELL and for
              understanding the regulation of Pol II in development.

