Title       : Molecular and Cellular Structure of Gap Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0131425

Award Number: 0131425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina E. Sosinsky gsosinsky@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1144,1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The gated connexin channels found in gap junctions regulate communication
              between tissue cells.  These membrane channels are critical for integrating and
              regulating basic cell processes such as metabolic cooperation, ionic
              transmission, differentiation and hormonal regulation.  Breakdown in gap
              junctional communication can lead to developmental defects, abnormal cell
              proliferation and failure of tissue regulation as well as physical or
              developmental diseases.

The channels consist of a dimer of two hexamers each
              called a connexon, of the constituent protein, connexin.  These channels are
              unique in that when the two hexamers pair up, they self-assemble into distinct
              cellular junctional areas that are morphologically distinct.  The connexins are
              a family of related proteins sharing a common folding motif.  Different
              connexins are found in the same tissue and different connexins can be localized
              to the same gap junctional plaques.  In the current structural model of the
              protein, the C and N termini are located on the cytoplasmic side of the
              membrane and cross the membrane four times in a helical segments.  Mutagenesis
              studies have indicated that the extracellular domains may contain b sheet
              structures.

The overall goal of this research is to image at the electron
              microscopic level the molecular structure of gap junction proteins as well as
              their arrangements within and between cells.  This project is divided into two
              parts.  Both address organizational principles that determine not only the
              molecular structure of connexins but also how these connexins are organized and
              interact with other cellular components. This is, in essence, the cellular
              structure of connexins.
  
The goals of this project  are:

(1) To
              significantly improve the resolution of the present 3d molecular structure of
              the Cx26 channel:
Connexin26 (Cx26) is the smallest of the gap junction
              family.  This connexin isoform has the potential for molecular structure
              determination since it has been hypothesized that the smaller the carboxy
              terminus, the tighter the packing and less disorder within the connexon unit.
              Using the large gap junction two-dimensional crystals obtainable from these
              HeLa Cx26 transfectants, computational methods will be developed and applied to
              increase the resolution of the reconstructions.  An approach using single
              particle/correlation averaging in combination with a crystallographic analysis
              will be used in order to circumvent the lattice disorder inherent in these
              crystals.  Development and application of this methodology will be useful not
              only for Cx26 crystals but also for application to other connexin
              crystals.

(2) To continue to specifically label gap junction proteins in
              situ using photooxidation of either genetically tagged connexins or specific
              antibodies and then determine their 3D spatial arrangements and interactions
              with other cellular components using fluorescence photooxidation and electron
              tomography.

The potential impact of this project is to advance the present
              knowledge of connexin channel structure, cellular organization, assembly and
              disassembly.  Results from these experiments would impact the interpretation of
              other channel structures and understanding of how membrane proteins traffic. 
              These results should also help to understand the molecular basis of
              connexin-related diseases.


