Title       : Positive and Negative Regulation of Rop Signaling in the Response to Oxygen
               Deprivation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0131486

Award Number: 0131486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia N. Bailey-Serres serres@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We have identified an ON/OFF signaling mechanism that is required for tolerance
              of oxygen deprivation (anoxia) in Arabidopsis thaliana. Activation of Rop, a
              monomeric RHO-like G-protein, is required for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
              induction and ethanolic fermentation but is insufficient for anoxia tolerance.
              Tolerance of anoxia requires initiation of Rop signaling as well as the
              subsequent termination of Rop signaling by the GTPase activating protein
              RopGAP4. Our data support a model in which Rop-signaling promotes NADPH oxidase
              activity and H2O2 production required for ADH induction; in addition the
              negative regulation of Rop signaling by RopGAP4 reduces H2O2-induced damage,
              prolongs cell viability and increases anoxia tolerance. We propose that an
              increase in cytosolic free calcium, a second messenger in response to oxygen
              deprivation, is necessary to complete the activation of Rop signaling.  We
              predict that interplay between Rop signaling and cytosolic free calcium levels
              governs changes in gene expression necessary for stress tolerance. Our goals
              are to: (1) Determine if a mitochondrial signal initiates Rop signaling in
              response to oxygen deprivation; (2) Elucidate the role of cytosolic free
              calcium fluxes in the regulation of Rop activity and RopGAP4 gene expression;
              (3) Determine whether Rop-mediated activation of NADPH oxidase involves the
              relocation of Rop and requires an increase in cytosolic calcium; (4) Test
              whether an H2O2  signal is sufficient to induce ADH and RopGAP4 expression; and
              (5) Explore the signaling mechanisms downstream of Rop that are involved in
              anoxia tolerance.  We will use genomic and genetic analyses to effectively
              study this signaling network. These studies will include: (1) Analysis of
              changes in gene expression regulated by anoxia-induced Rop signaling using
              total and large polysomal mRNA; (2) A screen for dominant suppressor mutations
              that restore anoxia tolerance to ropgap4-KO seedlings; and (3) Continued
              screening of gene-trap lines for mutations altering ADH expression. The
              elucidation of the role of positive and negative regulation of Rop in the
              low-oxygen stress response should enable the engineering of flooding tolerance
              in crop plants.

This project will elucidate the mechanisms that allow plant
              cells to sense a depletion of cellular oxygen and respond by stimulating
              fermentation. The project will study how the strict control of the stress
              response is tantamount for survival. The understanding of the signaling process
              that controls this response will enable scientists to manipulate flooding
              tolerance.  The results may have additional relevance to plant and animal
              biology, due to similarities between stress responses in plants and the
              low-oxygen stress response in plants and animals.

