Title       : Stereotype Threat in the Science Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0131181

Award Number: 0131181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jasna D. Jovanovic jasna@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Beginning in the middle-school years there is a significant drop in young girls'
              confidence to succeed in math and science, even though girls perform as well or
              better than boys. The perception females hold of their abilities in math and
              science is the gatekeeper to their persistence in these academic domains. Yet,
              it is not clear why young adolescent girls lose confidence in these abilities.
              There is compelling recent evidence that when adult women are either directly
              or subtly reminded of women's minority status in math, their subsequent math
              performance is compromised and their expectations for future success in math
              are lowered. This profound effect of a "stereotype threat" is found
              consistently across studies of adult women. Very little is known, however,
              about stereotype threat in children and when it becomes salient to young girls.
              Although there is a well-established body of evidence identifying the
              experimental conditions under which stereotype threat is heightened, it is not
              known how stereotype threat is triggered in a natural occurring context such as
              the classroom. Identifying the emergence of stereotype threat and the
              conditions in the classroom under which it occurs is critical to understanding
              why young adolescent girls lose confidence in their ability to succeed in math
              and science. This pilot investigation will identify the conditions in the
              classroom that increase girls' vulnerability to this threat, and examine
              whether stereotype threat is responsible for the decline in adolescent girls'
              math and science confidence.

