Title       : Young Children's Use of Mental State Information in Persuasion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0131496

Award Number: 0131496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Bartsch bartsch@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Children often attempt to persuade their parents and friends.  At what age do
              they begin to tailor their arguments to the beliefs and attitudes of those
              individuals?  Even preschoolers may possess such persuasive sophistication,
              according to theoretical accounts of children's developing social cognition and
              recent findings concerning young children's understanding of mental states. 
              This research will use experimental interviews and analysis of everyday
              conversations to clarify whether, when, and how young children engage in
              psychologically sensitive persuasion.  Because recent findings have indicated
              that children acquire an understanding of belief and its role in action during
              the preschool years, this research will focus on whether and when young
              children utilize belief information in their persuasion attempts, how typical
              are such efforts, and how development of this ability occurs.  Experimental
              studies will involve individual interviews requiring young children to engage
              in persuasion with puppets or other people.  Information about the beliefs of
              each "persuadee" will be systematically manipulated in order to measure effects
              on children's persuasion.  These experimental manipulations will address the
              basic question of whether young children can engage in psychologically
              sensitive persuasion.  They will also compare children's reasoning about belief
              as measured by traditional tasks to their belief reasoning on persuasion tasks,
              a first step towards understanding developmental progression.  Experimental
              studies will also address questions concerning how "real" are the skills
              revealed in young children and which task factors appear to facilitate
              children's use of belief information in persuasion.  Specifically, the research
              will examine how children's sensitivity to belief information in persuasion
              depends on how belief information is presented, how persuasive arguments are
              elicited, and whether interactions are with puppets or real people.  Whether
              young children consider beliefs as representations or merely get ideas for
              arguments from belief information will also be examined.  Finally, an analysis
              of children's everyday talk with parents (from transcripts of family
              conversations sampled throughout the preschool period) will provide a
              complementary "real-life" and longitudinal perspective on children's developing
              use of psychological information in persuasion.  Together, these studies will
              provide extensive and novel descriptive data concerning children's use of their
              developing understanding of mental states in an important and common type of
              social interaction, persuasion.  Results will bear on how development occurs,
              specifically with regard to belief understanding and application to persuasion,
              and generally with regard to whether conceptual development precedes social
              application or the reverse.  The resulting descriptive and explanatory data
              should inform educational and developmental practices.
