Title       : Plastid Sequestration in Mesodinium rubrum: Physiological, Molecular, and
               Ecological Aspects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0131847

Award Number: 0131847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane K. Stoecker stoecker@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Mesodinium rubrum is a one-celled member of the marine plankton that can form
              extensive red-tides.  It is unusual in that although it is a "Protozoa"
              (animal-like cell) it contains numerous chloroplasts (the organelles in which
              photosynthesis occurs) and can make its own food from carbon dioxide and water
              using the energy in sunlight, and thus is plant-like. Although Mesodinium
              rubrum appears to derive its plastids from ingestion of algae, it only
              occasionally requires algal prey and the plastids appear to be capable of
              synthesizing chlorophyll, the primary pigment used to capture light in
              photosynthesis. It also temporarily harbors nuclei of algae.  Because of its
              unusual attributes, it may be a model for how ancestors of some algal groups
              acquired their photosynthetic organelles.
	The objectives are to describe the
              relationship of Mesodinium rubrum to its algal prey and to determine if
              photosynthesis and growth depend on acquisition of new chloroplasts or nuclei
              from algae and/or on digestion of prey as food. Another goal is to determine if
              Mesodinium rubrum permanently harbors algal organelles or genes.  These
              questions will be approached using a combination of experimental studies of
              cultured Mesodinium rubrum and of natural populations in the plankton.  A
              combination of microscopic, chemical, and isotopic techniques will be used to
              study the physiological ecology of Mesodinium rubrum.  Molecular techniques
              will be used to measure algal gene content and expression in Mesodinium rubrum
              and to determine relationships among different populations of Mesodinium rubrum
              and their plastids.  These parallel physiological and molecular investigations
              will elucidate the possible role of organelle uptake from algae by protozoa in
              cellular evolution.

