Title       : Role of the Tomato Gene Mi in Conferring Specific Resistance against Nematodes
               and Aphids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0131193

Award Number: 0131193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie M. Williamson vmwilliamson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The tomato gene, Mi, confers resistance against several species of root-knot
              nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) as well as against specific isolates of potato
              aphid (Macrosiphum euphorbiae). It is the only major gene for resistance to an
              aphid to be cloned so far and the first discovered that can mediate
              gene-for-gene resistance to two unrelated pests. Mi is a member of a diverse
              class of plant resistance-genes (R-genes) involved in gene-specific resistance
              against pathogens including viruses, bacteria and fungi.  Members of this class
              of plant proteins mediate specific pathogen recognition and signaling of host
              defense responses.  More than 20 such genes have been identified, yet how the
              pathogen is recognized and resistance conferred is not known. The Mi clone
              constitutes a unique resource for gaining insights into R-gene functions
              associated with specific pest recognition and signaling in plants and for
              determining the mechanism(s) by which a single gene can mediate resistance to
              multiple organisms. Chimeric constructs of Mi that produce a lethal phenotype
              when transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves are already
              available. Specific in vitro mutations in Mi and in constitutively lethal
              constructs of Mi will be produced. The phenotypes of the mutations will be
              examined in two different assays to delineate the function in pathogen
              recognition and signal transmission of particular regions of the gene. These
              assays will determine the effects of mutated alleles on cell death in a leaf
              infiltration assay and on nematode resistance in transformed roots. The
              phenotypes of in vitro-generated alterations in Mi on the signalling of
              resistance will also be examined in transgenic plants to identify the
              functional domains associated with nematode and/or aphid recognition and
              downstream defense signaling.  In addition, proteins that interact with Mi will
              be identified using the yeast 2-hybrid system and the role of these proteins in
              resistance will be examined. 

Root- knot nematodes cause billions of dollars
              in damage to the world's crops.  Current agricultural control measures include
              application of chemical pesticides or the use of resistant plants.  A single
              gene present in some tomato varieties can confer effective resistance against
              nematodes as well as resistance against some aphids.  This project explores the
              question of how a single gene, which was bred into tomato from a wild plant
              species, can mediate recognition of the nematode pest and trigger an effective
              defense.  An increased understanding of how plants defend themselves from
              pathogens and pests should result from this work.  Such understanding is
              essential for rational design of strategies to improve pest and pathogen
              resistance in plants.


