Title       : Role of TOR Signaling in Mitochondrial Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0131221

Award Number: 0131221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund (Ted) Powers tpowers@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The primary objective of the proposed research is to further our
              understanding of the mechanisms by which the highly conserved TOR (Target Of
              Rapamycin) signaling pathway regulates cell growth in eukaryotic organisms. 
              This pathway was discovered by the action of the antibiotic rapamycin, a potent
              immune suppressor, which targets the large, evolutionarily conserved TOR
              kinase.  Insight into the function of this pathway has come from recent studies
              of the simple eukaryote, S. cerevisiae, where it has been shown that TOR
              controls the expression of genes involved in several essential
              nutrient-responsive biosynthetic pathways.  In particular, TOR regulates the
              expression of a concise cluster of genes (termed RTG-target genes) that encode
              mitochondrial and peroxisomal enzymes whose activities are required for the de
              novo biosynthesis of glutamate and glutamine.  The RTG-target genes are also
              regulated by a mitochondria-to-nucleus signaling pathway, termed the retrograde
              response pathway, that is induced when mitochondrial respiratory function is
              impaired.  The aims of this project are three-fold.  First, the pathway by
              which TOR regulates RTG target gene expression will be elucidated.  Research
              underlying this project has determined that TOR acts in part by regulating the
              nucleocytoplasmic localization of a transcription factor complex, composed of
              the Rtg1 and Rtg3 proteins.  Thus, the research will examine a number of
              proteins that may provide a link between TOR and this important regulatory
              step.  Second, functional genomic approaches will be used to determine the
              extent of cross talk and/or overlap between TOR and retrograde signaling. 
              Third, novel regulators of RTG target gene expression will be identified and
              partitioned into the TOR and/or retrograde branches of this signaling pathway. 
              Together, these studies will help elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which
              TOR regulates the activity of an essential metabolic pathway.  Moreover, we
              will learn how TOR collaborates with another important intracellular signaling
              mechanism to maintain the normal metabolic behavior of cells.

