Title       : H-Bonding Control of Molecular Self Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0131477

Award Number: 0131477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Hamilton andrew.hamilton@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to use ordered molecular environments to control
              growth at a crystal surface.  In biomineralization, nature uses a number of
              protein sequences to recognize specific crystal faces.  To try to understand
              and model this process, functionalized gel matrices which present an array of
              carboxylates will first be used to control crystal growth.  Functionalized bis
              urea gelators will first be used to study the effect of spatial group
              orientation on calcium carbonate crystal growth.  Small constrained peptide
              sequences will then be synthesized (20 residues with 4 Asp or Glu residues and
              with and without internal lactam bridges) and their ability to  interact with
              target minerals such as calcium carbonate and calcium sulfide will be
              investigated.  Second and third generation peptidomimetic molecules will then
              be designed to interact with specific crystal faces.

 With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr.
              Andrew D. Hamilton of the Department of Chemistry at Yale University.  Dr.
              Hamilton will explore the basic chemical processes involved in the natural
              process of biomineralization.  Designed organic molecules and specific protein
              sequences will be investigated for their ability to control the growth of
              minerals such as calcium carbonate and calcium sulfide.  The ability to control
              calcium carbonate crystal growth has applications in biomedical science for
              controlled bone growth.  The ability to control calcium sulfide growth has
              applications in the semiconductor industry.  Students trained as a result of
              working on this project will gain experience in inorganic materials research as
              well as supramolecular organic chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by
              both the computer and pharmaceutical industries.



