Title       : LTREB: The Ecological and Organismal Basis for Early-Season Life History
               Variation in Tree Swallows Tachycineta Bicolor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0131437

Award Number: 0131437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297987             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Winkler dww4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1196,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is to extend and upgrade a long-term study of the ecology and
              reproductive biology of tree swallows (Tachycineta bicolor) nesting near
              Ithaca, New York.  This population numbers approximately 300 breeding pairs. 
              The population has been studied for the past fifteen years, and a large number
              of techniques have been developed to efficiently explore tree swallow biology
              and ecology.  Many of these techniques take advantage of the fact that tree
              swallows readily nest in artificial nest-boxes.  Like many other songbirds,
              tree swallows have about a 50% annual survival rate, so a five year study can
              sample many birds during their entire reproductive lifetimes. Tree swallows are
              obligate aerial insectivores.  Thus, they are unusually sensitive to short-term
              changes in weather, because their prey, flying insects, are unable to fly
              during cool temperatures or rain.  Previous research has developed the methods
              for sampling and analyzing insect availability on a daily basis.  One of the
              principal foci of the research in Ithaca in the past ten years has been
              investigating the seasonal decline of clutch size.  Earlier laying females lay
              larger clutches, and they pay no measurable cost for laying earlier.  Tree
              swallows across North America have advanced their date of laying, apparently in
              response to global climate change, and understanding the determinants and
              consequences of lay-date variation is thus of both basic and applied interest. 
              

The current project would attempt to answer three related questions:  1)
              How does variation in insect abundance and weather affect the lay-dates of
              individual swallows? 2) Does variation in flight performance correlate with
              variations in lay-date and chick-provisioning performance? 3) What are the
              consequences of short-term variation in weather and food supply both in terms
              of organismal biology and breeder fitness?  Flight performance is clearly a
              critical trait for an aerial insectivore, and it will be evaluated in a Flight
              Performance Test Tunnel that is already constructed and in need of only slight
              modifications. Chick-provisioning performance will be assessed through a series
              of detailed behavioral observations coupled with samples of the food being
              delivered to the chicks collected in a specially developed trap. Physiological
              health and stress will be evaluated with repeated measurements of blood
              characteristics. 

This project would bring a new level of detailed
              measurements to a long-term study that has proved its worth both in basic
              research output and in education of students at all levels.  By studying
              swallow reactions to the dynamic weather conditions of a temperate ecosystem,
              we can better understand the relationships between an animal's biology and its
              environment, both today and in the past, and make better predictions about how
              environmental changes will affect animal populations.

