Title       : Genetics of Sperm Migration and Gamete Recognition in Caenorhabditis Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0131532

Award Number: 0131532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. L'Hernault bioslh@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0131532
L'Hernault

During development, cells that are destined to interact
              with one another are frequently born in different locations.  Such cells must
              locate and move towards the site where the interactions with their
              partner(s)occur.  Fertilization in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is an
              attractive model in which to study the genetic control of these phenomena.  The
              superior genetic and cell biological tools that either we developed or were
              previously available make C. elegans an experimental system where it is
              feasible to approach these phenomena comprehensively.  Several mutants (spe-9,
              spe-13 and fer-14) produce cytologically normal spermatozoa that are motile,
              but they cannot fertilize when they collide with an oocyte.  The spe-9 gene
              encodes an epidermal growth factor (EGF) domain containing integral membrane
              protein, and such EGF cell surface proteins are known from much prior work to
              play critical roles in cell-cell interactions.  Therefore, spe-9 mutants are
              likely defective in either sperm-oocyte recognition, adhesion or fusion. EGF
              repeat containing proteins, like spe-9, are known to work with numerous other
              components.  spe-13 and fer-14 phenocopy all examined aspects of the spe-9
              phenotype and their study should help clarify the genetic hierarchy that
              operates during fertilization.  The phenotypic, genetic and molecular analysis
              of the fer-14 gene will be completed.  fer-14 will be positionally cloned by
              SNP mapping, deficiency end point mapping, a candidate gene approach and/or
              transgenic rescue.  Gamete interactions and motility in wild type spe-9, fer-14
              and other mutants will continue to be followed in vivo by nontoxic methods we
              have developed to fluorescently label sperm and allow real time observations
              with new high resolution methods.  New Spe mutants that produce spermatozoa
              with no obvious cytological defects will be identified and further
              investigated.  Those that fulfill a set of six criteria based on the known
              phenotypic features of spe-9, spe-13 and fer-14 will be subjected to detailed
              cell biological, genetic, and molecular analyses.  These studies should reveal
              novel information about gamete recognition and cell surface phenomena that are
              important prior to and during fertilization.  Equivalent mutants affecting
              gamete interactions have not been described in any other metazoan.

