Title       : Presynaptic Direct Structure-Function Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0131459

Award Number: 0131459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Cooper RLCOOP1@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kert Viele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold J. Stromberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The accepted model for chemical transmission at the neuromuscular junction is
              that when an action potential reaches the nerve terminal, voltage-sensitive
              calcium channels open which leads to a cascade of events resulting in vesicles
              fusing with the presynaptic membrane to release their contents into the
              synaptic cleft.  The number of active zones within synapses, and not
              necessarily the size or numbers of synapses per se, is correlated to the degree
              of synaptic efficacy. Additional factors besides structural elements have a
              role in synaptic efficacy, but the purpose of this study is to focus on
              structural correlations. Investigating the function of individual synapses is
              essential to understanding the mechanisms that influence the efficacy of
              chemical synaptic transmission. The known simplicity of the synaptic structure
              at the crayfish opener neuromuscular junction and its quantal nature of release
              allow an assessment of discrete synapses within the motor nerve terminals. By
              analyzing areas of a quantal current trace using modern statistical techniques,
              it is noted that the >gold standard= of directly counting quantal events is
              unstable in determining the number of release sites (n) and the probability of
              release at these sites (p) when the probability of release is low. This
              classical approach estimates one site even when there are clearly multiple
              sites operating. Modern methods used in this investigation estimate the
              probability of release at each site (p) to determine whether new sites are
              recruited as the firing frequency is increased. The proposed investigations
              directly correlate quantal parameters by various statistical methods to
              synaptic structure. An established method of identifying and recording from a
              synaptic site allows for its subsequent serial reconstruction using electron
              microscopic techniques. Thus, the same region can be serial sectioned and
              reconstructed from electron micrographs to directly correlate function to
              synaptic ultra structure. This effort will provide a clearer understanding of
              the mechanisms employed by structural elements that influence synaptic efficacy
              and mechanisms underlying frequency facilitation of transmitter release in
              crustaceans.


