Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Chromosome Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0131604

Award Number: 0131604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Weiler weilkare@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genomes of multicellular eukaryotes exist in two distinct chromatin states,
              the loosely compacted euchromatin and the generally condensed heterochromatin. 
              Scientific studies using the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, first revealed
              that this structural subdivision correlated with differences in gene activity
              over 60 years ago.  There is growing appreciation for the importance of
              chromatin structure in gene expression, but our understanding of chromosome
              structural differences at the protein level and how this impacts gene
              expression is still in its infancy.  One focus of this research project is the
              analysis of two Drosophila genes genetically identified as important for
              antagonizing heterochromatin formation and promoting a euchromatic chromatin
              state, E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9.  The specific objectives are to extend
              phenotypic characterization of E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9 mutants and to map,
              clone and molecularly analyze each gene.  Previous experiments showing that
              E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9 mutations affect gene expression will be extended and
              include multiple alleles.  The embryonic lethality associated with mutations in
              both genes will be investigated to determine the timing and characteristics of
              developmental arrest, potentially yielding insight into the normal activity of
              each gene product.  Evidence for a role in mitotic or meiotic chromosome
              function will be investigated through assays for chromosome loss, and altered
              behavior and morphology.  The E(var)3-5 and E(var)3-9 genes will be mapped and
              then cloned, followed by DNA sequence analysis to predict features of the
              protein products.  The expression pattern of each gene will be examined.  The
              second research focus is the functional analysis of the D1 gene, which encodes
              an abundant protein that binds to satellite DNA within heterochromatin.  Mutant
              alleles of the D1 gene will be generated and characterized, as a means to
              elucidate the function of the D1 protein.  D1 mutants will be studied to
              determine if the D1 gene is essential for viability, and if so, to characterize
              the timing and phenotypes associated with developmental arrest.  Through
              experiments analogous to those performed to analyze the E(var) mutants, flies
              bearing mutant D1 alleles will be examined to reveal a potential role for D1 in
              mitotic and interphase chromosome structure, chromosome dynamics and gene
              expression.  It is anticipated that the molecular and genetic characterization
              of these three genes will increase our understanding of protein determinants of
              chromosome structure and their role in normal chromosome function.
The aim of
              this research is to increase the understanding of chromosome structure by the
              genetic analysis of several structural components and regulators, using the
              fruit fly as a model system.  Two genes genetically identified as being
              important for chromosome structure will be cloned and analyzed to better define
              their roles.  The function of an abundant chromosomal protein will be
              elucidated through the isolation and characterization of mutant alleles of its
              gene.   The findings of these studies should be applicable to other organisms
              and contribute to our general understanding of the importance of chromosome
              structure for cell function.

