Title       : Function of Wnt Signaling During C. Elegans Vulval Induction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0131485

Award Number: 0131485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359934             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eisenmann eisenman@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Function of Wnt Signaling during C. elegans Vulval Induction.
David M.
              Eisenmann, University of Maryland Baltimore County

Abstract
All metazoan
              organisms rely on the use of extracellular signals to regulate cell division,
              migration and differentiation during development.  Several
              evolutionarily-conserved signal transduction pathways are used to receive these
              signals and alter the regulation of genes and proteins that bring about changes
              in the behavior of responding cells.  One of these conserved signaling pathways
              is the Wnt signaling pathway.  Wnt pathways function in vertebrates during the
              development of the nervous system, the heart, the reproductive organs, and the
              skeletal system, and other processes.  Much of our knowledge of the function of
              the Wnt pathway has come from genetic, molecular and biochemical analyses in
              model systems such as Drosophila, Xenopus and C. elegans. This lab has
              previously shown that Wnt signaling is involved in the development of the vulva
              of the C. elegans hermaphrodite.  During vulval induction, six equivalent
              vulval precursor cells are instructed to adopt distinct cell fates by the
              action of extracellular signals that activate receptor tyrosine kinase/Ras and
              Notch signaling pathways in these cells.  Previous work showed that the Wnt
              pathway acts with the Ras pathway to coordinately regulate the levels of
              LIN-39, a member of the important class of evolutionarily-conserved
              transcription factors encoded by Hox genes, and current results indicate that
              the levels of LIN-39 in the vulval precursor cells play an important role in
              which cell fate they adopt.  
The experiments in this proposal aim to further
              characterize the role of Wnt signaling in vulval induction in C. elegans 
              Specifically, to identify novel factors acting in C. elegans Wnt signaling, the
              mig-14 gene will be cloned and characterized and suppressors of the mig-14
              mutant phenotype will be isolated and characterized.  mig-14 is very
              interesting because mig-14 mutations lead to defects in most processes
              regulated by Wnt signaling in C. elegans, yet the mig-14 genomic region
              contains no known Wnt components or regulators.  Also, mig-14 is likely to act
              in the Wnt sending cell, suggesting it could shed light on some of the unknown
              issues involved ligand production and secretion.  Additional Wnt pathway
              factors may also be identified by proteins which physically interact with the
              C. elegans b-catenin BAR-1, which will be characterized in this proposed work. 
              To investigate how cells become responsive to Wnt signals, cis- and
              trans-acting factors that control the BAR-1 expression pattern will be
              identified.  This work will hopefully identify novel Wnt pathway components and
              regulators, and extend our knowledge of this important evolutionarily-conserved
              signaling pathway. 

