Title       : Active Control of Chemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0131001

Award Number: 0131001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rice s-rice@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this award funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division, Rice will study the theory for the active control of
              the evolution of quantum many-body systems in order to establish conditions
              under which active control of a unimolecular reaction can be achieved in a
              dense liquid phase.  The principal focus in these investigations will be on
              developing new variants of methods that use coherent excitation of states with
              or without adiabatic transfer of population.  A main focus in on the
              development of new stimulated Raman adiabatic passage (STIRAP) laser excitation
              schemes for both gas phase and solution phase reactions.  Other promising
              methods as well as refinements and extensions of previous implementations of
              active control of molecular dynamics will also be studied.

Selective control
              of product formation in a chemical reaction has been sought persistently
              throughout the evolution of chemistry.  Using such control of a reaction would
              allow one to generate a particular product mostly or completely.  Control has
              been accomplished at the macroscopic level by manipulating external factors
              such as temperature, pressure, solvent character, etc.  With the advent of the
              tunable laser, it was hoped that product selectivity could be controlled at the
              microscopic level, and that individual bonds within a molecule could be
              selectively broken.  It was very quickly found that energy absorbed by a
              molecule was not easily localized in individual bonds, but preferred to
              redistribute throughout the molecule.  More recently, however, the concept of
              laser selective chemistry has had a rebirth, and theories developed by Rice and
              others have shown that energy could be localized by carefully choosing a
              complex sequence of laser pulses of prescribed shapes.  If this theory can be
              put to practice experimentally, it will be possible to realize the goal of
              microscopic selective control of chemical reactions.

