Title       : RUI: Folding Kinetic Studies of Permuted Myoglobins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0131774

Award Number: 0131774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Spencer Anthony-Cahill sacahill@chem.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An understanding of the principles that determine protein folding and stability
              is critical for guiding the rational design of proteins with novel functional
              properties, and for accurate predictions of tertiary structure from amino acid
              sequence.  This project will increase our understanding of the relationship
              between altered topology and the folding pathway for a protein, and provide
              experimental data that can be used to refine structure prediction algorithms. 
              The specific aims are: (1) to compare the folding and unfolding rates of
              wild-type and three to four circularly permuted sperm whale myoglobins using
              stopped-flow circular dichroism spectroscopy; (2) to map differences in the
              transition state structures for wild-type and circularly permuted myoglobins
              using perturbation methods. These studies entail generation and bacterial
              expression of genes encoding permuted myoglobin proteins (permuteins) as well
              as site-directed mutants of the permuteins and the wild-type myoglobin. 
              Purified apoproteins will be analyzed for stability to chemical denaturation
              and in kinetic assays for folding and unfolding.  CD spectroscopy will be used
              to derive the stability parameters and kinetic studies will be carried out with
              stopped-flow CD to measure rates of permutein folding and unfolding at various
              denaturant concentrations.  Kinetic and equilibrium stability data will be used
              to map the relative energies of the denatured, native and transition states for
              folding reactions. The long-term goals of this research include a thorough
              determination of those regions of the myoglobin sequence that will tolerate
              topological mutation, and characterization of the folding pathway for these
              mutants.  

This project will provide an opportunity for several
              undergraduate students to integrate classroom teaching in biochemistry and
              biophysics with an intensive research experience.    The students  will carry
              out all aspects of the proposed work from cloning genes to CD studies, as well
              as presentation of results at local and national meetings.  Hands-on experience
              with equilibrium and kinetic data collection and interpretation will greatly
              enhance student comprehension of biophysical principles, and prepare these
              students well for further study in biochemistry.  

