Title       : Collaborative Research: Biology and phylogeny of marine planktonic
               cyanobacterial symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0131762

Award Number: 0131762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan P. Zehr zehrj@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              We propose a study of symbioses between cyanobacteria and planktonic diatoms,
              dinoflagellates, radiolarians, silicoflagellates and other planktonic
              protozoans in the equatorial oligotrophic Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. We have
              recently observed that these symbioses are diverse and abundant, and some have
              not yet been reported in the scientific literature. The biology and the
              phylogeny of these symbioses are virtually unstudied. The 16S rDNA sequences of
              cyanobacterial symbionts within a diatom (Climacodium) showed that they are
              closely related to the N2 fixing genus Cyanothece (which fixes during the
              night), which suggests that some of these symbioses may involve N2
              fixation.

We hypothesize that cyanelle symbionts may benefit host species
              either via incorporation of fixed N or C (via DON or DOC release or by being
              phagocyticized).  The research approach will use combined microscopy and
              molecular biology approaches to link observed relationships between
              cyanobacteria and the eukaryotic microalgae with phylogenetic information and
              detection of the genes involved in nitrogen fixation. Using samples collected
              directly by microscopy, and bulk filtered water samples, the identity, nitrogen
              fixation potential (presence of nitrogenase genes) and expression of nitrogen
              fixation genes will be related to specific organisms and quantified in the
              water column.  These approaches will be based on amplification and sequencing
              of 16S rDNA from the symbionts to understand the phylogeny of the
              cyanobacteria, and detection of the presence of nifH as an indicator of
              capacity to fix N2, examination of the ultrastructure of host and cyanelle, use
              of 14 C autoradiography to examine C transfer, measurements of abundance and
              distribution to quantify ecological importance, along with culture attempts to
              allow laboratory studies directed at determining the nature of the symbiotic
              interactions using GC/MS. The proposed research will take advantage of four
              already- funded (NSF) research cruises scheduled over the next three years in
              the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.

