Title       : Synthetic Studies in Homogeneous Catalysis and Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0131206

Award Number: 0131206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $935000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Collman jpc@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,1966,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James Collman of Stanford University  is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for research on redox
              reactions (involving both electron- and atom-transfer mechanisms) of
              transition-metal poryphrin complexes. Interest will be centered on redox
              reactions involving more than one electron. Investigations of reductions of
              dioxygen by dinuclear porphrin complexes involving two dissimilar metals will
              be continued. Four-electron oxidations of organic complexes by chlorite ion,
              catalyzed by porphrin complexes will be studied, as well as related
              electrochemical reactions. Hetrometallic dinuclear porphrin (and related)
              complexes of second and third row transition elements will be prepared and
              characterized by several methods in order to ellucidate novel types of
              metal-metal multiple bond.

Oxidation-reduction reactions involving the
              transfer of several electrons from reductant to oxidant are not rare in nature
              or in technological applications, but such reactions have been studied
              relatively infrequently. Building on achievements of the prior period of NSF
              support, the PI has identified several diverse types of multi-equivalent redox
              reactions, all of which involve transition metal porphrin complexes as
              catalysts or reactants. There is a strong probability that increased
              understanding of such multi-electron redox reactions will have important
              technological and scientific applications. Four-electron oxidations by chlorite
              ion, to be studied in this program, are regarded as especially promising.
