Title       : Cell Body Ionic Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1993     
File        : a9021217

Award Number: 9021217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart H. Thompson stuartt@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Electrical activity of nerve cells is determined by ion channels               
              found within the cell membrane.  The electrical excitability of                
              individual nerve cells depends upon the types of ion channels                  
              expressed, the relative and absolute densities, and the spatial                
              distributions of ion channels in different regions of the cell.                
              These factors have a functional significance and any modification              
              to these factors could be a cause of neuronal plasticity.  The                 
              molluscan nervous system provides an important model for the                   
              study of neural circuits and neuronal plasticity.  This research               
              project will investigate the mechanisms molluscan neurons use to               
              process information in the nervous system.  Electrophysiological               
              methods of voltage and patch clamping will be utilized to study                
              the biophysics of membrane ion channels and to map the spatial                 
              distribution of ion channels in different areas of the cell.                   
              Biophysical properties that are modulated by activity, such as                 
              the inactivation gating of calcium and potassium, will be                      
              examined to help encode the time history of neuronal activity.                 
              Video fluorescence microscopy will be used to study the spatial                
              patterning of intracellular calcium signals and the nature of the              
              cytoskeleton.  Results of this study will contribute to the                    
              understanding of neuronal information processing and the                       
              specializations responsible for the functional individuality of                
              neurons.
