Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Geo-Data Processing Research and Research Training
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9021778

Award Number: 9021778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor M. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Virginia University
	      
	      Morgantown, WV  26506    304/293-0111

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to West               
              Virginia University for the renovation and repair of the West                  
              Virginia University Geo-data Processing Laboratory which is a part             
              of the Department of Geology and Geography.  The West Virginia                 
              University Geo-data Processing Laboratory focuses on the                       
              integrated storage, processing, and analysis of spatial and                    
              geophysical data, and it supports research and research training               
              in the fields of geographic information systems (GIS), remote                  
              sensing, digital mapping, spatial statistics, and geophysics.                  
              The building which houses the Geo-data Processing Laboratory was               
              constructed in 1942 and last renovated in 1981.  The ARFMP grant               
              of $180,000 and $212,752 provided by the grantee as cost sharing               
              will be used to modernize these research and research training                 
              facilities.  This project will address significant deficiencies of             
              the current research infrastructure by providing (a) electrical                
              circuitry sufficient to support all the equipment, (b) temperature             
              control and ventilation adequate to prevent computer shutdown, (c)             
              suitable lighting, (d) necessary conduit and computer cabling to               
              enable the full potential of the computer system to be used, and               
              (e) a reconfiguration of the individual laboratories into more                 
              suitable sizes.  Benefits accruing from this renovation will be the            
              improvement and expansion of system use.                                       
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of undergraduate and graduate students.  Students             
              trained in these laboratories will have command of a technology                
              which has great potential to facilitate advances in many fields of             
              science.
