Title       : ARFMP: Modernization of the Barclay Biology Teaching Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021816

Award Number: 9021816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Lohr slohr@crestedbutte.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to Rocky              
              Mountain Biological Laboratory, an independent nonprofit field                 
              station, for replacement of Barclay Teaching Laboratory which                  
              houses experimentally-oriented, high-altitude field biological                 
              research and research training activities.  This building was                  
              constructed in 1967 and has never been previously renovated.  Its              
              replacement is fully justified and cost-effective.  The ARFMP                  
              grant of $100,000 and $115,137 provided by the grantee as cost                 
              sharing will be used to modernize these research and research                  
              training facilities which will enhance the laboratory component of             
              field projects carried out at Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory             
              and remove some of the seasonal constraints on the conduct of                  
              research.  This project will address the need to improve the                   
              current research infrastructure by utilizing the foundation of the             
              original building for the construction of another building of                  
              better design.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of quality students and faculty.  The large                   
              number of students from many institutions who are currently                    
              trained in field biology by outstanding biologists at Rocky                    
              Mountain Biological Laboratory, in spite of the adverse conditions             
              that prevail, is exemplary.  The proposed improvements will ensure             
              that continued growth in the already successful faculty research               
              program will proceed and that additional emphasis will be placed on            
              student research and research training.
