Title       : ARFMP: Modernization of Plant and Invertebrate Research and Research Training
               Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021870

Award Number: 9021870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Bernard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Imre A. Tamas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Jonathan Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florence Bernard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to Ithaca             
              College for the replacement of obsolete plant growth facilities by             
              a new Controlled Environment Laboratory Complex for plant and                  
              invertebrate research.  This complex will be a part of a new                   
              science building which will house Ithaca College's biological                  
              research and research training activities.  This building to be                
              replaced was constructed in 1964 and has not been renovated since              
              that time and its replacement is fully justified and cost-                     
              effective.  The ARFMP grant of $375,000 and $378,220 provided by               
              the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these                    
              research and research training facilities.  This project will                  
              address the need to improve the current research infrastructure by             
              providing modern facilities essential to continued research                    
              productivity and the training of undergraduates for advanced work.             
              The replacement will provide a new greenhouse, plant growth rooms,             
              plant growth and insect chambers, and space for tissue culture                 
              work.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of quality undergraduate students many of whom                
              continue on for advanced training.  Students trained in these                  
              laboratories will be able to participate in crucial areas of plant             
              research including environmental protection, evolutionary                      
              genetics, plant development, and plant molecular genetics as well              
              as in research on insects and other invertebrates.
