Title       : Cholinergic Regulation of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1995     
File        : a9021447

Award Number: 9021447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Koenig                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Dohanich dohanich@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Steroid hormones exert dynamic control over a wide variety of                  
              biological functions in mammals.  An important goal is to gain an              
              understanding of the mechanisms by which steroids, (e.g.                       
              estrogens, androgens, progestins) interact with the nervous                    
              system to alter physiological and behavioral functions.  It is                 
              known that steroids can affect behavior by altering chemical                   
              communication between brain cells.  Indeed Dr. Dohanich reports                
              that estrogen influences the chemical signals produced by                      
              acetylcholine, a major muscarinic cholinergic neurotransmitter.                
              He has shown that estrogen activates specific behaviors in                     
              females, in part, through the modulation of acetylcholine                      
              neurotransmission.  Dr. Dohanich plans to extend his initial                   
              findings by determining the effects of cholinergic manipulations               
              on a variety of steroid hormone regulated behaviors.  In                       
              addition, he will investigate the role that various muscarinic                 
              receptors subtypes play in the regulation of these behaviors.                  
              Finally, Dr. Dohanich will determine the changes in cellular                   
              receptors for acetylcholine following hormonal manipulations that              
              alter these specific behaviors.  The results of this work will                 
              enhance our understanding of the role of neurotransmission in the              
              regulation of mammalian behavior.  This is important since the                 
              interplay between neurotransmitters and steroid hormones is a                  
              fundamental mechanisms that influences many functions in the                   
              central nervous system of mammals including humans.                            
              Consequently, this research has important implications for                     
              understanding the biological processes that underline steroid-                 
              dependent events ranging from reproduction to human mood states.
