Title       : The Transcriptional Regulation of Vasopressin and Oxytocin Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9021307

Award Number: 9021307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Sherman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Vasopressin and oxytocin are closely related neuroendocrine                    
              peptide hormones synthesized in specialized neurons of the                     
              hypothalamus that project to the posterior pituitary, where they               
              have access to the general circulation.  Vasopressin is                        
              predominately involved in the physiological mechanisms of water                
              balance and hemodynamic homeostasis, whereas oxytocin regulates                
              milk ejection during lactation and uterine smooth muscle                       
              contractions during parturition.  Although these two neuropeptide              
              hormones exhibit widely differing physiological properties, they               
              are structurally very similar.  Since oxytocin and vasopressin                 
              only differ in two of the nine amino acids, it is believed that                
              they are derived from a common ancestral gene.  However, despite               
              the great physiological importance of these hormones, almost                   
              nothing is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying their               
              transcriptional regulation.  Dr. Sherman will describe the                     
              genetic region that contains both the vasopressin and oxytocin                 
              genes.  He will concentrate on the structure and sequence of the               
              5, flanking regions for the vasopressin and oxytocin duplication               
              domain which are oriented in an inverted fashion and separated by              
              approximately 9 kb of intergenic DNA.  This region may represent               
              the vestiges of a gene duplication event.  In addition, Dr.                    
              Sherman will use state-of-the-art molecular biological                         
              methodologies to elucidate possible functional and tissue-                     
              specific relationships between the vasopressin and oxytocin genes              
              during physiological expression.  Understanding the molecular                  
              events involved in the transcriptional regulation of vasopressin               
              and oxytocin mRNA expression in the hypothalamus will lead to a                
              better understanding of the neuronal events leading to the                     
              secretion of these hormones by neuroendocrine cells.  These                    
              studies interface neuroendocrine cell biology with neuronal and                
              endocrine mechanisms.
