Title       : Dissertation Research: Examination of Relationships Within the Casas Grandes
               Interaction Sphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1990  
File        : a9021969

Award Number: 9021969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Redman charles.redman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Redman, Ms Ronna Bardley will               
              analyze a body of archaeological material to collect data for her              
              doctoral dissertation.  She will study marine shells and shell                 
              artifacts excavated from the site of Casas Grandes in Northern                 
              Mexico and from a number of sites in the U.S. Southwest to                     
              determine the interactions between these regions.  She wishes to               
              trace this process from collection (in the Gulf of California)                 
              through manufacture, distribution and consumption. To accomplish               
              this, she will examine the natural ranges of species represented.              
              Because within a single species shell chemical composition varies              
              by region, she will analyze and match archaeological specimens                 
              with samples from different geographical areas.  Finally, she                  
              will conduct a stylistic analysis to help determine where                      
              manufacturing took place.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Between approximately 1100 - 1300 AD, a large population grew in               
              Chihuahua, Mexico and was centered at the site of Casas Grandes.               
              Given the size and monumental nature of the site, it is clear                  
              that a stratified complex society was present.  The discovery of               
              many exotic materials at Casas Grandes indicates that widespread               
              trade occurred, and the city in fact may have served primarily as              
              a trading center.  At approximately the same time large sites                  
              also appeared in the Southwestern United States and                            
              archaeologists have questioned whether these represent an                      
              independent local process or rather result from direct                         
              Mesoamerican influence via Casas Grandes. Through chemical and                 
              stylistic analysis of shell artifacts, Ms Bradley will examine                 
              the issue directly.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed new              
              light on the role of trade and inter-regional exchange in the                  
              emergence of complex societies.  It will also help to develop a                
              new approach to shell sourcing which may be applicable in a wide               
              variety of situations.  Finally, it will assist in the training                
              of an extremely promising young scientist.
