Title       : RUI: Self-Schemata: Linking Intentions and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1992     
File        : a9021105

Award Number: 9021105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Kendzierski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Researchers have identified a number of factors that affect                    
              decision implementation (i.e., the linking of intentions and                   
              behavior).  While several important social psychological models                
              include links between intentions and behavior, no adequate                     
              theoretical model of decision implementation exists for dealing                
              with complex situations where implementation requires                          
              considerable time and effort at multiple points in time.  Such is              
                                                                                             
              the case with many important health  behaviors (e.g., adherence                
              to diet, exercise, and medication regimens).                                   
                                                                                             
              This research will examine the role of self-schemata in decision               
              implementation.  Self-schemata are cognitive structures involving              
              generalizations about the self that are focused on aspects of the              
              self regarded by the individual as important.  Previous research               
              has linked self-schemata to self-reported behavior in both                     
              concurrent and prospective studies.  The research will determine               
              whether self-schemata moderate the strength of the relationship                
              between individuals' intentions to diet and their dieting                      
              behavior, and examine on possible reason why this might occur:                 
              namely, that the dieting intentions of individuals who possess a               
              self-schema in this domain are more accessible from memory.                    
                                                                                             
              The research represents the first step in the development of a                 
              schema-based model of decision implementation.  It will                        
              contribute to our understanding of the role that the self plays                
              in linking intentions and behavior, test the adequacy of several               
              social psychological models as regards the link between intention              
              and behavior, and extend schema theory by examining one possible               
              mechanism by which self-schemata may moderate intention-behavior               
              consistency.
