Title       : Alliance for Success Science and Engineering Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1990  
File        : a9021233

Award Number: 9021233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Williams                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Girves jgirves@columbus.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Alliance for Success in the academic consortium of 13                      
              major research institutions and six historically Black                         
              colleges and universities.  The Alliance was established in                    
              February of 1989 as a comprehensive and cooperative effort to                  
              increase the numbers of minority faculty members nationally.                   
              Its programs and initiatives are intended to affect the                        
              pipeline of minority students at several critical stages from                  
              the freshman year through post- doctoral research activities.                  
              Emphasis during the undergraduate phase is focused on the                      
              preparation, motivation and support of honors students in                      
              their pursuit of graduate study and academic careers.                          
                                                                                             
              Alliance institutions have the experience and resources                        
              required to significantly increase minority representation                     
              in the sciences and engineering (S&E).  The highly successful                  
              Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP) has dramatically                  
              increased the graduation and retention rates among minority                    
              students.  Science inception of the SROP in 1986, 99% of its                   
              1,514 minority participants are still enrolled or have                         
              graduated, 66% of its graduates have entered                                   
              post-baccalaureate programs (three times the national                          
              average for all baccalaureates), and over 50% have indicated                   
              an interest in becoming professors.  The major research                        
              institutions in the Alliance, who engage in over $2 billion                    
              worth of externally funded research annually and confer over                   
              17% of the S&E PhD degrees awarded annually in the United                      
              States, have the capacity to ensure high quality graduate                      
              education for all graduates of Alliance programs who are                       
              admitted to their graduate schools.                                            
                                                                                             
              Utilizing the invaluable experience of five year of the SROP                   
              program as a firm foundation, we intend to take a giant step                   
              that could literally change the face of American science and                   
              engineering.  The Alliance proposes planning activities to                     
              address specifically undergraduate S&E education.  The                         
              planning process will focus on expansion and enhancement of                    
              the Alliance Summer Research Opportunities Program for S&E                     
              minority students, development of criteria for a Summer S&E                    
              Institute, identification of mechanisms for instructional and                  
              curricular enrichment activities in S&E disciplines,                           
              development of recruiting strategies directed at increasing                    
              minority student participation in S&E, and coordination of                     
              data collection, measurement and evaluation for determining                    
              the success rate of Alliance programs.  The outcome from each                  
              of these planning efforts is intended to significantly                         
              improve the undergraduate educational experience of minority                   
              S&E students, and to prepare and motivate them to pursue                       
              graduate studies leading toward productive faculty careers.                    
              Because they are part of an integrated and longitudinal set                    
              of initiative, and because the product of one program will                     
              positively influence the level of participation and success                    
              rate of the next program in the serves, we believe the effect                  
              of the whole will greatly exceed the sum of the individual                     
              components.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              On behalf of the chief academic officers of the Alliance for                   
              Success, we request funding in the among of $40,000 to                         
              undertake the planning outlined above, and to develop from                     
              it a strong implementation proposal.  Alliance member                          
              institutions have already committed $80,000 for the current                    
              year to provide the infrastructures for the planning                           
              process.  A partnership with NSF Alliances for Minority                        
              Participation Program will make possible the stimulation                       
              of positive change in the participation of minorities in                       
              science and  engineering.
