Title       : Strategic Self-Presentation of Emotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9021603

Award Number: 9021603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret S. Clark mc0z+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate:  a) the attributions people draw               
              about others based on the emotions those others express, b) how                
              people's behavior toward others is influenced by the emotions                  
              those others express, and c) whether and, if so, when, people                  
              will choose to intentionally strategically present emotions to                 
              others.  Three emotions will be investigated:  happiness, sadness              
              and anger.  A person's happiness is expected to increase                       
              attributions of likableness to that person and to increase                     
              compliance with the person.  Happiness is expected to be                       
              strategically presented to others as an ingratiation strategy                  
              when the potential presenter has reason for the other to like him              
              or her and/or a desire for the other to comply with him or her.                
              A person's sadness is expected to increase neediness attributions              
              of dependency or neediness to that person and to increase the                  
              amount of help that that person will receive (assuming the other               
              feels some moral obligation to help).  Sadness is expected to be               
              strategically presented to others as a supplication strategy when              
              the presented desires help.  This may be a more effective                      
              strategy in communal relationships (in which obligation to help                
              is high) than in exchange relationships (in which obligation to                
              help is lower).  Finally, a person's anger is expected to                      
              increase attributions of dangerousness to that person and to                   
              increase the amount of others' compliance with that person's                   
              desires.  This may be particularly  true when the potential                    
              complier has low power relative to the angry person and when                   
              their relationship is a non-voluntary one.  Anger is expected to               
              be strategically presented to others as an intimidation strategy               
              when the presenter wants the other to comply, has power over the               
              other and when the relationship is non-voluntary.                              
                                                                                             
              This research will inform our understanding of strategic self-                 
              presentation, as well as increase the body of knowledge related                
              to communal and exchange relationships.
