Title       : ARFMP: Modernization of Research Facilities for Chemistry, Physics, and Computer
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1995   
File        : a9021801

Award Number: 9021801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Sapp   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ollie C. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to                    
              Tuskegee University for the repair, renovation, and                            
              reconfiguration of the recently vacated John A. Andrew Hospital                
              complex as a replacement for the facilities currently used to                  
              house the research and research training activities of the                     
              Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Computer Science.  The main             
              portion of this complex to be modified was constructed in 1970 and             
              has not been renovated since that time.  The replacement and                   
              relocation are fully justified and cost-effective.  The ARFMP                  
              grant of $950,000 and $1,300,000 provided by the grantee as cost               
              sharing will be used to modernize these research and research                  
              training facilities.  This project will address the need to                    
              improve the current research infrastructure by reconfiguring the               
              space, installing adequate heating, ventilation and air                        
              conditioning (HVAC) and other building systems, and providing                  
              needed fixed equipment such as laboratory casework, fume hoods,                
              and cold rooms.  Bringing biology, chemistry, and computer                     
              sciences together and also in closer proximity to related                      
              activities can be expected to enhance collaborations, the                      
              efficiency of the use of the facilities, and the quality and                   
              quantity of ongoing research.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of undergraduate and graduate students.  This                 
              project will play a significant role in helping Tuskegee                       
              University to remain a demonstrated leader in the direction,                   
              inspiration, and training of qualified black students and women                
              students and an important resource for bringing them into the                  
              human resources pipeline in scientific fields.
