Title       : ARFMP: Facilities Replacement and Renovation - Natural Resource Ecology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9021805

Award Number: 9021805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361414             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Gibson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to                    
              Colorado State University for the relocation of the Natural                    
              Resource Ecology Laboratory (NREL) which houses interdisciplinary              
              ecological sciences research and research training activities to               
              the Biochemistry and Radiation Biology Building.  The Biochemistry             
              and Radiation Biology building was constructed in 1947 and last                
              renovated in 1987.  The relocation is fully justified and cost-                
              effective.  The ARFMP grant of $360,000 and $542,121 provided by               
              the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these                    
              research and research training facilities.  This project will                  
              address the need to improve the current research infrastructure by             
              relocating NREL to another space, which is being completely                    
              repaired and renovated, in the old Biochemistry and Radiation                  
              Biology Building and thus providing a research and research                    
              training space adequate in size and design and complete with new               
              wiring, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), and fume            
              hoods that are adequate to accommodate the quantity, quality, and              
              diversity of research conducted in this burgeoning program.  The               
              Center for Analysis of the Dynamics of Regional Ecosystems (CADRE),            
              a multi-institutional and transdisciplinary center of excellence in            
              the ecological and atmospheric sciences, has just been approved by             
              the University.  The strength and the experience of the research               
              institute, NREL, which will be enhanced by this project, is one of             
              the cornerstones upon which CADRE is being built.                              
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of quality undergraduate and graduate students in             
              an expanding program in ecosystems research that is of regional,               
              national, and international importance.  This project will assist              
              in the fulfillment of the University of Colorado's commitment to               
              enhance research on the effects of climate on arid and semi-arid               
              ecosystems through training of future scientists with a holistic               
              view of atmosphere-biosphere interactions.
