Title       : Curatorial Support for the Field Museum Herbarium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9021960

Award Number: 9021960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $527984             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Engel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine J. Niezgoda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Herbarium of the Field Museum of Natural History                      
              contains 2.5 million mounted specimens with concentrated coverage              
              of Central and South American areas, and is the fifth largest                  
              repository of plant specimens in the western hemisphere.  The                  
              Herbarium is actively expanding its holdings through the research              
              and survey activities of its Curators, through exchanges with                  
              other herbariums, and through donations of private collections.                
              Botanists from around the world rely on access to the specimens                
              in the Herbarium which are made available to visiting                          
              investigators and through loans.  The Museum has initiated an                  
              ambitious plan to construct new collection storage areas for the               
              Herbarium, and this will relieve crowding in the collection,                   
              allow currently inaccessible specimens to be processed and made                
              available, and provide room for many years of collection growth.               
              Dr. John Engel, Chairman of the Museum's Botany Department, has                
              devised a three-year plan to make all backlogged specimens                     
              available, and to implement the first phase of transition to the               
              newly constructed collection area.                                             
                   Collections of natural history specimens such as the Field                
              Museum's Herbarium are critical resources for the study of                     
              biological diversity on Earth.  Continued growth and improvement               
              of these resources is essential for current investigations into                
              ecology, evolution, global change (among other areas of                        
              inquiry), and for future generations of researchers.
