Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Paleontological Research Facilities at Field Museum of
               Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9021856

Award Number: 9021856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Bolt   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              Field Museum of Natural History for the renovation and repair of               
              paleontological facilities housed in the Department of Geology.                
              This building was constructed more than 25 years ago and has not               
              been renovated since 1975.  The ARFMP grant of $375,000 and                    
              $420,495 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to               
              modernize these research and research training facilities and will             
              permit the accommodation of multiple users.  This project will                 
              address the need to improve the current research infrastructure in             
              terms of health and safety as well as of the quality and range of              
              research that can be conducted by modernizing the heating,                     
              ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), electrical, and plumbing             
              systems; constructing new workbenches; and moving the Geomagnetics             
              Laboratory and Image Analysis Laboratory into renovated, larger,               
              dedicated rooms.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of                           
              paleontological research and for the training of quality                       
              undergraduate and graduate students not only from the United                   
              States but also from many other countries.  Students trained in                
              these laboratories, with access to these outstanding                           
              paleontological collections, can benefit from research                         
              opportunities not available at the neighboring universities with               
              which they have a collaborative relationship, namely, the                      
              University of Chicago, the University of Illinois-Chicago, and                 
              Northwestern University.  The studies of students at the Field                 
              Museum will complement the programs and facilities at these                    
              collaborating institutions.
