Title       : Social and Political Uses of Quantification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9021707

Award Number: 9021707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Porter is studying the social and political role of                        
              quantification.  He argues that the "objectivity" of quantitative              
              arguments is not simply a matter of appearing true, but also of                
              being highly standardized, or governed by explicit rules.                      
              Quantitative reasoning is valued in the political realm in part                
              because it seems to be independent of the biases and interests of              
              individuals, and hence to be quintessentially "public" knowledge.              
              Dr. Porter is examining from this standpoint the history of some               
              of the most widely-used modern methods for reducing decisions to               
              calculations.  His research emphasizes the uses of cost-benefit                
              analysis and, if time is available, statistical methods for                    
              detecting weak causes (such as carcinogenicity in chemicals).                  
              This is the first serious historical study of either of these                  
              methods, and indeed the first systematic attempt to understand                 
              historically the vastly-increased importance of quantification in              
              public life.  His standpoint throughout is that of the history of              
              science, and he compares these public uses of calculation with                 
              quantitative norms for reporting experimental results, such as                 
              the significance test.
