Title       : Theoretical Approaches to Temporal Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9021562

Award Number: 9021562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106052             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Gregor Fetterman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              What are the mechanisms that mediate the experience of time in                 
              humans and other animals?  Killeen and Fetterman (1988) argued                 
              that animals base temporal judgments on behaviors elicited by                  
              periodic reinforcements, and that the frequency of reinforcement               
              determines the speed of a pacemaker whose pulses instigate                     
              transitions from one behavior to another.  This research will                  
              evaluate the adequacy of that Behavioral Theory of timing, and                 
              will compare its predictions against those of an information-                  
              processing theory of animal timing (Scalar Expectancy Theory).                 
                                                                                             
              Behavioral Theory predicts a correlation between temporal                      
              judgments and ongoing behavior, and thus Dr. Fetterman will                    
              observe animals as they time the duration of events.  Temporal                 
              judgments should be better predicted by the ongoing behavior than              
              by the time elapsed.  Dr. Fetterman will also disrupt ongoing                  
              behavior, which should produce a decrease in the accuracy of                   
              timing.  Other experiments concern the statistical properties of               
              the pacemaker and the relation between the speed of the                        
              pacemaker, arousal, and ensuing temporal judgments.  Behavioral                
              Theory holds that a given interval of time is always evaluated                 
              relative to the prevailing level of arousal; changes in arousal                
              should cause changes in the perceived duration of events.                      
              Several experiments will incorporate manipulations that should                 
              alter level of arousal (e.g., by changing rate of reinforcement),              
              and thus should perturb the animal's sense of time.  These                     
              findings may be related to the human literature on disturbances                
              in biorhythmicity and to disorders that involve a distortion of                
              time perspective.
