Title       : US-Malaysia Cooperative Research: Elemental Analysis of Geological Materials by
               Glow Discharge Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9021952

Award Number: 9021952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard W. Harrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1970,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Willard W.                          
              Harrison, Department of Chemistry, University of Florida,                      
              and Dr. Tong Soo Loong, Department of Chemistry, University                    
              of Malaya, to pursue, for a period of 24 months,                               
              cooperative research on the elemental analysis of                              
              geological materials by glow discharge methods.  They will                     
              study the glow discharge as an atomization, excitation, and                    
              ionization source for the elemental analysis of solids by                      
              mass spectroscopy and atomic emission.  The research will                      
              center on the examination of geological materials by                           
              compacting them with a variety of host matrices.  They will                    
              study sample preparation procedures and the effect of                          
              getter agents as matrix and plasma modifiers to scavenge                       
              reactive gases.  Comparisons will be made of spectral                          
              interferences, and alternative discharge gases will be                         
              compared to determine any resultant advantages to their use                    
              in glow discharge sources.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Several important analytical techniques can advantageously                     
              utilize the characteristics of a glow discharge.  Solid                        
              samples can be handled directly without the need for sample                    
              dissolution.  The glow discharge, in general, is a simple                      
              two-electrode device, filled with a rare gas, usually                          
              argon, at low pressure.  The sample to be analyzed forms                       
              the cathode.  When an electric current is passed through                       
              the device, argon ions are formed, impact upon the sample,                     
              and sputter atoms into the plasma.  Collision processes                        
              subsequently excite and ionize fractions of the sputtered                      
              neutral atoms.  The ionized matter may then be studied by                      
              various spectrometric techniques.  In their research, the                      
              collaborators will address several problems encountered in                     
              using the glow discharge to analyze geological samples.                        
              The collaborators are highly respected scientists whose                        
              past association has been productive.  This project is                         
              relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing                        
              Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of                         
              cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their                    
              counterparts in developing countries through the exchange                      
              of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques                       
              and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
