Title       : Relatedness and Altruism in Neotropical Wasps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9021514

Award Number: 9021514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Sakai                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Queller queller@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin R. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan E. Strassmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Social insects provide nature's most conspicuous example of               
              altruistic behavior, in which some individuals sacrifice their                 
              survival and reproduction for the benefit of others.  Theories of              
              the evolution of altruism have therefore emphasized social                     
              insects.  The theory of kin selection predicts that social insect              
              colonies should be groups of close relatives, and this is usually              
              true.  However, when there are many egg-laying queens per colony,              
              average relatedness is expected to be quite low.  The maintenance              
              of worker altruism then becomes more problematic, unless workers               
              are locked into their role by a specialized morphology.  From                  
              this perspective, the social insects that most challenge current               
              understanding of the maintenance of worker behavior are the                    
              swarm-founding wasps of the neo-tropics, because they combine the              
              multiple-queen habit with little or no morphological                           
              differentiation between workers and queens.                                    
                   Study of this group will answer two vital questions.  First,              
              how low is relatedness among colony-mates in these wasps?                      
              Second, what factors other than queen number influence                         
              relatedness, especially in cases where relatedness is higher than              
              expected?  If relatedness is very low, then these studies will                 
              show that current theories of the evolution of sociality may need              
              revision.  If relatedness is not low, then the problem posed by                
              the presence of multiple queens will be solved.  Further                       
              investigations into why relatedness is not low will uncover the                
              forces that help to maintain altruistic behavior in this group.
