Title       : Processing of Choline Acetyltransferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9021042

Award Number: 9021042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165625             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Randall Slemmon   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Olschowka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Nervous system function is tied closely to the development and                 
              maintenance of neurons in both the central and peripheral nervous              
              systems.  Molecular technologies developed over the last two                   
              decades have greatly enhanced our ability to understand the                    
              cellular mechanisms that mediate these processes, thereby                      
              highlighting new areas of research.  One such area has included                
              questions of how the neuron sorts its several thousand proteins                
              following synthesis, which is then followed by cellular transport              
              of each one to specific locations.  The general mechanisms used                
              to accomplish these tasks are used by all cells throughout their               
              existence and play important roles in cellular development, the                
              reaction of cells to stress and the maintenance of the cell's                  
              functions.  By studying the above process for molecules like                   
              choline acetyltransferase, the biosynthetic enzyme for the                     
              important neurotransmitter acetylcholine, we can begin to                      
              understand how neurons of this particular subtype continue to                  
              carry out their contribution to neuron-neuron communication over               
              time.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The projects undertaken in this study have been designed to                    
              exploit what is known of protein transport and apply this to what              
              has been learned about the structure of choline                                
              acetyltransferase.  This enzyme possesses an extra statement on                
              its amino terminal end that has the appearance of a structural                 
              domain capable of mediating translocation.  This will be tested                
              by examining if the sequence is removed as a result of the                     
              transport process.  Similar types of proteolytic processing are                
              commonly observed for protein translocation in other systems.  If              
              such a segment removal occurs, then it may identify one mechanism              
              by which proteins critical to neurotransmission are deployed. In               
              addition, this may lead to a better understanding of the process               
              by which proteins are recognized and how the structure of neurons              
              are maintained.
