Title       : Dry Chemical Etching of Gallium Arsenide in OMVPE Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1991     
File        : a9021626

Award Number: 9021626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Flytzani-Stephanopoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The epitaxial growth of gallium arsenide (GaAs) by                             
              organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE) has been used to                    
              grow various III-V and II-VI compound semiconductors and for                   
              electronic and optoelectronic devices.  Optimizing the reactor                 
                                                                                             
              design for OMVPE growth has been done by, for example gas flow                 
                                                                                             
              visualization and numerical simulation.  A major advantage of                  
              OMVPE over molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is that the growth                     
              rates of the former can be four to ten times higher than MBE,                  
              making feasible the production of electronic devices on a                      
              large volume scale.  The OMVPE throughput and yield in large-                  
              scale device fabrication could be enhanced if complete in-situ                 
                                                                                             
              device processing, such as etching, patterning and regrowth                    
              were demonstrated.  The advantage of such processing are:                      
                   (1) potential for fabrication of low-loss buried                          
                       waveguides and low threshold buried diode lasers                      
                      (2) simplified processing                                              
                   (3) low contamination                                                     
              The PIs are therefore working at interfaces developing a                       
              simple dry etching process with capabilities for in-situ,                      
              large area etching without contaminant introduction or surface                 
                                                                                             
              degradation.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              In this study, they plan to investigate the in-situ dry                        
              chemical etching of GaAs and AlGaAs using methyl radical                       
              sources.  The PIs plan to study the "reverse growth" or                        
              "etching" of GaAs using several methyl radical-sources at near                 
                                                                                             
              atmospheric pressure typical in OMVPE growth.  These studies                   
              will identify the most promising source and operating                          
              conditions for the in-situ etching of GaAs in OMPVE reactors                   
              without impurity buildup and/or surface morphology changes.                    
              Azomethane, iodomethane, hydrogen iodide, and trimethyl                        
              arsenic will be examined as source compounds at temperatures                   
              in the range of 300-600oC.  Another objective is to examine                    
              the orientation dependence of etching.  Patterned substrate                    
              with different crystal orientations exposed will be studied.                   
              The anisotrophy of etching will also be examined with masked                   
              substrate.  Additionally, the work aims at identifying the                     
              conditions and understanding the process leading to "poor"                     
              etching regimes as evidenced by either substrate morphology                    
              changes or the incorporation of impurities.
