Title       : ARFMP: Renovation of Inadequate Ventilation Systems in Biological Research
               Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021734

Award Number: 9021734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Gubins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia for the renovation and             
              repair of two buildings at its Philadelphia headquarters, the                  
              Research Wing, which houses the Academy's biological research                  
              collections, and the Main Building, which houses research and                  
              research training activities in aquatic ecology and systematic and             
              evolutionary biology.  These buildings were constructed,                       
              respectively, in 1978 and in 1872.  The newer of the two buildings             
              has never been renovated and the older one was last renovated in               
              1980.  The ARFMP grant of $200,000 and $350,900 provided by the                
              grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these research               
              and research training facilities.  This project will address the               
              need to improve the current research infrastructure in terms of                
              health and safety as well as of the quality of research that can be            
              conducted by renovating the ventilation systems in both of the                 
              buildings.  These renovations will enable the continuation of                  
              current laboratory research activities; contribute to the                      
              preservation of the integrity of laboratory experiments and to the             
              control of adverse effects of air quality, relative humidity, and              
              temperature on the systematics collections; and permit the                     
              implementation of new activities involving radioisotopes and                   
              carcinogens.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of quality undergraduate and graduate students.               
              Students trained in these laboratories are in demand in both basic             
              and applied research fields.  In addition, the project will                    
              contribute to the Academy of Natural Sciences' efforts directed                
              toward human resources pipeline issues which involve working with              
              pre-college students.
