Title       : Seasonal Control of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1992     
File        : a9021706

Award Number: 9021706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Herndon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane J. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Delwood C. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory Univ Yerkes Reg Pri
	      
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Body temperature, hormone production and other biological                      
              functions fluctuate according to a regular pattern over a 24-hour              
              cycle.  Such circadian rhythms control many aspects of human                   
              metabolism, including the sleep/wake cycles and attentiveness.                 
              It is also becoming more evident that humans, like other mammals,              
              display annual cycles in many kinds of behavior.  Among these                  
              seasonally fluctuating human traits are rates of suicide, violent              
              crimes, and emotional levels as well as changes in hormone levels              
              and conception.  Dr. Herndon will use a primate model to                       
              understand the mechanisms underling the control of annual cycles.              
                                                                                             
              He proposes that reproductive success is regulated by daylength                
              which is transduced by the nocturnal secretion of melatonin, a                 
              hormone of the pineal gland.  To test this hypothesis, Dr.                     
              Herndon will determine the effects of altering daily photoperiod               
              and melatonin levels on the pattern of luteinizing hormone,                    
              follicle stimulating hormone, and testosterone secretion.  In                  
              addition, he will determine the effects of these manipulations on              
              behavior.  These results will provide important insight into the               
              nature and neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying annual cycles in               
              all primates, including humans.
