Title       : ARFMP: Renovation and Modernization of Marine Science Hall,Dauphin Island Sea
               Lab, Alabama Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9021845

Award Number: 9021845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Crozier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve D. Jorgensen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium of the state of Alabama,              
              which serves 21 state academic institutions including three                    
              predominantly black colleges and universities and which operates               
              and maintains the Dauphin Island Sea Lab, for the renovation and               
              repair of Marine Science Hall and for the replacement of attendant             
              buildings.  Marine Science Hall houses multi-disciplinary                      
              biological and behavioral science research and research training               
              activities in coastal marine science.  This building was                       
              constructed in 1950 and last renovated in 1990.  The ARFMP grant of            
              $585,000 and $585,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will             
              be used to modernize these research and research training                      
              facilities.  In order to relieve overcrowding and to provide                   
              suitable facilities for collaborative investigation, this project              
              will address the need to improve the current research                          
              infrastructure by repair or replacement of the physical structure              
              and its supporting systems.  Resulting from these changes will be              
              more space for laboratory use and the creation of a video analysis             
              facility and an isotope facility.                                              
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and                    
              engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct               
              of research and for the training of undergraduates, graduates and              
              postdoctoral students in interdisciplinary research.  This                     
              modernization project makes a further contribution to the human                
              resources pipeline because of the Dauphin Island Sea Lab's unique              
              ability to introduce pre-college students to the knowledge                     
              generated by the Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium's                    
              scientists and collaborators.
