Title       : Task Allocation and Checkpointing in Distributed Computer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9021041

Award Number: 9021041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Franklin jbf@ccrc.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth F. Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,
Abstract    :
              With the increasing availability of message based distributed parallel         
              computing systems, the difficulties associated with constructing               
              parallel algorithms and mapping them onto parallel architectures have          
              grown in importance.  Currently, the algorithm development and                 
              programming process typically includes the explicit mapping of                 
              algorithm subtasks to processors.  This problem is typically dealt             
              with manually and often results in inefficient computation and                 
              communication load balancing which in turn leads to an overall                 
              reduction in the speedups potentially obtainable.                              
              The problem is exacerbated when distributed architectures are                  
              considered where processors and/or communications links are subject to         
              failure, yet must continue processing at reasonable rates with the             
              remaining computing resources.  This requires that process and data            
              checkpointing be done effectively and that, on detection and location          
              of failures, the system be reconfigured and tasks reallocated.  This           
              work focuses on the checkpointing and task reallocation problems.              
              This research program is aimed at investigating approaches to                  
              allocating tasks to processors in distributed computer systems whose           
              reliability characteristics have been characterized.  The goal is to           
              ensure effective use of the remaining distributed resources after              
              failure (processor or link) has occurred through the development of            
              distributed checkpointing and fast task reallocation schemes.
