Title       : Microevolution of Acoustic Communication in Acris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9021185

Award Number: 9021185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Ryan mryan@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Wilczynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Auditory communication requires a sound call emitted by one                    
              animal to be received as a sensory signal and detected reliably                
              by another animal listening.  It is important to know how the                  
              receiver is matched to the signal in a given species, and how                  
              congruence can be maintained over generations despite the                      
              individual variability within a species.  Nowhere is the match                 
              between signal and receiver more crucial than when the                         
              communication system is used in mate recognition.  Females                     
              often use the signal from a calling male to discriminate                       
              between members of the same species versus other species, and                  
              if the male's signal does not match the female's detection                     
              properties he will be ignored as a potential mate.                             
                                                                                             
              Neurobiology, behavior, morphology and evolutionary biology                    
              are combined here to study the "microevolution" of                             
              communication in particular populations of cricket frogs.  The                 
              advertisement calls of males ready to mate will be quantified                  
              to see how pitch and timing of their acoustic components differ                
              among the populations.  Neurophysiological recording in the                    
              brain will be used to see how the auditory pathway processes                   
              call features that characterize the population.  Behavioral                    
              studies will test whether females respond preferentially to                    
              calls from their local population.  Variation within a                         
              population will be analyzed to see how differences affect mate                 
              choice, to identify sex differences in the communication                       
              system, and to see how the structure of the calling organ, the                 
              larynx, may constrain or promote call changes.  Finally,                       
              genetic relatedness will be assessed biochemically to see if                   
              populations that are separated but share similar call structure                
              reflect similar pressures from habitat constraints on acoustic                 
              signals, or instead reflect a historical ancestral relation-                   
              ship.  This work represents a uniquely complete analysis of a                  
              particular communication system, likely to uncover fundamental                 
              patterns and processes underlying the neural and morphological                 
              control and evolution of vertebrate social behavior and                        
              communication.  Its multidisciplinary scope is likely to produce               
              a wide impact on many areas of biology.
