Title       : Analysis of the Principles Underlying 3 Dimensional GraphicsPerception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9021270

Award Number: 9021270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Wickens cwickens@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research has the objectives of formulating and validating                 
              theory-based principles for the visual representation of higher                
              dimensional scientific data.  Two theoretical perspectives are                 
              joined in this work.  One addresses the similar characteristics                
              of the display of two or more data points that facilitate their                
              cognitive integration, but disrupts the focussing of attention on              
              single data points.  This perspective emphasizes the similarity                
              induced by contours and color.  The second addresses biases and                
              characteristics of depth perception.  Subjects view                            
              multidimensional data bases on a workstation that characterize                 
              the constraints between dimensional values in different                        
              scientific domains (e.g., meteorology, electrophysiology,                      
              economics), in various static and dynamic, color and monochrome,               
              3D formats that allow test of the hypotheses.  They answer a                   
              range of questions of the displayed data, and the speed and                    
              accuracy of the response is used to evaluate graphical formats.                
              While a wealth of display technology is now available for                      
              scientific visualizaiton, there are very few empirical                         
              validations of the techniques offered, and those are not                       
              described within the framework of general principles of human                  
              perception and cognition, in a way to generalize to other                      
              applications.  This research will advance knowledge by providing               
              such generalization.
