Title       : The Analysis of Optic Flow Without Locally Smooth Velocity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1991       
File        : a9021081

Award Number: 9021081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128780             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Andersen ANDERSEN@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most current models of how people perceive the 3-D shape of                    
              moving objects are capable of determining shape when only a                    
              single object is present.  However, in the real world we usually               
              encounter scenes in which many objects are moving.  This research              
              will develop a new model of the perception of the shape of                     
              objects when several objects are moving in a scene.  The research              
              will study scenes in which overlapping objects cannot be                       
              distinguished in a static view, but can be distinguished when the              
              observer or the objects are in motion.  Three sets of experiments              
              will determine the limitations of human observers in perceiving                
              multiple moving objects.  The first set of experiments will study              
              people's ability to determine the number of objects that are                   
              moving in a complex scene.  The second set of experiments will                 
              study how people identify the shapes of objects moving in a                    
              scene.  The third set of experiments will study how people judge               
              the amount of depth between objects in the scene.  These results               
              will facilitate the three-stage development of the model.  The                 
              first stage will use results from the first set of experiments to              
              derive mathematically the number of independent objects that are               
              moving in a computer-generated scene.  The second stage will use               
              results from the second set of experiments to describe                         
              mathematically the shape of small regions of each object.  The                 
              third stage will use results from the third set of experiments to              
              specify a quantitative value of the distance between objects in a              
              scene.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              An understanding of how the visual system determines the shape                 
              and depth of multiple moving objects will have important                       
              implications for the design of computer-generated displays used                
              to train pilots, for the development of visual aids for the                    
              blind, and for the development of robotics vision systems.
