Title       : Intonation in Tone Languages: A Comparative Study of Mandarin, Yoruba, and
               Cantonese
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9021274

Award Number: 9021274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Lin Shih   (Principal Investigator current)
              Akinbiyi Akinlabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACTS                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This grant provides equipment to enable the investigators to                   
              compare the intonation of three tone languages: Mandarin, Yoruba,              
              and Cantonese.  In all three languages, FO contours can be                     
              approximated with sparsely placed tonal targets.  Chinese tones                
              typically have two targets, placed at the beginning and the end                
              of the rhyme.  However, the first target of a rising tone is                   
              delayed to the center of the rhyme.  An innovative analysis of                 
              Yoruba tonal target placement drastically simplifies Yoruba tonal              
              phonology.  Each tone in Yoruba has a single target. H(igh) and                
              L(ow) targets are aligned with the end of the rhyme, but M(id)                 
              target is aligned with the beginning.  This alignment                          
              automatically accounts for the 'spreading' phenomenon                          
              traditionaly handled by a phonological rule.  Data on the scaling              
              of tonal target confirms that global downtrend can be viewed as                
              the combination of many factors.  Declination effect found in                  
              sequence of like targets is strongest in L sequence and less in H              
              sequence, so is final lowering, which affects the final syllable.              
              Catathesis (downstep) is restricted to alternating L H sequence.               
              The amount of lowering depends on the pitch level of the L                     
              target.  Mid tones, however, do not have strong catathesis                     
              effect.
