Title       : US-Belgium Cooperative Research: Protandrous Fishes as Tests of Sex Allocation
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9021096

Award Number: 9021096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7485               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Warner warner@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5947      BELGIUM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Robert Warner, Marine Science Institute, University of                         
              California at Santa Barbara and Dr. Francois Wernerus,                         
              Staresco Marine Laboratory, Calvia, Corsica. The objective                     
              of the project is to study protandrous fishes (those which                     
              change sex from male to female) to test theories of sex                        
              allocation.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Evolutionary ecologists have long been interested in the                       
              phenomenon of sex change in fishes.  Within this group the                     
              patterns of sexuality show extreme variety, and this                           
              variety has often been used to explore the adaptive                            
              significance of sex allocation. Sex allocation theory deals                    
              with the evolutionary dynamics of sexual expression:  sex                      
              ratio, hermaphroditism and related topics.  Ever since this                    
              theory began to develop in the mid-seventies, it has been                      
              pointed out that there is a critical need to document the                      
              mating systems of species that are protandrous.  Theory                        
              predicts that these species should have mating systems in                      
              which mating occurs in random pairs or small groups, such                      
              that there is a size advantage in reproduction accrued by                      
              small males relative to small females.  The investigators                      
              propose to test these predictions by assessing size-specific                   
              mating success and mating group size in four sparid fishes                     
              common in the Mediterranean.  Two of these species are                         
              protandrous, one changes sex in the opposite direction, and                    
              one does not change sex.  Comparisons between these species                    
              will offer a powerful test of theory.  The research will be                    
              carried out at the Staresco Marine Laboratory in Corsica,                      
              which is a major center for research in marine behavioral                      
              ecology.  The research will benefit from the theoretical                       
              expertise of Dr. Warner and the experimental experience of                     
              Dr. Wernerus.
