Title       : Neurotransmitter Mechanisms Regulating Molluscan Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9021586

Award Number: 9021586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Ram jeffram@med.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project investigates the underlying mechanisms by which                   
              drugs affect the contraction of smooth muscles.  Smooth muscles                
              are the type of muscles that line blood vessels, cause the                     
              movements of the walls of the stomach and intestine, and control               
              the opening and closing of the pupils of the eye.  These muscles               
              as important as they are for normal blood pressure, digestion,                 
              and vision in humans, are nevertheless considered to be more                   
              "primitive" than skeletal or cardiac muscle.  Smooth muscles are               
              the main type of muscles in lower organisms, such as snails or                 
              worms, where they can be studied with fewer technical                          
              difficulties than in vertebrate animals.  Understanding the                    
              mechanisms by which endogenous substances or drugs control the                 
              contraction of these muscles may help us better understand                     
              hypertension, blindness or problems in digestion.  One substance               
              found in both humans and lower animals is serotonin, which is                  
              released by blood clots and can contract blood vessel walls and                
              amplify the effects or other contractile substances, thereby,                  
              exacerbating the effect of the clot.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research studies the mechanism by which serotonin amplifies               
              the contraction of smooth muscle in the sea snail, Aplysia.                    
              Methods have been developed to isolate smooth muscle cells so                  
              that the contraction and electrical properties of individual                   
              cells may be studied.  The studies examine the effect of                       
              serotonin and drugs on these properties.
