Title       : ARFMP: Modernization of the University of Guam Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1991   
File        : a9021782

Award Number: 9021782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Richmond richmond@uog9.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Amesbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP)                
              award from the Research Facilities Office provides funds to the                
              University of Guam for the renovation and repair of the                        
              University of Guam Marine Laboratory which houses marine                       
              sciences research and research training activities and is the                  
              only U.S. marine laboratory facility in the region.  This                      
              building was constructed in 1970 and last renovated in 1975.  The              
              ARFMP grant of $130,795 will be used to modernize these research               
              and research training facilities which are located in a harsh and              
              corrosive tropical marine natural environment that necessitates                
              an unusually large amount of maintenance and repair of                         
              facilities.  This project will address the need to improve the                 
              current research infrastructure by adding and replacing                        
              laboratory counters, providing a laboratory space for                          
              photomicrography and microbiology and a capacity for boat                      
              storage, and eliminating the problems of fluctuations in water                 
              temperature and salinity and algal fouling of the outside water                
              table and aquarium area.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by                     
              providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and              
              for the training of undergraduate and master's degree students.                
              The Guam Marine Laboratory plays a unique role in the nation's                 
              scientific base due to its geographical location and the specific              
              research expertise that it represents.  It provides research                   
              opportunities for native Pacific Islanders living on the U.S.-                 
              affiliated islands of Micronesia, and indeed, outside of Hawaii,               
              which is many thousands of miles away, it is the only facility                 
              where local people can obtain undergraduate and graduate degree                
              experience and conduct research involving the local marine                     
              environments.
