Title       : Conference: Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing, to be held July, 30th to
               August 4th, Copper Mountain, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0078875

Award Number: 0078875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Sterling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposal requests funds to help support the 2000 FASEB Summer Research
              Conference on "Retinal Neurobiology and Visual Processing". This meeting will
              be the fifth biannual conference in this series devoted specifically to the
              retina. The presentations will cover many facets of retinal biology:
              development and the underlying molecular mechanisms; cellular functions that
              support neural signaling; neural circuits by which the retina processes visual
              input; the code by which the retinal output is conveyed to the brain; and the
              resulting abilities and limitations of visual behavior.
	The five-day
              conference will attract approximately 180 participants from around the world.
              Thirty-three internationally recognized experts have agreed to present their
              work in formal talks, which are organized in nine thematic sessions. In
              assembling this program, the organizers have sought to span the range of
              research in retinal neurobiology, taking into account recent exciting advances
              in specific areas. Furthermore, emphasis has been placed on the contributions
              of younger scientists in an early career stage. In addition, there will be two
              informal workshops on topics selected before the meeting by the participants.
              Finally, all participants are invited to present posters during two poster
              sessions.
	The conference format is designed to foster direct scientific
              exchange among participants. There is ample time for discussion at the end of
              each presentation, during workshops and poster sessions; there is further free
              time for informal exchange at meals, which are communal, and in the afternoons.
              To encourage presenters to discuss their latest efforts and ongoing projects,
              proceedings are not published, but Abstracts of the talks and posters are
              collected in a small booklet and will be made available to all attendees and to
              others in the field who might request it. Because this conference attracts most
              of the field's investigators, it has been highly successful in disseminating
              results, and has significantly affected the course of retinal research.

