Title       : Development of an Advanced Light Microscopy Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0078961

Award Number: 0078961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Carthew Carthew@pop.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Pipas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard L. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Benedict DeFranco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The Advanced Light Microscopy Facility at the University of Pittsburgh is
              currently used for basic biomedical research in cell, molecular, and
              developmental biology.  It is an indispensable tool for many users at the
              university.  The research programs that will use the upgraded facility include
              several that address the basic causes of diseases such as colon cancer, cystic
              fibrosis, and neurodegenerative diseases such as spinal ataxia, Alzheimers, and
              Huntington's chorea.  This facility is presently composed of two units, a
              confocal microscope and an image analysis system.  Confocal microscopes use
              lasers as a light source to visualize biological specimens.  This allows
              researchers to see individual proteins within cells of a tissue sample.  It has
              opened up a new way of studying biology with microscopy.  One example of its
              power is that in 1999, it was used to discover the existence of stem cells in
              the adult brain.  This discovery overturned decades of dogma and promises new
              methods to treat afflictions of the nervous system caused by disease or
              injury.

     A new confocal microscope and upgraded imaging system are being
              purchased with the aid of this grant.  The new confocal microscope from BioRad
              will replace the old microscope that is no longer state of the art.  Moreover,
              the upgraded image analysis system will provide the ability to rapidly analyze
              large quantities of confocal image data. It will feature rapid data acquisition
              and storage, channel processing, counting and sizing, measurement, and 3D
              reconstruction.

     Besides its use for world-class biomedical research,
              the upgraded facility will play a vital role in training and education.  The
              new microscope will be used to train Ph.D. graduate students at University of
              Pittsburgh and prepare them for their roles as the scientists of tomorrow.  The
              facility is also used to teach University of Pittsburgh undergraduate students
              in cell biology and developmental biology laboratory courses.  It is also used
              in departmental outreach programs to educate high school teachers in the
              Western Pennsylvania area.  As such, it allows students and teachers to
              experience the capabilities of light microscopy for discovery in the modern
              life sciences. The new system will be connected via the internet for image
              transmission of biological specimens to both classrooms and laboratories around
              the country.

