Title       : Fostering Diversity in Biostatistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0078588

Award Number: 0078588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73635              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise M. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is the PI's transition from a traditional biostatistical research
              career in clinical trials,
toxicology and environmental health to statistical
              methods for community based research, with an emphasis on sociology and
              behavioral science.  The desire for this transition has arisen from the PIs
              involvement in
several initiatives designed to foster diversity in the
              Biostatistics Department at the Harvard School of Public Health
              (HSPH).

Three types of activities are proposed:

Publication of a series
              of articles on diversity.

Development of working collaborations with social
              and behavioral scientists at the Harvard School of Public Health, with a view
              to generating stable funding sources to support the future efforts of
              Biostatistics faculty
and students in these areas.

Development of new
              statisticalmethods for community based research.  Specific topics to be
              addressed include spatial analysis of time to event data, missing data problems
              especially in spatial data analysis settings, measurement error and missing
              data problems in multilevel modeling. 


Although the PI is an established
              and relatively senior researcher with a good track record as a
              statistical
methodologist, the proposal meets the POWRE guidelines in two
              ways:

It will support the PI during a critical time in her career while she
              makes a transition in her research interests, learns a new area and establishes
              collaborations that can provide  sustainable long-term funding in this new
              area.   

It involves innovative ideas for integrating research and
              education, specifically for underrepresented minority students.

This POWRE
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS). 
