Title       : Design and Preparation of Alpha-Hydrogen Nitroxides for 'Living' Free Radical
               Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0078852

Award Number: 0078852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Braslau braslau@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of new alpha-hydrogen nitroxides
              for the mediation of "living" free radical polymerization of functionalized
              vinyl monomers. Parallel synthesis utilizing fluorous phase chemistry will be
              employed for the preparation of libraries.  The libraries, in turn, will be
              screened for efficacy as polymerization initiators.   Experimental feedback
              from polymerization performance coupled with steric variations aimed at
              lowering the bond dissociation energy of the C-O bond of the N-alkoxyamines
              will be used to prepare even better initiators.  Water soluble nitroxides will
              be prepared to extend this controlled polymerization method to aqueous media. 
              The methodology will afford polymers of very low polydispersities and
              controlled molecular weights, generating well defined random and block
              copolymers, and provide access to the development of advanced materials with
              complex molecular architectures.

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Rebecca
              Braslau of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California -Santa
              Cruz.  Professor Braslau will focus her work on developing new nitroxides for
              application in "living" free radical polymerization.   The research, that
              includes an on-going collaboration with Dr. Craig Hawker at IBM, will lead to
              the production of materials having importance to biotechnology, microelectronic
              fabrication and catalyst design.   The research also has broader impact in the
              education of graduate and undergraduate students. 
