Title       : Gas-Phase Studies of Charged Aromatic Radicals and Biradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0078924

Award Number: 0078924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilkka I. Kenttamaa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this renewal award the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              supports the work of Dr. Hilkka I. Kenttamaa of the Department of Chemistry at
              Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana.   The purpose of this work is to
              generate aromatic biradicals (1,n-arynes) in the gas phase, and study their
              product branching ratios and rate constants in reactions with atom donors,
              electophiles, nucleophiles, and stable radicals.  Each biradical carries a
              chemically inert charged substituent that allows it and its reaction products
              to be studied by Fourier-Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry
              (FT-ICR).   Structural features of the biradicals will be varied, including the
              distance and orientation of the two radical sigma-orbital lobes, the type of
              charged group, and the presence of additional substituents.  
              Reactivity-controlling parameters to be investigated include the biradicals'
              singlet-triplet gaps and the polarity of their transition states.  
              Experimental studies will be complemented by molecular orbital
              calculations.

The proposed research is at the frontiers of mass spectrometry
              in studies of short-lived reaction intermediates.   The fundamental information
              to be obtained is likely to be of great interest to organic and organometallic
              chemists who use radicals and biradicals in synthesis.   The PI has a large
              group of undergraduate and graduate students, about half of whom are female or
              from underrepresented groups.   For them the research is expected to provide a
              valuable educational experience.
