Title       : SBIR Phase II: Blind Fastener Inflation for Structural Joining of Aluminum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0078454

Award Number: 0078454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Kolle jkolle@tempresstech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tempress Technologies, Inc
	      19308 68th Avenue S.
	      Kent, WA  980321192    206/767-8921

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project continues the
              development of a hyper-pressure fluid pulse system for installation of blind
              structural fasteners.  Riveting is the preferred method of assembling
              load-bearing aluminum airframe structures.  Upset riveting requires the
              application of high load to both ends of the rivet using impact or hydraulic
              pistons.  A structural fastener that could be installed from one side of the
              structure - blind fastening - would simplify aircraft assembly and repair.
              Existing blind fasteners are expensive, time-consuming and do not match the
              corrosion and fatigue performance of upset rivets.  Phase I of this project
              demonstrated that a compact, hyper-pressure pulse generator can inflate
              aluminum alloy rivets with an interference fit and strength approaching
              conventionally upset rivets. Blind fastening was demonstrated in unsupported
              aluminum panels.  Phase I analysis showed that rivet inflation can be
              accomplished with a much smaller tool.  The Phase II effort will involve the
              development of a lightweight, hand-held tool with an enhanced trigger mechanism
              that will provide the pulse control required for reliable fastener
              installation.  The work will continue the development of techniques for
              inflating rivets with aluminum pins to form a solid, all-aluminum fastener. 
              The objective in Phase II is to meet the performance specifications for a
              fluid-tight aerospace structural rivet.

Airframe assembly represents a major
              portion of the cost of military and commercial aircraft.  The process to be
              developed will halve the cost of manual airframe fabrication and can be used in
              an automated flexible-manufacturing environment.  There are a variety of other
              potential applications of hyper-pressure pulse technology including: fastening
              composite/titanium airframes; automotive aluminum sheet bonding; pulsed-jet
              peening for stress-relief and forming of aluminum sheet; and research into the
              behavior of materials under dynamic loading at extreme pressures.

