Title       : Mechanism of Embolism Reversal in Vascular Plants: Studies at the Level of
               Individual Vessels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0078155

Award Number: 0078155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel M. Holbrook holbrook@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Melcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maciej A. Zwieniecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
     Plants must continually supply their leaves with water that is absorbed
              by the roots and transported to the leaves through the stem.  The driving force
              for this comes from the evaporation of water from leaf surfaces, which exerts a
              "pull" on the water column.  This  allows the plant to draw water from the soil
              through hollow xylem cells which form conduits for water transport through the
              stem -- essentially using the stem as a straw.  Because the water is under
              tension, air is sucked into the xylem occasionally, causing an embolism that
              blocks water flow.  It is well known that air embolism occurs in plants,
              sometimes to the extent that water delivery to leaves is significantly
              impaired.  The goal of this study is to understand the mechanisms by which
              plants may be able to repair air-filled conduits such that they are able to
              reuse them in water transport.  It is only in the past decade that researchers
              have realized that plants can reverse embolism, and there is some evidence that
              this repair may occur even during the day when the water in the xylem is under
              substantial tension.  The mechanisms by which embolisms are repaired, however,
              remain poorly understood. 
     This proposal outlines studies to understand
              this key physiological process as well as to explore factors limiting the
              capacity for repair in different species.  A major objective of the proposed
              work is to use magnetic resonance imaging to monitor the dynamics of embolism
              and embolism reversal in intact plants.  The major limitation to date in
              understanding embolism repair has been the lack of any method to examine this
              process in vivo.  In addition, the PIs will use a suite of new approaches that
              allow the determination of hydraulic properties of individual water transport
              conduits.  Water availability is a major factor limiting agricultural
              production and plays an important role in determining ecological interactions
              in both agricultural and natural systems.  This study will increase our
              understanding of how plants survive periods of low water availability and
              improve our ability to predict plant responses to environmental factors such as
              drought and temperature extremes.
