Title       : 2000 Cold Spring Harbor Course on Computational Neuroscience:Vision, June 15 -
               28, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0078075

Award Number: 0078075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36814              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              COLD SPRING HARBOR LABORATORY COURSE ON 
COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE:
              VISION
JUNE 2000 AND JUNE 2002

SUMMARY


The Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory will give a short 2 week course on Computational Neuroscience:
              Vision from June 15 - June 28, 2000, and during the summer of 2002. 
              Computational approaches to neuroscience have produced important advances in
              our understanding of how nerve cells are connected to and communicate with each
              other.  The basis of the course is to study how computer models can best
              simulate aspects of the nervous system.  The course emphasizes that an
              understanding of the computational problems in conjunction with perceptual and
              biological data can help guide research in neuroscience.  Through a combination
              of lectures and hands-on computer laboratory exercises, this course will cover
              different aspects of the function of the visual system.  These include problems
              such as: the neural basis of color vision, pattern vision, and visual motion
              perception; oculomotor function; and visual attention/decision-making.  This
              course has now been taught 6 times over the past 12 years as part of an
              integrated set of courses at Cold Spring Harbor in a number of areas of
              neurobiology.  This year there will be a new emphasis on theories and
              computational models of the neural basis of visually guided behavior and
              decision-making, a burgeoning area of neuroscience.  Lectures in the course
              will be given by the organizers and by invited lecturers who are working on
              current research frontiers and are leaders in their field.  The course is
              intended for graduate students, post-doctoral fellows and faculty.

The
              course, like other Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory courses, is aimed at teaching
              novel technologies and approaches.  These are state-of-the-art techniques that
              are often not yet taught in standard courses offered by universities and
              medical schools.  The short duration of the courses also makes it possible for
              busy scientists to attend.  In the case of the Computational Neuroscience
              course, computer modeling of the nervous system is an important approach to
              analyzing how nerve cells communicate.  The nervous system is very complex with
              very large numbers of cells.  Computer programs that make models of how nerve
              cells work can make predictions and guide analysis of nerve cell function. 
              Conversely, results from biological experiments can be incorporated into
              computer models.  Because the visual system is one of the best-studied parts of
              the nervous system, there is a maximal interplay between computational and
              biological approaches.  Thus the Computational Neuroscience course uses the
              visual system as a model.

