Title       : LTREB: Stopover Biology of Intercontinental Landbird Migrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0078189

Award Number: 0078189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Moore Frank.Moore@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Migration is a fundamental characteristic of the life history of many animals
              from monarch butterflies to humpback whales and is one of the most fascinating
              of all behavior.  Over two-thirds of all songbirds that breed in temperate
              North America migrate long distances to wintering areas in Mexico, Central and
              South America and the Caribbean islands.  Traveling long distances comes with
              considerable risks, and the mortality may be substantial.  This research
              focuses on the problems migrants face when they pause to rest and refuel:
              Besides the energetic cost of flying, a migratory bird invariably finds herself
              in unfamiliar surroundings at a time when energy demands are high, often faced
              with avoiding predator avoidance and finding food, competing with other
              migrants and resident birds for limited resources, faced with unfavorable
              weather, and the need to correct orientation errors. Field studies are designed
              to determine how migrants solve these problems before and after crossing the
              Gulf of Mexico.

Besides gaining a better understanding of how animals
              respond to periods of energetic demand, this research has important
              conservation implications.  Evidence reveals population declines among many
              migratory bird species over the past quarter century.  Although debate over the
              causes of the decline continues, what has been largely overlooked in
              development of conservation plans is the importance of habitat during
              migration.  Unless habitat requirements during migration are met, conservation
              measures focused on the breeding grounds and/or tropical wintering areas will
              be compromised. We know little about how migratory birds respond to changes in
              the availability and distribution of stopover habitat.

