Title       : Generation of Non-Equilibrium Plasma in the Gliding Arc Discharge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0078652

Award Number: 0078652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356421             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Fridman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1062,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is a study of plasma parameters generated in the gliding-arc discharge
              propagating in both plane and coaxial geometries , especially near the
              equilibrium-to-nonequilibrium transition point.  The gliding air in the plane
              parallel to the gas flow is the base case; a cylindrical gliding-arc
              configuration adds tangential velocity independently controlled by external
              magnetic fields.  Arc propagation velocities, geometry, electric fields, and
              power inputs are determined by optical imaging synchronized with
              voltage-current measurements.  Additional information on plasma conditions is
              obtained by spectrally resolved imaging, microwave interferometry, and infrared
              spectroscopy.  A concomitant theoretical study focuses on kinetic mechanisms of
               the equilibrium-to-nonequilibrium transition.  Kinetics of excited and charged
              particles are modeled under conditions when both thermal ionization and
              nonequilibrium ionization mechanisms are important.  Critical values of the
              electric field and gas temperature in the transition plasmas are identified and
              compared to experimental findings.

The gliding arc is a hybrid type of
              atmospheric-pressure air discharge that provides relatively high levels of
              electron density, current, and power (typical of thermal plasmas) along with
              relatively low temperature and high electric field (typical of cold
              nonequilibrium plasmas).  The gliding-arc discharge, moving in a gas flow
              between divergent electrodes, contains periodic self-triggered transitions of
              atmospheric-pressure thermal arc into a nonequilibrium discharge.  In this
              transition, the plasma cools rapidly while electron density remains on the
              thermal-plasma level.

