Title       : SBIR/STTR Phase II: Gas-Cluster Ion Source for Mass Spectrometer and
               Microelectronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0078580

Award Number: 0078580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Fenner dfenner@epion.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Epion Corporation
	      37 Manning Road
	      Billerica, MA  018213925    978/670-1910

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will design, fabricate
              and test a
prototype gas-cluster ion-beam (GCIB) sputtering tool for depth
              profiles with
monolayer-specific surface analysis of thin films. Applications
              will be to multilayer
thin films of key importance in the microelectronics
              industries including semiconductors,
metals in magnetic sensors, and
              dielectrics in photonic and micro-optical devices. The
sputtering tool is
              expected to meet aggressive performance specifications including
              depth
resolution of less than 1 nm in conjunction with mass spectrometry. This
              GCIB tool will
be designed particularly for in-situ sputtering with
              surface-analytical instruments
including the secondary-ion mass spectrometer
              (SIMS), the Auger electron spectrometer
(AES) and the x-ray photoelectron
              spectrometer (XPS). The overriding motivation is the
critical need in
              microelectronics for techniques to obtain accurate sputter depth
measurements.
              The Phase-I effort demonstrated those GCIB methods with argon clusters
sputter
              with near-atomic smoothness, high depth resolution and high secondary-ion
              yields.
Minor instrumental design issues limited the cluster beam exposure
              uniformity and this
artificially limited the average depth resolution
              measured. Straightforward engineering
solutions are well known and are
              expected to yield improvements in Phase II that will
provide depth resolution
              of well below 1 nm.

The proposed technology will enable analysis of
              next-generation microelectronics devices
having much thinner films. Epion is
              the first and only to manufacture GCIB systems. The
tool to be prototyped will
              enable and have a wide applicability to many areas of the
electronic materials
              processing and manufacturing industry.

