Title       : RUI: Regulation of Even-Skipped Stripe 1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0078131

Award Number: 0078131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Sackerson csackerson@iona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iona College
	      715 North Avenue
	      New Rochelle, NY  108011830    914/633-2000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078131
Sackerson

The Drosophila body plan is organized into reiterating
              units called segments. Segmentation occurs early in embryogenesis, and is
              critically dependent on the proper expression of the transcription factor,
              even-skipped (eve). In the complete absence of eve function, all segmentation
              is lost. The segmentation function of eve is carried out through its expression
              in seven circumferential bands ("stripes") at the blastoderm stage; the seven
              stripes mark the positions of the future odd-numbered parasegments, and through
              this positioning, directly and indirectly determine the positions of the
              fourteen segments. even-skipped stripe 1 (eve stripe 1) is of special interest,
              since it occurs between the segments which will become head and those which
              will become trunk; eve stripe 1 also is required for the formation of the
              cephalic furrow, a transient invagination at the boundary between the head and
              trunk that occurs early in gastrulation. The position of eve stripe 1 is
              presumed to be set by an interaction between the patterning systems of the head
              and trunk.

The objective of this work is to elucidate the mechanisms by
              which eve stripe 1 is positioned. It is expected that novel insights into gene
              regulatory mechanisms in the Drosophila embryo will be obtained, since models
              for the positioning of the other eve stripes in the trunk cannot be
              extrapolated in a simple way to explain the formation of eve stripe 1. The
              availability of transgenic flies which express the reporting gene, lacZ, at the
              position of eve stripe 1, along with clones and the DNA sequence of the eve
              stripe 1 enhancer, open up the opportunity for a detailed examination of eve
              stripe 1 expression.

This question will be approached by examining the
              effects of mutations in early developmental regulators on the expression of eve
              stripe 1 from the transgenes and from the endogenous locus. The maternal
              coordinate gene bicoid, and the traditional zygotic gap genes will be examined.
              In addition, the head-specific gap genes and certain pair-rule and homeotic
              genes will also be examined for effects. From this data a model will be
              proposed which will then be tested by the production of further transgenic
              lines. In this second phase of the work, the mutation of putative
              cis-regulatory sequences and the misexpression of putative trans-regulatory
              proteins will both be used to further elucidate the regulatory network involved
              in eve stripe 1 regulation. It is expected that an understanding of eve stripe
              1 regulation will contribute to our understanding of head development in
              Drosophila, pattern formation, and the spatial control of gene expression.

