Title       : Geographic Differentiation of the Last Interglacial Paleosol Layer in the
               Chinese Loess Plateau: Its Climatic and Chronological Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0078557

Award Number: 0078557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhaodong Feng Fengz@mail.montclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montclair State University
	      Valley Road & Normal Avenue
	      Montclair, NJ  07043    201/893-4000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Loess Plateau of China has the most complete and extensive terrestrial
              records of Quaternary sedimentation on Earth, and analysis of the soil
              formation and its geographic differentiation should provide useful information
              on climate history and global circulation modeling.  This project will study
              the last interglacial paleosol (called "S1" and dates from 128,000 to 73,000
              years ago) with soil samples selected along a SE-NW transect in the Chinese
              Loess Plateau.  The goal of the research is to reconstruct the detailed history
              of the last interglacial Asian monsoons.  To achieve the goal, four sets of
              analyses will be conducted.  First, the paleosol S1 pedostratigraphy and
              chronology will be established through sample dating and other laboratory
              analyses.  Second, the soil characteristics will be examined, including the
              meso-scale and mirco-scale morphology.  Third, the summer monsoon proxy will be
              calibrated through analyses of the histories of leaching and general weathering
              of the soil profiles.  Fourth, the winter monsoon proxy will be calibrated
              through analyses of the bulk size distribution and larger quartz size to
              determine the degree of post-depositional weathering.

To comprehend the
              scope of future climate changes with considerations of severe human impacts,
              the last interglacial period deserves special attentions because it serves us
              best in understanding the natural processes of interglacial times.  However,
              the global records of climate change for this period are inconsistent, and more
              data are needed from different regions to validate the spatial scale of various
              abrupt climatic events.  A number of basic questions require an improved
              knowledge of climate histories of continental interiors.  For instance, what
              are the relative roles played by atmospheric and oceanic circulation in
              transporting heat and water vapor from low to high latitudes and from oceans to
              interiors.  Only by defining and quantifying the specific responses of regional
              environmental systems to global changes will major uncertainties about the
              mechanisms of global changes be understood.  The Chinese Loess Plateau, a
              product of interactions between a high-latitude continental winter monsoon and
              a low-latitude oceanic summer monsoon, is perfectly located to validate the
              various hypotheses of the mechanisms of global changes.  This study of monsoon
              history will be useful to future more accurate global change modeling.

