Title       : Mechanism of Defective Interfering RNA Replication and Interference with Helper
               Virus Infections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0078152

Award Number: 0078152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Nagy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT MCB-0078152. PI: Peter D. Nagy. Previous work on RNA replication, a
              central process in viral pathogenesis, has focused on promoter elements. The
              discovery by the PI and others of novel cis-acting elements, such as RNA
              replication enhancers that up-regulate RNA synthesis and RNA replication
              silencers that down-regulate RNA synthesis, changes our view of RNA virus
              replication. These RNA replication enhancer and silencer elements may play
              major roles not only in replication, but they may also affect the fitness and
              evolution of viruses and the symptoms they cause in infected hosts. Defective
              interfering (DI) RNAs, due to their simple genomes and robust replication are
              attractive model systems for understanding the role of cis-acting elements in
              RNA replication. DI RNAs are highly competitive, parasitic RNAs associated with
              many virus infections. DI RNAs compete against their helper (parental) viruses,
              resulting in a decreased replication rate of the helper virus and frequently
              leading to symptom attenuation in the host. The hypothesis to be tested in this
              research is that the superior competitiveness of the DI RNAs relative to the
              helper virus is due to (i) favorable positioning of cis-acting elements, such
              as promoters and replication enhancers in DI RNAs, and/or (ii) the absence of
              some replication silencer elements in DI RNAs that may have been deleted during
              DI RNA formation. This research uses tombusviruses, model (+)-strand RNA
              viruses of plants, to: (i) characterize replication enhancer and silencer
              elements by using a recently developed cell-free replicase system; (ii)
              elucidate the mechanism of enhancer-mediated stimulation and silencer-mediated
              inhibition of RNA transcription through testing the direct effect of RNA
              enhancer and silencer elements on template binding by tombusvirus replicase
              proteins expressed in E. coli.

These studies will lead to a better
              understanding of regulation of viral RNA synthesis by sequences on the RNA
              being copied.  The studies will also elucidate the ability of certain
              incomplete viral variants to attenuate infections by the original, complete
              viruses from which they were derived. These variants are called defective
              interfering RNA's.   They are derived from viruses that infect a wide range of
              organisms, including plants.   

