Title       : Chromatin Structure and DNA Processing in Euplotes Crassus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0078182

Award Number: 0078182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn L. Jahn jahn@casbah.acns.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
0078182 Jahn
The ciliated protozoan Euplotes crassus is being studied as a
              model system in order to uncover the mechanisms producing rearrangements of
              DNA.  Ultimately, investigating this system should help answer questions about
              the structure of chromosomes and the nucleus, and how cells manipulate these
              structures such that the genome remains functionally stable while providing
              genome plasticity, which can be evolutionarily and developmentally
              advantageous.  By studying a controlled rearrangement process such as that
              occurring in the E. crassus during the formation of a macronucleus, it can be
              determined what chromosomal proteins, DNA sequences and enzymes are involved
              and how the process is controlled.  E. crassus, like other ciliated protozoa,
              possesses two types of nuclei, macronuclei and micronuclei, that differ in
              their properties.  Most notably, chromosome segregation is absent from the
              macronucleus and transcription is absent from the micronucleus.  Chromatin and
              chromosome structure and genomic organization differ in these two types of
              nuclei.  In addition, during the developmental process of forming macronuclei
              from micronuclei, extensive DNA elimination occurs that includes site-specific
              deletions and chromosome breakage with telomere addition.  The abundance of
              these rearrangements, their developmental programming, and their occurrence in
              single-celled organisms that can be developmentally synchronized en masse,
              provide a unique model system for the analysis of chromosome structure and the
              mechanisms of genome rearrangements.  The principal investigator has identified
              an unusual chromatin structure of the highly abundant Tec element transposons
              that are undergoing elimination during macronuclear development.  In addition,
              her laboratory has identified a lysine/arginine-rich, histone H1 or
              HMG-like,'chromosome scaffold' protein (p85) that has the following properties:
              a) it is only found in the developing macronucleus, b) it is associated with
              eliminated DNA  (including the Tec elements), c) it colocalizes with
              topoisomerase II, and d) it affects topoisomerase II activities in vitro.  This
              points to a role for topoisomerase II-mediated, chromosome condensation
              processes that are conserved in all organisms in ciliate genomic
              rearrangements.  This project aims to determine the sequence of p85 to allow
              identification of any similar proteins in other organisms.  In addition, the
              role of p85 in DNA elimination will be determined by defining what DNA
              sequences it binds to and what sequence specificity it has, and by determining
              how this protein affects chromatin structure.  Finally, the interaction of p85
              with topoisomerase II will be further analyzed. 

