Title       : SBIR Phase II: Integrated Microsensors for Detection of Aqueous and Gas Phase
               Volatile Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0078726

Award Number: 0078726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene C. Aquino arcova@swva.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Rsrch Corp of VA
	      PO Box 3406
	      Radford, VA  241433406    540/731-0655

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves
              development of an integrated sensor system that will accurately and rapidly
              measure small quantities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) both in air and
              in aqueous environments. At present, no inexpensive sensor system is
              sufficiently sensitive and rugged for use in continuously monitoring of VOCs in
              underground water streams, soil, effluent discharge, fugitive emissions and in
              spent liquid and vapor streams. To capture this business opportunity, this
              project involves the development of low-cost continuous organic chemical
              sensors based on the change of fluorescence of dyes embedded in polymeric and
              sol-gel thin films. This program is innovative in combining sensitive diode
              laser-excited fluorescence with total internal reflection methods of analysis
              to provide a continuous monitor of VOCs. The Phase I research program was
              successful in demonstrating the feasibility developing several highly sensitive
              polymer/dye films for use in detection of aqueous and gaseous phase VOCs.
              Detection limits in the part-per-billion (ppb) range for both aqueous and vapor
              phase trichloroethylene were achieved using fluorescence detection
              spectroscopy. The Phase II research and development program will accomplish the
              feasibility demonstrated in Phase I by developing a turnkey sensor system for
              multiple chemical analysis.

The Phase II Research Objectives include
              synthesis of polymer and sol-gel solid matrices with pendant functional groups,
              development of a fluorescence monitoring array and algorithms for
              multi-chemical analysis, design and integration of miniaturized total internal
              reflection fluorescence array instrument, acquisition of families of test data
              to establish instrument specifications, and demonstration of the total-internal
              reflection fluorescence instrument at environmental remediation facilities and
              a water treatment plant. This sensor platform together with sensitive
              polymer/dye films is significant in providing rapid on-site identification and
              quantification of volatile organic compounds and environmental pollutants in
              groundwater, soil, effluent discharge and fugitive emissions.
