Title       : Statistical Signal Processsing Models of Electrosensory Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0078206

Award Number: 0078206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Nelson m-nelson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to understand how animals acquire and process
              sensory information about their environment. The focus is on identifying and
              characterizing brain mechanisms and information
processing principles that
              allow animals to enhance signals that are important to their behavior and to
              suppress irrelevant background noise.  The specific studies are centered around
              the ability of weakly electric
fish to detect and localize small prey in the
              dark using an active electric sense. While much is known about the neural
              circuitry in these animals, there is a gap in the theoretical understanding of
              how the brain should best process incoming sensory data.  This proposal helps
              fill that gap by using statistical signal processing theory to develop optimal
              signal processing models of electrosensory target detection.  These models are
              expected to provide a quantitative link between neurophysiology and behavior,
              and will provide valuable insights into the structural and functional
              organization of the nervous system. 

The issues addressed in these studies
              are of broad interest in sensory neurobiology, including the role of feedback
              pathways from higher brain centers, mechanisms for generating predictions of
              incoming sensory data, and synergistic interactions between sensory and motor
              aspects of sensory acquisition. In addition to advancing basic knowledge in
              neuroscience, the models of optimal sensory acquisition have relevance in
              applied areas of science and engineering such as artificial intelligence and
              robotics. This project also provides cross-disciplinary training for young
              scientists with interests that cut across the fields of physics, mathematics,
              computer science and neurobiology.  

