Title       : Structural Constraints on Subunit Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0078363

Award Number: 0078363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas O. Baldwin tbaldwin@U.Arizona.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078363
Baldwin, Thomas
It is commonly assumed that polypeptides that function
              as components of multisubunit complexes have the same structure, whether in the
              complex or as the free subunit.  The hypothesis upon which this proposal is
              based is that this view is not generally accurate.  This PI suggest that the
              conformation of the subunit in the complex may represent only a fraction of the
              conformations present in an equilibrium population of the free subunits.  In
              support of this hypothesis is the fact that the associate rate constants for
              assembly of multisubunit complexes span many orders of magnitude in value. 
              Through the experiments described in this proposal, the PI expects to find
              kinetic heterogeneity in associate rates for the luciferase subunits. 
              Differences in association rates will be evidence for differing structures, and
              the relative amplitudes of the different rate components will allow
              quantitative description of the relative populations of conformers.  In the
              second phase of these experiments, the PI will ascertain the extent to which
              the populations of conformers may be altered by solution conditions and by
              genetic mutation.
A large proportion of all polypeptides in living cells
              function within multisubunit complexes.  The fundamental mechanisms through
              which these complexes assemble are very poorly understood.  There has been
              extensive work on the energetics of complex formation, but relatively little on
              the rates of formation and dissociation.  Protein-protein interactions play
              crucial roles in many fundamental life processes.  The research of this project
              is designed to obtain a more detailed and fundamental understanding of the
              dynamic nature of multisubunit proteins.


