Title       : Molecular Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation by
               Mycobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0078465

Award Number: 0078465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerben J. Zylstra zylstra@aesop.rutgers.edu               X320  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Zylstra
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH's) constitute a class of aromatic
              hydrocarbons consisting of two or more fused benzene rings in linear,  angular,
              and cluster arrangements.  Since many of the aromatic hydrocarbons found in the
              environment have a natural pyrolytic origin, they must have been in contact
              with microorganisms throughout evolutionary periods of time.  It is not
              surprising, therefore, that microorganisms capable of degrading aromatic
              compounds have evolved.  Almost all of what is known about the metabolism of
              PAH's is based on fast-growing gram negative organisms and naphthalene (two
              rings) and phenanthrene (three rings) as model substrates.  Slow-growing gram
              positive organisms such as Mycobacterium have been shown not only to degrade
              naphthalene and phenanthrene but also to degrade PAH's consisting of four or
              more aromatic rings.  In fact, this class of organisms is perhaps the
              best-studied group because of their ability to mineralize high molecular weight
              PAH's.  Catabolic pathways have been proposed based on the identification of a
              few intermediate compounds detected in culture supernatants.  In this project
              molecular genetics and biochemistry will be used to investigate the ability of
              Mycobacterium strain PYO1 to degrade high molecular weight PAH's.  Cosmid
              clones containing the PYO1 genes required for phenanthrene and pyrene
              degradation have been identified, and analysis of the 30 kb of sequence
              obtained so far has identified at least 21 genes that are involved in the
              degradation of PAH's intermingled with five insertion sequences.  Putative
              functions have been assigned to each open reading frame and will be tested with
              biological analyses using expression in heterologous hosts, mRNA analyses, and
              knock-out mutants.  These experiments are expected to result in the
              determination of every step in the catabolic pathway with the identification of
              every catabolic intermediate.  

Highly recalcitrant, stable polycyclic
              aromatic compounds are found in the environment.  Such compounds can be formed
              during coal gasification and liquification processes, improper waste
              incineration practices, and in forest fires.  Sources of the compounds include
              oil, carbon black, coal tar, and other petroleum-derived products.
              Mycobacterium species of bacteria and their relatives are unique in their
              ability to degrade these compounds. However, little is known about the
              molecular and biochemical basis of these abilities.  In this project, the
              ability of Mycobacterium strains to degrade polycyclic compounds will be
              investigated at the gene and enzyme levels.  A thorough knowledge of how
              Mycobacteria degrade these compounds will aid in the design of bioremediative
              processes for removing polycyclic compounds from the environment.


