Title       : Function and Regulation of Cargo Recognition by Clathrin Adaptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a0078509

Award Number: 0078509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander D. Sorkin alexander.sorkin@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The orderly movement of membrane-enclosed compartments within the eukaryotic
              cell is critical to proper function.   There are many different kinds of such
              intracellular membrane compartments, each with its own unique molecular
              mechanisms for biogenesis and intracellular placement and movement.  A subset
              of such compartments utilizes a molecular mechanism for formation and
              trafficking that involves a protein called clathrin which forms a transient
              "coat" or "basket" around the membrane compartment.  Such clathrin-coated
              membrane compartments are involved in the internalization of specific materials
              from the extracellular milieu (receptor-mediated endocytosis) and in the
              movement of newly synthesized proteins out to the cell surface.  Thus, the
              population of "clathrin-coated vesicles" inside the cell is a heterogeneous
              mixture of compartments with different contents and therefore necessarily
              different destinations.  This project concerns itself with understanding how
              the cell "knows" the content of such a compartment so that it "knows" where to
              send it.  

Clathrin adaptor protein complexes AP2 and AP1 are major
              components of clathrin coats at the plasma membrane and trans-Golgi network
              (TGN), respectively, where they participate in formation of clathrin-coated
              vesicles.  These vesicles are responsible for the basic cellular functions of
              receptor-mediated endocytosis and organelle biogenesis.  One of the key
              functions of AP complexes is to selectively recruit the integral membrane
              proteins ('cargo') transported by coated vesicles.  The interaction of APs with
              cargoes is also implicated in the assembly of coats.  In spite of a
              considerable amount of characterization of the biochemistry and cell biology of
              AP function, there are many aspects of their roles in membrane traffic that
              have yet to be defined.  In particular, the role of AP-cargo interactions in
              their cellular function has only recently begun to be addressed through
              preliminary experiments that form the basis for this project. 

   Several
              laboratories have established through in vitro experiments how APs recognize
              cargo by binding to sequence motifs (such as YxxQ,  where x is any amino acid
              and Q is a bulky hydrophobic residue) in the cytoplasmic domains of receptors.
              Others have defined numerous regulatory proteins which interact with APs in
              cells.  It is clear from studies of AP localization in cells that these
              molecules have very specific interactions with intracellular membranes at the
              sites of their function.  It is not established, however, how much of their
              ability to function at different sites in the cell is determined by cargo
              recognition.  Dr. Sorkin's lab has developed a unique system for examining the
              requirements for both AP2 and AP1 in protein sorting. In this system, they have
              successfully replaced the endogenous m1 and m2 subunits of the AP complexes by
              mutated versions of the same proteins.  Specifically, they have mutated the
              cargo recognition site of the m2 subunit of AP2 and produced cells expressing
              the mutant AP2 complex, which allowed them to investigate the role of AP-cargo
              interactions in dictating AP localization and function.  The expression of
              mutant m2 abolished the uptake of some plasma membrane receptors but do not
              affect the endocytosis of other cargoes.  These data highlight the importance
              of a careful evaluation of the role of AP-cargo interaction in vivo. 

This
              project will extend these studies to a more in depth analysis of the effects of
              the m2 mutation on clathrin-coated pit formation and cargo targeting, and apply
              the same strategy to elucidate the role of m1 subunit in AP1 function. The
              comparative roles of m1 and m2 in different cellular locations will be defined
              by production of chimeric molecules between the two and analyzing membrane
              traffic in cells expressing these chimeras. The first objective is to test the
              hypothesis that interactions with YxxQ motifs, that are critical for cargo
              sorting, have negligible influence on targeting and docking of AP2 but is
              important for the assembly of AP1 coats. To this end, cells expressing mutant
              m2 or m1 subunit of AP2 or AP1, correspondingly, will be utilized to assess the
              role of m interactions with YxxQ-containing proteins in the correct targeting
              of APs and the assembly of coated pits/buds at the cell surface and TGN. The
              second objective is to test the hypothesis that AP1 plays a role in
              bi-directional TGN-endosomal trafficking through analysis of the effects of
              expression of mutant m1 subunits of AP1 incapable of YxxQ motif recognition.
              The comparative roles of m1 and m2 in different cellular locations will also be
              investigated in Objective 3 by production of chimeric molecules between the two
              and analyzing membrane traffic in cells expressing these chimeras. These
              studies will establish the role of AP-cargo interactions in directing membrane
              traffic and uncover new insights into regulatory mechanisms of protein sorting
              along the endocytic and secretory pathways.



