Title       : The Development of Thinking: Inductive Inference in Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a0078945

Award Number: 0078945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Sloutsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Generalization from known to the unknown, or inductive inference, is an
              important component of human thinking.  For example, if one learned that robins
              have hollow bones, would she think that eagles also have hollow bones?  Is it
              reasonable to infer that bats have hollow bones too?  Which attributes of
              robins and eagles are important for inferring that eagles do (or do not) have
              hollow bones?  Do these attributes differ in their importance? And how do
              children learn which attributes are most predictive for inferring biological
              properties? Our prior research indicated that young children induce biological
              properties based on the overall similarity between compared entities, whereas
              preadolescents rely on a single most predictive source of information, such as
              biological kind or inheritance information. 

In this project, we will
              examine how young children combine different sources of information when
              inferring biological properties, and how they acquire the ability to rely on a
              single most predictive source of information. Specifically, we will estimate
              the importance of different sources of information across different age levels.
              We will also examine the transition from young children's induction (based
              primarily on overall similarity) to preadolescents' induction (based primarily
              on most predictive attributes). Finally, we will examine changes in inductive
              inference as a function of learning. In the course of the project, children and
              preadolescents (3-4-, 5-6-, 7-8- and 11-12 year olds) will participate in
              inductive inference and learning studies. The former will consist of a single
              session where participants will solve induction problems, whereas the latter
              will consist of 6 learning sessions spaced over a two-week period.  At each
              session participants will be presented with induction problems and provided
              with feedback as to whether or not their inference is correct.  The goal of
              these learning studies is to establish how children develop understanding of
              which attributes are most predictive for inferring biological
              properties.

The project will contribute to our understanding of the
              development of human thinking, particularly of inductive inference and concept
              formation. In addition, the project may have important implications for the
              instructional theory and for learning and teaching science because it will
              specify how children think when they do not have knowledge of most predictive
              attributes, and how knowledge of these attributes changes their thinking.


