Title       : New Approaches for Efficiency in Synthetic Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0078335

Award Number: 0078335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1920000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry M. Trost bmtrost@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Barry M. Trost, of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford University, is
              developing new and efficient approaches for the synthesis of complex organic
              molecules. He is exploring a number of palladium, platinum, and
              ruthenium-catalyzed transformations, including the synthesis of skipped and
              conjugated dienes, butenolides with unsaturated side chains, and
              cross-conjugated trienes, the isomerization of propargylic alcohols to enals,
              and the isomerization of ynals to unsaturated esters. Multicomponent
              cyclizations afford efficient access to a variety of functionalities. Catalytic
              enantioselective pi-allyl palladium, molybdenum, ruthenium, and tungsten-based
              methodologies will be designed and developed, with the choice of metal
              dictating both the chemical and the stereochemical outcomes. Novel cyclization
              strategies based on nucleophilic catalysis are opening new doors for
              unprecedented approaches to polypeptide synthesis.

As our knowledge of the
              structure and reactivity of molecules increases, the practice of organic
              synthesis is undergoing a change in focus, with the question now more often
              asked being not if a complex target can be synthesized, but rather how.
              Practical syntheses derive from the existence of a basic set of synthetic
              reactions, and the limitations of that base set define the extent to which
              organic syntheses may be made economical, efficient, and environmentally
              conscious. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program, Professor Barry M. Trost, of the Department of Chemistry at Stanford
              University, is developing new and selective reactions which add to our arsenal
              of techniques for the synthesis of the complex organic molecules increasingly
              forming the basis of a myriad of applications, ranging from biology to
              materials science.
