Title       : Collaborative Research: The Effect of Changes in Wages on Economic Perceptions
               and Voting: An Improved Micro-Level Foundation for Economic Voting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0078882

Award Number: 0078882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Nagler jonathan.nagler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research tests the theory that voters look at distinct aspects of the
              economy to determine how well the incumbent administration manages the economy
              the benefit the voters' self-interests, and they vote on that calculation,
              rather than consideration of the overall growth rate of the economy or of the
              voter's personal financial condition.  The investigators postulate that voters
              look at changes in the wages, or chnges int he level of employment, of:  people
              in similar occupations; people with similar levels of education; and people in
              the same industry as the voter to determine how well the economy performs in
              the voter's interest.  Thus, the investigators offer a model of
              individual-level behavior consistent with aggregate observations of the
              importance on economic performance on vote choice.  The investigators argue
              that voters are self-interested, and that they evaluate the incumbent based o
              how well the incumbent manages the economy towards the voters' self-interest. 
              Thus, voters would have preferences over both the level of economic growth
              credited to the administration, and to the distributive impact of the
              incumbent.  Kramer's argument (1983) is repeated that it would be inefficient
              for voters to look at their own pocketbook as a measure of the incumbent's
              competence or the incumbents' distributve tendencies.  The pocketbook of the
              voter is a function of life-cycle effects, effort, and other idiosyncratic
              factors -- which would dwarf government-induced change in income.  The argument
              is extended by pointing out that for voters to look at the aggregate
              macro-economy would mask all intra-economy, distributive variation.  This would
              include skill-based variation, education-based variation, sectoral variation,
              and regional variation.  Thus, it is concluded that the best strategy, which a
              voter could employ to determine how well the incumbent administration manages
              the economy to benefit the voter's self-interest, is to look at the economic
              performance of individuals who share relevant economic characteristics with the
              voter.

	The investigators estimate wages of different groups of voters using
              the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation files.  The
              impact of these objective economic measures is examined with respect to: 
              voters' evaluations of the economy through the Survey of Consumer Attitudes and
              Behavior and the National Election Study; voters' evaluations of the incumbent
              through survey instruments measuring presidential popularity; and voters' vote
              choices through the National Election Study.  By using a dataset with richer
              information on the economic circumstances of individuals than used previously,
              and combining this with the theory offered by the investigators, the project is
              able to advance the state of the art of the micro-foundations of economic
              voting.   

