Title       : A Conference on Redistricting in Comparative Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0078439

Award Number: 0078439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard N. Grofman bgrofman@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite the importance of the redistricting process on the nature of democratic
              representation, redistricting practices and their consequences have been little
              explored outside of the United States context and that of a few other English
              speaking democracies.  This project rectifies this by organizing the first
              redistricting conference that would be broadly comparative in content.  The
              conference, a collaborative effort on the part of the Center for the Study of
              Democracy at the University of California, Irvine, the Administration and Cost
              of Elections (ACE) Project of the United Nations, and the International
              foundation for election Systems (IFES) and brings together scholars and
              practitioners from around the world.  It is co-organized by a committee with a
              representative of each of these groups.

The main objective of the conference
              is to provide academics and practitioners with a forum for collecting and
              exchanging information on comparative redistricting practices and their
              potential impact on electoral outcomes.  The conference offers several
              significant theoretical and practical benefits:

1) Information compiled for
              and during the conference makes an important start toward the compilation of a
              comprehensive database on comparative redistricting practices.

2) Several
              important theoretical issues are addressed in the conference, including the
              implications of malapportionment (the creation of districts that are unequal in
              population), the potential for partisan gerrymandering (the creation of
              districts that favor one political party or special interest group at the
              expense of other groups) and its impact on the quality of representation, and
              the implications of various redistricting practices for the representation of
              minority - racial, ethnic, religious and linguistic - groups within the
              country.

3) This project also has important policy implications,
              particularly for newly emerging democracies.  Because redistricting offers
              those in power and avenue for manipulating the outcome of elections, it is
              important to identify redistricting practices that will lend support to the
              democratic process as well as those that may be used to circumvent
              representative democracy.

