Title       : Identifying the building blocks of protein structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0078194

Award Number: 0078194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $512556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiping Weng zhiping@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A Supersecondary Structure Unit (SSU) is defined as three or more secondary
              structures in a given fold that pack against one another. When such SSUs occur
              in different folds, they are referred to as "legos". Numerous anecdotal
              examples of legos, such as 4-a-helix-bundle and 3-b-corner, have been
              identified, but there has been no systematic attempt to explore the entire
              structural database for a full list of recurrent structural patterns from which
              know protein folds might be constructed. This project will develop the
              necessary methods to carry out such a search and to fully characterize the
              resulting lego set.

Such an effort will provide an entirely new view for
              protein folds. Specifically, the project will seek  to answer the following
              questions: 
1.	How large is the lego set? 
2.	To what extent can the lego set
              cover known folds? 
3.	What are the rules governing lego-lego interactions?
              
4.	Can one construct novel protein folds by following the rules? 
5.	How
              conserved are sequences representing the same lego?
6.	Do legos correlate to
              functional sites?

This project will be an important complement to current
              approaches in functional
genomics. Most current approaches infer protein
              function by sequence and structural similarities to existing folds. The results
              obtained from this project will provide a basis to relate different folds and
              to extend functional inference beyond the boundary of known folds. 

The
              project will lead to the development of an array of lego-based algorithms
              for
predicting protein structure and function. The legos and their various
              properties will constitute a publicly available database. Via the World Wide
              Web, researchers will be able to perform two types of searches. A protein
              structure can be submitted to discover the legos it encompasses. The user can
              also search a protein sequence against all lego profiles; the matched legos may
              provide
information otherwise unavailable for novel sequences.


