Title       : The Acquisition of American Sign Language by Deaf Children with Delayed Input
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0078788

Award Number: 0078788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane C. Lillo-Martin lillom@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns effects of both the nature and the timing of linguistic
              input on the course of language acquisition. For most children, first language
              acquisition is facilitated by exposure to the native language from birth, with
              a fluent language model. However, some deaf children lack sufficient auditory
              input for the normal acquisition of a spoken language, and their exposure to a
              signed language may be delayed by several years. This project examines the
              course of acquisition of American Sign Language (ASL) by deaf children who did
              not begin to experience exposure to this language until after the age of 5
              years - nowadays, an uncommon experience. Such a delay in language exposure may
              well result in qualitative as well as quantitative differences as compared with
              normal language acquisition.

	The project involves longitudinal recording of
              the language development of a small group of deaf children with delayed
              exposure. The longitudinal videotaping of spontaneous, natural interactions
              with caregivers and experimenters is supplemented with periodic structured
              activities designed to asses the children's language with respect to particular
              grammatical elements. These experiments will involve comprehension, judgment,
              and elicitation tasks targeting both sentence structures which are expected to
              be more easily acquired and those expected to be problematic.

	Results from
              this group will be compared with children's language acquisition in several
              other situations. The study proposed includes testing both language-matched and
              age-matched control groups of deaf children whose exposure to ASL began at
              birth from their deaf, signing parents. The spontaneous production data will be
              compared with similar data from a separate on-going study of early syntactic
              development by i) deaf children acquiring ASL with exposure from birth; ii)
              deaf children acquiring ASL with exposure by the age of two years; iii)
              normally hearing children acquiring English; iv) normally hearing children
              acquiring Spanish; and v) normally hearing children acquiring Japanese. By
              studying children acquiring languages with varying syntactic structures, as
              well as children whose exposure begins at different times, we aim to examine
              the contributions of variations in input structure as well as variations in
              input timing on the course of acquisition.

	Studies of the acquisition of
              language with delayed exposure will help in the effort to disentangle some of
              the factors which influence the course of language acquisition even in the
              normal situation, helping researchers to pinpoint those aspects of language
              which must be in-born and those which require experience to develop. Such
              studies can also provide evidence regarding the critical period hypothesis, the
              idea that without exposure to language during the early critical period of
              life, children are not able to use the mental resources normally employed in
              language acquisition and will therefore never achieve complete adult-like
              fluency. In ordinary circumstances, this hypothesis is impossible to test,
              since ordinarily children receive linguistic input from birth. Deaf children
              whose exposure to ASL begins later are a unique group for this kind of study.
              These studies also have important social and educational implications for
              teachers and parents grappling with the question of how to provide deaf
              children with all possible advantages. A better understanding of the effects of
              early versus delayed linguistic input on the acquisition of ASL is crucial for
              improved decision-making.


