Title       : Gibberellins and Floral Induction in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0078277

Award Number: 0078277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef Weigel weigel@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The transition from vegetative growth to flowering is controlled both by
              environmental and endogenous cues.  Understanding where and how these signals
              are integrated is a prerequisite for understanding why similar environmental or
              endogenous cues can elicit opposite flowering responses in different plants. 
              For example, while the plant hormone gibberellin generally induces flowering in
              rosette plants such as Arabidopsis, it inhibits flowering of several other
              plants.  Similarly, Arabidopsis flowers faster in long than in short days,
              while other plants flower preferentially, or even exclusively, in short days. 
              Dr. Weigel proposes complementary biochemical, physiological, molecular and
              genetic approaches to determine how gibberellins induce flowering in
              Arabidopsis.  He has shown that, in Arabidopsis, flowering signals converge on
              the promoter of the floral identity gene LEAFY.  He has shown that the LEAFY
              promoter contains a gibberellin-response element that is essential for promoter
              activity in short days.  He has also identified, by loss- and gain-of-function
              mutageneses, several FOG and GAT genes, which affect the
              gibberellin-requirement for flowering.  He now proposes (1) to identify the
              factor that interacts with the LEAFY promoter to confer GA response; (2) to
              integrate the newly discovered FOG and GAT genes into the current framework of
              floral inductive pathways; (3) to study the molecular biology of the
              flowering-specific FOG1, FOG2 and GAT1-3 genes; and (4) to characterize in more
              detail FOG4, which strongly affects several gibberellin responses, including
              germination and flowering.

The importance of flowers for human sustenance
              cannot be overstated.  Not only are they organs of plant reproduction, but
              their immediate products are fruits and seeds, including cereal grains, which
              provide the majority of calories consumed by humans.  Thus, understanding how
              plants regulate the formation of flowers is likely to have long-ranging
              practical applications.  This research will serve as a starting point for
              understanding why flowering of different plants can respond in opposite ways to
              similar signals.  The detailed mechanistic knowledge gained from the proposed
              studies will enable us in the future to fine tune flowering responses of
              important crop plants.

