Title       : The Chaperonin Genes of Jakobid Protists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0078008

Award Number: 0078008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. O'Kelly cokelly@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Ford Doolittle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract
Organisms with the most eubacterial-like mitochondrial genomes
              should have the most ancestral mechanisms for mitochondrial and eukaryotic
              protein-folding machinery. Sequences of the group I (cpn60, mitochondrial,
              descended from eubacteria) and group II (CCT, cytosolic, descended from
              archaea) chaperonin genes, compared with those from prokaryotic outgroups and
              from other protists including amitochondriate exemplars, should reveal whether
              this is so. In addition, the organisms with the most eubacterial-like
              mitochondrial genomes should have an ancestral intron distribution. Most
              eukaruyotes that are considered to be ancestral lack spliceosomal introns, but
              evidence is accumulating that these introns were lost. Consistent with this
              interpretation, preliminary data show the presence of numerous spliceosomal
              introns in jakobids. Cpn 60 and CCT subunits in jakobid flagellates, of which
              there are currently eight mitochondriate species in culture, will be sequenced.
              Initial sequence surveys using PCR techniques will be followed by more complete
              sequencing based upon genomic liberties. The evolutionary histories of these
              sequences will be inferred through phylogenetic analyses that correct for the
              deleterious effects of sparse taxon sampling and such artifacts as long-branch
              attraction. The abundance and structure of included introns will be assessed in
              the light of current hypotheses about the evolution of introns in eukaryotic
              cells. 

The jakobid flagellates are potentially among the ancestral of
              living eukaryotes. Jakobid mitochondrial genomes represent the most
              eubacterial-like mitochondrial genomes discovered, in terms of gene content,
              gene organization, and putative gene function. Moreover, nearly all groups of
              amitochondrial protist have been shown to retain genes of mitochondrial origin,
              suggesting that they are derived from mitochondriate ancestors. The jakobid
              flagellates may represent an informative model system for the study of early
              eukaryote evolution.




