Title       : Topics in Incomplete Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0078851

Award Number: 0078851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver D. Hart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Incomplete contract theory is gradually becoming accepted as a useful way to
              understand the nature of organizations.  This project aims to extend work in
              this area in three ways.  First, I wish to understand better the nature of
              hierarchies.  Much of economic activity is structured hierarchically.  That is,
              if a senior person and junior person disagree about what should be done in an
              organization, the senior person gets his or her way.  Why is this?  To what
              extent is it efficient?  Given a hierarchical structure, who should be senior? 
              For example, if one person has the job of coordinating activities and somebody
              else has a more specialist task, is it necessarily the case that the
              coordinator should be senior to the specialist?

Second, I am interested in
              the foundations of contractual incompleteness.  Everyone accepts that the
              contracts people write are incomplete, but there is less agreement about the
              reason for this or the implications of contractual incompleteness.  One way
              contracts are "completed" in reality is through the allocation of ownership
              rights:  an owner of an asset can make decisions about the asset which an
              incomplete contract leaves open, and this fills out the contract.  But is
              ownership an efficient way of completing contracts?  Are there any other, more
              subtle, ways of allocating decision rights in organizations than through
              ownership?

Finally, I intend to study procedures for changing management or
              obtaining control in publicly traded corporations.  In particular, I wish to
              compare three mechanisms:  (1) a proxy fight; (2) a takeover bid; and (3) a
              combination of (1) and (2).  I believe that combining proxy fights and
              takeovers can overcome some of the inefficiencies that each mechanism exhibits
              by itself.

