Title       : SBIR/STTR Phase II: Development of Stable Membrane-Based Gas-Liquid Contactors
               for SO2 Removal from Flue Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0078527

Award Number: 0078527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Purushottam Shanbhag shanbhag@compactmembrane.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Compact Membrane Systems
	      325 Water Street
	      Wilmington, DE  198042410    302/999-7996

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will demonstrate
              the
enhanced performance of membrane-based gas-liquid contactors to abate
              SO2
emissions from flue gas. SO2 present in flue gas streams leads to
              deforestation and
damage to crops and property as a result of its
              participation in the formation of acid
rain. In Phase I, Compact Membrane
              Systems, Inc. (CMS) developed a nonporous
perfluorocopolymer composite
              membrane designed for use in membrane-based gas
liquid contactors to scrub
              flue gas of SO2 using an aqueous absorbent solution. This
membrane is designed
              to overcome the major drawbacks of conventional
microporous supports, i.e.
              progressive wetting out of the microporous substrate by
the (typically)
              aqueous absorbent and in some instances salt precipitation at the
liquid-gas
              interface. In addition to all the operational advantages of
              membrane
contactors, CMS membranes result in sustained improved SO2 removal
              efficiencies.
During Phase I it was demonstrated that this membrane permeated
              SO2, scrubbed a
flue gas simulant gas stream of SO2 as well as if not better
              than a conventional
microporous membrane contactor under identical conditions,
              and showed no loss in
performance despite exposure to an acidified silica
              suspension. Phase II will scale-up
the process to employ large pilot-scale
              contactors, study absorbent regeneration
technologies, demonstrate the whole
              process on a pilot-scale combustor, and
demonstrate that the CMS system offers
              better efficiencies and economics of flue gas
removal compared to existing
              systems.

The enhanced performance of membrane-based gas-liquid contactors to
              abate SO2
emissions from flue gas is of considerable interest to ore
              processors, pulp and paper
industries, many oil and natural gas processors
              (particularly those which have to
treat tail gases from gas sweetening
              processes), power plants employing coal as a
fossil fuel, etc.

