Title       : Collaborative Research: RUI: Air Cargo Services and Competitive Advantage in
               Industrializing Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0078621

Award Number: 0078621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65248              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Bowen bowenj@uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    920/424-1415

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5978,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Air cargo is an increasingly vital, though little researched, link in the
              contemporary global economy. Yet the availability and quality of air cargo
              services vary among cities, regions, and countries. This project will examine
              how variation in air cargo services affects the competitiveness of exporting
              manufacturers and the local economies within which they operate.  Through
              questionnaire surveys and in-depth interviews with air cargo carriers and
              exporting manufacturers, both the supply and demand dimensions of air cargo
              services will be assessed in the context of Malaysia, the Philippines, and
              Singapore.  Utilizing both quantitative and qualitative methods, models will be
              developed to show how the use of air cargo services changes as firms
              internationalize their operations, how foreign-owned and locally owned firms
              differ in their relationships with air cargo carriers, and how greater use of
              information technology has changed relationships in the air cargo industry.
              

While there is a significant descriptive and growing theoretical literature
              on producer services, virtually none of this addresses air cargo.  Heretofore
              air cargo has been treated simply as a means of transport for certain special
              goods.  However, the accelerated emergence of a new international division of
              labor and concomitant reach by firms for competitive advantage have produced an
              evolution in the technological sophistication and organizational structure of
              the air transport industry.  Airlines have developed broader product lines of
              different speed services, used communication advances to accelerate the flow of
              information among air cargo shippers and carriers, and formed international
              alliances to better serve multinational corporations.  In essence, a much
              richer set of services has been developed.  An exploration of these complex
              services, the carriers that provide them, and the exporters that use them in
              three dynamic Southeast Asian economies will demonstrate the role of air cargo
              as an influence upon the competitiveness of developing economies.


