Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Economical Continuous Metal Coating Method for Electronic and
               Other Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a0078622

Award Number: 0078622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mandar Sunthankar mandar@ionedge.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IonEdge Corporation
	      513 B N. Link Lane
	      Fort Collins, CO  805242737    970/491-9942

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9153,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will conduct
              research to develop a new approach to coating metals continuously and rapidly
              on large areas of moving substrates.  Currently, these types of coatings are
              electrochemically plated resulting in higher operating costs due to
              environmental regulations in the U.S.  This has added to the declining share of
              the world market for the U.S. electronic metal-coating industry.  Consequently,
              the Phase I results on the technique have generated interest in the commercial
              sector and a prototype demonstration is needed for the identified customers. 
              The proposed method is suitable for coating conductive as well as nonconductive
              substrates, and rigid as well as flexible substrates.  In this Phase II
              project, a prototype will be developed for continuously coating nonconductive
              substrates used in electronic applications.  Then metal coatings will be
              deposited at a rate better than that of the conventional methods.  Further
              research will be conducted to meet customer's expectations of the coating
              quality and process economics.  In addition, process repeatability will be
              assured by running the equipment for the identified customers. Finally, the
              coating price will be determined and a cost benefit analysis will be performed.
               The proposed method has the potential to reduce operating costs in the
              intended coating operations substantially.  

Copper, nickel and other metal
              coatings are widely plated on nonconductive substrates in several electronic
              and automotive applications.  Typical application include EMI/RFI shielding in
              cellular phones, conductor lines in printed wiring boards used in computers and
              flat panel displays, and decorative trims in automobiles. The method to be
              developed could provide a lower-cost alternative to the conventional methods in
              use today and make the US. coating industry more competitive in the
              international market. 

