Title       : Convergent Evolution and Ecophysiological Differentiation in Chaparral Shrubs: A
               Comparative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0078301

Award Number: 0078301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Ackerly dackerly@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The California chaparral and similar communities around the world have played a
              pivotal role in the development of plant ecology as a science.  The ecological
              similarity of distantly related species in these communities has long served as
              a paradigmatic example of convergent adaptation. In addition, the study of
              ecological differences between species has played a central role in elucidating
              alternative strategies related to abiotic stress and disturbance.  The study of
              ecological variation has focused on two features: i) water relations and
              drought tolerance, in relation to rooting depth and habitat distribution, and
              ii) contrasting life history strategies related to regeneration following fire.
               The first objective of this study is to examine the relationships between
              photosynthetic characteristics, drought tolerance, and fire-regeneration traits
              in a broad comparative study of over 30 species from three sites ranging from
              northern to southern California.  The second objective of this project is to
              integrate these ecological studies with the rapidly expanding knowledge of
              phylogenetic relationships among plant species to test whether the similarities
              and differences among these species represent local adaptations to the
              chaparral climate, or older characteristics which then led to the assembly of
              the current community. 

This project represents the first attempt to assess
              the contributions of a large number of physiological and life-history traits to
              the identification of functional groups in woody plant species.  The
              identification of functional groups is a critical step in understanding the
              mechanisms of coexistence in diverse plant communities, and in assessing the
              potential responses of different species to changing fire regimes and other
              environmental conditions.  Furthermore, this project will finally provide a
              test of the long-standing paradigm of convergent adaptation in chaparral-like
              communities. 


