Title       : SBIR Phase II: Thresholdless Ferroelectric Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0078722

Award Number: 0078722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399175             (Estimated)
Investigator: William N. Thurmes thurmes@displaytech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Displaytech Incorporated
	      2602 Clover Basin Drive
	      Longmont, CO  805032193    303/772-2191

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project's goal is a
              commercial
quality liquid crystal exhibiting V-shaped switching with no
              hysteresis. This LC will be
used in gray-scale displays and telecommunications
              optical switches.
Ferroelectric liquid crystals (FLCs), due to their fast
              switching speed and wide
viewing angle, have inherent advantages over the more
              commonly used nematic liquid
crystals. However, when used in displays, they
              have a disadvantage - they generally can
be driven to only two states, on and
              off. Since displays require intermediate gray states,
FLCs currently attain
              gray scale by rapidly switching on and off. This project uses a new
type of
              FLC which, in addition to its speed and viewing angle advantage, also
              shows
analog switching. This type of material, previously known as a
              "thresholdless
antiferroelectric", is now known to be an FLC with a linear
              optical response to applied
field (also known as "V-shaped
              switching").

This project's objective is to make new liquid crystal
              compounds and mixtures that
exhibit V-shaped switching. Towards that end, a
              variety of cores, chiral tails, and achiral
tails, all of which are either
              known or suspected to promote a de Vries-type smectic A,
have been proposed.
              About 50 - 100 liquid crystals will be synthesized by combining
these various
              components. These new LCs will be combined with LCs made in the Phase
I or
              earlier, giving mixtures that ideally will have not only a de Vries smectic A
              phase,
but also a wide room-temperature smectic C phase, good low-voltage
              analog electrooptic
response, good alignability, and fast hysteresis-free
              switching. An optimal alignment
layer configuration will be determined. The
              newly formulated mixtures will be placed in
cells containing this alignment
              layer to give V-shaped switching displays.
This project could be instrumental
              in advancing our knowledge of the root causes of
V-shaped switching in FLC
              and, by extension, add insight into the responses of self-assembling molecules
              to applied forces. In addition, since the interaction of the alignment
layer
              with the liquid crystal is crucial for V-shaped switching, much more so than
              for
typical FLCs, this project will provide a better understanding of the
              alignment layer-LC
interactions.

