Title       : Blood Pressure Regulation During Early Vertebrate Organogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0078094

Award Number: 0078094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Warburton swarburt@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project is directed at understanding the function and control of the
              heart and vascular systems of vertebrates during the early stages of
              development.  The heart is one of the first organs to form and assume its adult
              function, yet it does so long before the developing nervous system can reach
              it.  This project will help define the ability of the nascent cardiovascular
              system to regulate itself without the assistance of the nervous system.  It is
              suspected that the blood vessels themselves may provide the key to regulation
              during these very early stages of development.  Research in this area is
              hampered by the minute size of vertebrate embryos and larvae, and only recently
              has it been technologically possible to determine blood pressure and blood flow
              in embryos and larvae.
The question of blood pressure regulation is especially
              interesting in light of the knowledge that the cardiovascular system is
              responsive to the pressures and flows it generates and is capable of remodeling
              in response to increased or decreased pressure.  Thus, maintaining appropriate
              pressures and flows during development may be critical for appropriate
              cardiovascular morphology to appear.  Abnormal pressures or flows may result in
              pathological abnormalities, but may also account for the ability of heart shape
              and vascular geometry to evolve in such a fashion as to support the widely
              varying lifestyles of the vertebrates.
The research proposed herein, will also
              involve training a large number of students from high school to graduate level
              at New Mexico State University.  This is especially valuable in this locale
              given our high density of underrepresented minority students.  This research
              will serve as a training ground to provide "hand on" research experience to
              these students.

