Title       : SBIR Phase II: Computer-Assisted Document Interpretation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0078525

Award Number: 0078525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Z. Sokol   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Renaissance Engineering In
	      130 West Second, Suite 1414
	      Dayton, OH  454021502    937/224-1414

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the
              outdated methods by which companies use material and process specifications.
              Specifications are a fact of life for any organization involved in complex
              manufacturing (e.g., aerospace, automotive, materials).  Specifications are
              comprehensive and voluminous documents, covering hundreds of different key
              characteristics.  The constant reading, checking, and analyzing of
              specifications is extremely labor-intensive, quality-impacting, and
              time-consuming.  During Phase I research, the feasibility of the concept was
              successfully determined, and a conceptual design solution for tools was created
              which provides computer-assistance in the interpretation of specification
              requirements. The conceptual solution is based on the theories of Information
              Extraction and the analysis of specification content within the context of a
              meta-specification created as a result of prior NSF-sponsored research.  This
              meta-specification provides an ontology for capturing the semantic knowledge
              contained in the text of specifications.  The Phase II objectives are to build
              a working prototype of the solution as the foundation for potential full-scale
              commercialization. The tools created as a result of this prototype will be used
              to convert existing text-based specifications into the computer-sensible
              ontology.  The Phase II solution is not attempting to totally automate the
              interpretation process.  Instead, the focus is on innovative approaches for
              providing computer assistance in the semantic analysis of a limited domain of
              documents. 

The organizations which have their processing, inspecting, and
              testing controlled by specifications are extremely interested in using tools
              that access specifications in an intelligent, computerized format.  These
              organizations include the United States Government as well as suppliers and
              prime contractors in American industry.  This effort could 'jump-start' an
              entire industry related to providing tools for the computer-assisted analysis
              of specification requirements. 

