Title       : Workshop: Micro/Meso-Mechanical Manufacturing; Evanston, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0078890

Award Number: 0078890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kornel F. Ehmann k-ehmann@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jun Ni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shiv G. Kapoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. DeVor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to organize an international workshop on
              micro/meso-mechanical manufacturing. The overarching  objectives are to better
              understand the needs for and issues that surround mechanical manufacturing at
              the micro/meso scale (M4); to identify enabling technologies as well as
              weaknesses and scientific barriers, both fundamentally and in the industrial
              practice of M4; and to formulate research and development needs and strategies
              so as to accelerate the deployment of M4.   A subsidiary goal will be the
              projection of the potential economic impact of this technology once fully
              developed.  The emphasis will be on the exploration of the feasibility of  the
              miniaturization of the manufacturing equipment and tooling;  and the
              development of associated mechanical and allied processes, e.g., material
              removal, deformation/forming, and EDM/ECM and others, respectively, in support
              of M4.

It is anticipated that the findings of this workshop will serve as a
              basis, for government,  academia, and industry to formulate appropriate
              programs and strategies to overcome, in a concentrated manner, the most
              critical scientific, technological and economic barriers and to identify the
              requisite enabling technologies for M4.  Specific consensus responses, and
              recommendations will be contained in a written report on:  (1) the
              state-of-the-art in M4; (2) its potential economic impact; (3) existing
              scientific and technological barriers; (4) enabling technologies;  (5) critical
              areas in which the United States is falling behind, and (6) a specific
              prioritized R&D agenda on how to accelerate the development and implementation
              of viable M4 technologies.


