Title       : The Role(s) of Forked Proteins in Actin Fiber Bundle Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0078080

Award Number: 0078080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Petersen petersen@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Regulation of the assembly of actin fibers is required for cell movement,
              changing and maintaining cell shape, and even for cell division. Actin binding
              proteins are essential in regulating these processes. In Drosophila
              melanogaster it is possible to use mutations to study the actin fiber bundles
              involved in bristle development during the pupal stage. These fiber bundles are
              morphologically very similar to actin fiber bundles present in vertebrate
              intestinal brush border and in stereocilia in the ear and kidney, but much
              larger. In the forked and singed mutants, actin fiber bundles are dramatically
              reduced in developing bristles. As a result, in the adult fly, the bristles are
              twisted and branched. The singed protein is homologous to sea urchin fascin and
              bundles actin fibers in vitro, indicating that it may play a role similar to
              fimbrin in intestinal brush boarder microvilli. The forked gene encodes six
              proteins with overlapping coding regions which differ primarily in their
              amino-terminal ends. The forked proteins are also actin binding proteins which
              are homologous to the vertebrate actin binding proteins, the espins.  These
              were originally identified in rat testis ectoplasmic specializations but have
              now been also found in kidney and intestinal microvilli and in ear stereocilia.
               The predicted amino acid sequences of the espins are more similar to forked
              proteins than to other known actin binding proteins, and an antibody to espin
              specifically recognizes forked proteins on Western blots. This suggests that
              forked belongs to a new family of actin binding proteins which are involved in
              the assembly of specific types of tightly packed parallel actin bundles. The
              differences between these proteins may contribute to the differences in
              location and architecture of the bundles, while the similarities should reflect
              their common function(s). 

Dr. Petersen will continue to study the role(s)
              of forked proteins in actin fiber bundle formation in Drosophila bristles and
              in vertebrate cell lines. Her laboratory has shown that forked proteins are
              synthesized and concentrated in bristle tips just prior to the formation of
              actin bundles, and that they can induce actin bundle formation in transiently
              transfected vertebrate cells. This suggests that they play a critical role in
              initiating bundle formation.  It is planned to use the transfection of
              vertebrate cells to further define the essential parts of the protein required
              for bundle formation, and to use affinity chromatography and the yeast
              two-hybrid system to identify the regions of forked which interact with other
              proteins. P-factor transformation with forked genes mutated in these regions
              will then be used to clarify the roles of each domain in actin bundle formation
              in bristles.

