Title       : SBIR Phase II: Design-Based Developments for Pump Cavitation Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a0078582

Award Number: 0078582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel O. Baun dob@conceptnrec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Japikse  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Concepts ETI Inc
	      4 Billings Farms Road
	      White River Junction, VT  05001    802/296-2321

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1464,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to provide the means
              to reliably calculate turbopump stiffness and damping matrices based on dynamic
              force measurements collected using a magnetic bearing rig.  During Phase I
              exploratory development of a high suction specific speed (NSS) = 65,000 rocket
              engine turbopump pump stage was carried out and laid the foundation for this
              project.  A complementary Phase I project for NASA focused on an NSS = 85,000
              stage.  Earlier Air Force funding concentrated on demonstrating magnetic
              bearings as a useful lab instrument.  More recent breakthroughs include a novel
              fix for auto-oscillation and establishing the structure of an innovative
              dynamic force matrix measurement methodology.  The primary challenge in this
              work is to isolate those forces on the rotor (with and without cavitation) due
              to the interaction of the impeller with the stator using innovative test and
              signal processing techniques.  By testing a series of impellers, a database of
              rotordynamic coefficients will be established based on component dynamic force
              data.  An additional objective is to evaluate the capability of CFD for
              replicating those physical force measurements.  The goal is to create
              scientifically based design methods for lighter high-performance turbopumps. 
              

Smaller, lighter, and higher speed rocket engine turbopumps are required to
              meet lower space launch cost requirements.  Successful accomplishment of this
              fundamentally based approach for measuring component specific rotor dynamic
              forces and a method for using experimental results on a broader basis in the
              design process can lead to a breakthrough technology.  It will enable turbopump
              designers to overcome current thresholds due to hydraulic induced rotor dynamic
              instabilities.  In addition to reducing equipment size and cost, reliability
              will improve.  The technology is also applicable to industrial turbomachinery
              including industrial pumps, aircraft engine fuel pumps, and compressors. 

