Title       : Intervention Strategies and the Outcome of Intrastate Conflicts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0078402

Award Number: 0078402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76111              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick M. Regan pregan@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project will build on earlier work that explores the relationship between
              outside interventions and the secession of hostilities. Specifically my
              research proposal will address the following:
1) the expected duration of a
              conflict with and without outside interventions;
2) an examination of the
              relationship between strategy and outcome, specifically the effectiveness of
              the "carrot and stick" approach to intervening, by examining the interplay of
              punishments and rewards, and the relative effectiveness of gradual
              interventions versus large, episodic ones (the former is epitomized by
              Nicaragua or El Salvador; the latter by Somalia);
3) the conditions under
              which states substitute military, economic, and diplomatic initiatives in their
              attempts to influence the course of internal conflicts.
Beyond these specific
              objectives the project will contribute to our understanding of when and how
              states choose across a range of potential policy options, the role of selection
              mechanisms in evaluating outcomes, and policy evaluation more
              generally.

This project will add to the current state of our knowledge of
              intervention effectiveness, as well as making available to the social science
              community a fairly refined data set on interventions in internal conflicts. 
              Specifically I will address the following:
	Conceptual Refinements:
 Develop
              and test a more complex understanding of the role of intervention strategy on
              conflict outcomes
 Examine the effects of intervention substitution

              Incorporate diplomatic interventions as a compliment to or alternative for
              military or economic strategies
 Examine the effect of outside interventions
              on the duration of intrastate conflicts
Data Refinements:
Record intervention
              data in terms of size and speed of the intervention
 Sequentially order the
              unfolding strategy of intervention
 Update current intervention data from 1994
              to the present

The initial focus would be on the expected duration of the
              conflict in light of (or in spite of) an outside intervention.  The interesting
              theoretical and policy question is whether interventions shorten or prolong the
              expected duration of a civil conflict.  We would expect that when third parties
              intervene they anticipate that their effort will lead to shortening the
              conflict.  This has never been sufficiently examined.  The second stage of the
              analysis will examine the effect of different strategies for intervening on the
              success or failure of the policy.  If states (or international organizations)
              use intervention strategies as a form of conflict management then knowing what
              works best is critical information. Currently this level of knowledge is rather
              meager.  For example, we know very little about the conflict management
              implications of using a mixture of diplomacy and coercion in trying to get
              actors in civil conflicts to stop fighting.  I will first test for the
              conditions under which third parties select into intervention strategies. Using
              a Heckman selection model I can test whether there is systematic variation in
              potential conditions that 'cause' an actor to choose to be in a specified
              category.  This requires a two-stage estimation process, where a regression
              equation that would account for the success or failure of an intervention would
              be specified, along with a set of variable that should account for selection
              into the intervention.  The first stage would estimate the likelihood that we
              would observe an intervention, given the set of specified conditions; the
              second stage would estimate the likelihood that an intervention would be
              successful.  

This research effort will produce two things of continuing
              value to the social science and policy communities.  First, a series of journal
              articles will describe the data and present the results of the analyses.  These
              analyses should have clear policy relevant implications, suggesting strategies
              for stopping intrastate conflicts that have the greatest chance of success.  I
              anticipate that the project could culminate in a book-length manuscript that
              would have a dual audience consisting of policymakers and scholars.  Second, as
              a result of the labor-intensive data generation effort we will have a data set
              on interventions in civil conflicts that will be highly desired and broadly
              applicable.  I will make these data publicly available via my web site and/or
              depositing them with ICPSR.


