Title       : Understanding Individual Differences in Judgmental Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0078783

Award Number: 0078783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Stewart t.stewart@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elise A. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
	
Stewart # 0078783	

 What is necessary for good judgment in
              uncertain situations?  For any
 given judgment problem, some people perform
              better than others.  This is
 true both for everyday judgments, such as a
              driver judging a safe speed or
 a consumer judging the quality of a product,
              and for professional
 judgments, such as a physician judging the severity of a
              child's illness
 or a weather forecaster judging the probability that a storm
              will spawn
 tornadoes.  Are the differences in judgmental performance simply a
              result
 of differences in experience and training, or do they reflect
              differences
 in fundamental cognitive abilities necessary for good judgment?

               
 This study will examine three cognitive abilities and how they relate to

              good judgment:  (a) intelligence (b) good statistical reasoning and (c)
 the
              ability to learn to use information accurately in new situations.
  
 Members
              of the local community and expert weather forecasters will be
 recruited to
              participate.  For both groups, two everyday judgment problems
 will be used to
              measure judgment performance.  In addition, the weather
 forecasters'
              professional judgment performance will be assessed based on
 their track
              record as forecasters and their performance on a new task.
  
 The data will
              be used to explore how judgmental skill in everyday and
 professional judgment
              tasks is related to other cognitive abilities.  The
 study results will
              improve our understanding of what goes into accurate
 judgment.  They will
              also contribute to the training of professionals and
 to the design of systems
              to support better judgment and decision making in
 uncertain situations.
  

               		


