Title       : Genetics and Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Elongation in S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0078100

Award Number: 0078100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa M. Dunn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Proposal MCB-0078100
PI: Teresa M. Dunn


This research is
              designed to elucidate the composition and organization of the
microsomal fatty
              acid elongating systems. The properties and functions of cellular
membranes
              are largely determined by the composition of their lipids, and each class
              of
lipids has a distinct fatty acid composition. Most cellular fatty acids
              have 16 or 18
carbons and are synthesized by the cytosolic fatty acid synthase
              enzyme. However, the
very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA's), with chain lengths
              greater than 18 carbons, are
synthesized by membrane-associated enzyme
              systems.  The function of the
VLCFA's is essential to the cellular processes,
              since alterations in their metabolism can have devastating consequences to the
              cell.  Three Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants with defects in VLCFA synthesis
              have recently been isolated in a screen for sphingolipid synthesis mutants. The
              wild-type genes required for fatty acid elongation have been cloned. These
              cloned genes and their mutants with defective VLCFA synthesis provide the tools
              that are needed to resolve several important questions about the fatty acid
              elongating enzymes. The purpose of this study is to identify the other
              elongating enzymes by using a combination of genetic screens and
              affinity-copurification strategies. The functions of the proteins identified in
              these screens will be determined. Since these proteins have been conserved
              through evolution, the identification of the proteins in yeast will result in
              their identification in plants and animals as well.

The cells of all living
              organisms such as yeast, plants, and animals, are enclosed by a thin skin of
              lipid and protein known as the cell membrane.  The cell membrane has special
              openings or passages through which biochemicals enter or leave the cell. 
              Different tissues can have different types of lipids in different proportions,
              and the properties and functions of the cell membranes are determined in part
              by the composition of their lipids.  Each class of lipids has a distinct fatty
              acid composition.  Most cellular fatty acids are made by a soluble enzyme
              system and contain 16 or 18 carbons.  However, a special type of fatty acids
              (VLCFA's) has chain lengths greater than 18 carbons and is synthesized by a
              different enzyme system, one that is membrane-associated.  A typical fatty acid
              of 16 or 18 carbons is lengthened by two carbon units four times in succession
              to give a 24 or 26 carbon length fatty acid.  These VLCFA's are essential to
              certain cell processes since if their amounts are altered in a cell the cell
              will die or stop growing. These VLCFA's are usually found in a class of lipids
              called sphingolipids.  The yeast S. cerevisiae is a good model system for
              studying VLCFA synthesis and function.  Three yeast mutants with defects in
              VLCFA synthesis have recently been found.  This has enabled the isolation of
              the corresponding genes and the proteins they encode.  Normal and mutant genes
              can then be inserted into yeast to find out how the protein product of the gene
              works in making the VLCFA's.  Since these proteins have been conserved through
              evolution, the identification of the enzymes in yeast will result in their
              identification in plants and animals as well. Then the function of VLCFA's and
              sphingolipids in higher organism can be investigated.




