Title       : Mutational Analysis of Photosystem I Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0078264

Award Number: 0078264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Parag R. Chitnis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078264
Chitnis

Energy generation in a cell requires electron transfer
              across membranes, which is typically mediated through multiprotein enzymes,
              such as cytochrome oxidase of respiration and photosystems of photosynthesis.
              Photosystem I is one of the two membrane-bound reaction centers of the
              photosynthetic electron transfer chain in cyanobacteria and chloroplasts. It
              functions as the light-driven plastocyanin-ferredoxin oxidoreductase and is a
              heteromultimeric pigment-protein complex. In this  project, the PI is
              attempting to determine the function of photosystem I proteins through
              site-directed mutagenesis and targeted gene inactivation. A photosystem I
              complex contains two phylloquinone molecules, one (or both) of which serves as
              the redox center A1. The PI proposes to introduce cysteinyl residues near the
              phylloquinone-binding site by mutagenesis and to attach spin labels to them.
              Paramagnetic interactions between the label and A1 signal will allow
              identification of the redox-active phylloquinone(s) and consequently the active
              branch of electron transfer pathway.  The PI has generated phylloquinone-less
              mutants that contain plastoquinone in their photosystem I complexes. The PI
              proposes to use those mutants to recruit foreign quinones in the A1 site in
              vivo. The quinones that compete successfully with the native plastoquinone in
              binding to the A1 site will be useful in determining structural features of the
              quinones that are important for their function at an extremely low redox
              potential. The quinones that are unable to substitute function of phylloquinone
              will be used for directed evolution of the binding site to accommodate and to
              use these quinones. In addition to studies on phylloquinones in photosystem I,
              the PI will investigate the role of b-carotene molecules in the excitation
              energy transfer in photosystem I. The PI recently discovered that several
              photosystem I proteins are modified post-translationally. He proposes to
              identify these modifications and examine their functional
              significance.

Electron transfer reactions are key steps in photosynthesis,
              respiration, drug metabolism, and many other biochemical pathways.
              Photosynthesis and respiration contain membrane-bound electron transfer chains
              of general significance. The electron-transfer proteins in energy-transducing
              complexes provide structural stability, recognize reaction partners, and
              accurately orient cofactors. We expect that the outcome of the proposed
              research will provide information about how the protein environment determines
              functional properties of cofactors. In addition, the results will suggest ways
              to modify proteins for accommodating and using foreign cofactors and to
              engineer better biomimetic photoconversion systems. Oxygenic photosynthesis in
              plants, algae and cyanobacteria is the primary source of energy and oxygen for
              the life on our planet. Therefore, better understanding of this process is
              necessary to address the environmental and food challenges of the future. 


