Title       : SBIR Phase II: Three Dimensional Video Motion Detection for Science and
               Mathematics Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0078672

Award Number: 0078672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan Kimball nathan@albertiswindow.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alberti's Window, LLC
	      304 Pleasant Street
	      Watertown, MA  02472    617/923-8450

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project  will complete
              the research and development to product of a low-cost tool for exploratory
              science and math learning, a three-dimensional motion detector.  This device
              uses a passive optical detection scheme with two ordinary home video cameras as
              sensors.  For at least 15 years, systems that capture and display motion in
              real-time have been used for studying the meaning of graphs and to investigate
              physical phenomena, and their educational effectiveness has been researched and
              documented.  To date, all low-cost systems have been constrained to one
              dimension, and generally use ultrasonic echo location.  This project will make
              3D-motion detection affordable and competitive with one-dimensional systems
              when used with schools' existing video equipment.  It offers great learning
              potential by allowing students to build a bridge from their universal 3D-world
              experience into mathematical space.  The Phase II project proceeds along three
              fronts: refinement of the signal processing hardware, coding of the 'host'
              software for capture, display, and analysis of the 3D data, and the development
              and testing of educational activities.  The software and activities are
              targeted for high school mathematics and physics.

This small business
              proffers a hands-on exploratory system to allow students multiple views and
              ways of understanding the complex study of motion.  Several of the largest
              national distributors of educational electronic laboratory equipment have
              demonstrated interest in selling and promoting the motion detector.

