Title       : Mechanism of EF-G-Dependent Translocation in the Ribosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0078322

Award Number: 0078322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simpson Joseph sjoseph@chem.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078322
Joseph
One of the fundamental steps in the elongation cycle of protein
              synthesis is the iterative movement of the tRNA-mRNA complex in the ribosome,
              called translocation. The long-term objective of this research is to understand
              the mechanism of translocation of tRNAs from one site to the next within the E.
              coli ribosome. Ribosomes are composed of RNA and proteins. Results from
              phylogenetic sequence comparison, genetic studies and biochemical experiments
              indicate a functional role for ribosomal RNAs in translation.  The specific
              goals of this proposal are to identify functional groups within tRNAs in the
              A-site and P-site that are required for translocation.

Previous research in
              the PI's laboratory has shown that ribosomes containing a full-length tRNA
              bound to the P-site and an analog of the anticodon stem-loop of tRNA bound to
              the ribosomal A-site are translocated. This minimal analog of tRNA will be used
              to identify essential ribose 2'-hydroxyls and non-bridging phosphate oxygens
              required for translocation from the A-site.  Other experiments from the PI's
              laboratory indicate that tRNAs with a break in the phosphodiester backbone are
              translocated from the P-site. Specific modifications within the smaller
              fragments of the tRNA can be incorporated by chemical synthesis. This presents
              a unique opportunity to study the role of specific functional groups within
              P-site tRNA that are required for translocation. 

Biochemical methods such
              as toeprinting and chemical probing will be used in addition to functional
              group substitution studies to identify interactions that are required for the
              movement of the tRNAs in the ribosome. These studies addressing functional
              interactions between tRNAs and the ribosome will be especially important once
              high-resolution crystal structures of the ribosome become available. 



