Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Purpose Open-Channel Flume for Water Flow Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0078926

Award Number: 0078926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis C. Ting francis_ting@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell W. DeBoer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandros Moutsoglou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0078926	
F. Ting, South Dakota State Universty 
Abstract

The requested
              open-channel flume will be used, in the immediate future, for experimental
              studies of turbulent flow fields around bridge piers and the dynamics of
              turbulence in irregular breaking waves. Improved descriptions of turbulent
              flows at piers and in breaking waves are critical to the development of
              accurate and efficient computational methods for pier scour and coastal
              processes. The proposed research will also provide the high quality data needed
              to test and improve detailed models of bridge pier flows and surf zone
              hydrodynamics. This data set would go far beyond any comparable data set that
              is presently available, and it would be very useful for testing a wide range of
              modeling techniques, including both present day models and models that are
              under long-range development.

The requested precision-tilting flume will be
              an important contribution to the modernization of the Fluid Mechanic Laboratory
              at South Dakota State University. This laboratory is used cooperatively by all
              deparments in the College of Engineering. In addition, cooperative programs at
              our collaborating institution at South Dakota school of Mines and Technology
              will also utilize the requested flume for research and education. Such use will
              be enhanced because a remote operation system will enable a researcher to run
              the flume and acquire instrumental data by computer through the Internet.
              Acquisition of the requested flume will therefore permit South Dakota faculty
              to carry out competitive investigations and more effectively compete for
              research funding. The corresponding increase in the amount of research support
              will enable South Dakota to attract and support capable graduate students. The
              integration of research and teaching will provide elevated education quality
              for South Dakota students. Furthermore Internet- based remote access to
              equipment will enhance diversity and will enable institutions  (e.g. tribal
              universities, two-year colleges and high schools) that do not have a Fluid
              Mechanics Laboratory to participate in projects and activities supported by
              requested equipment.

