Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Precision Surface Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0078776

Award Number: 0078776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161439             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Dow thomas_dow@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
This grant provides support for upgraded equipment at the Precision
              Engineering Center at North Carolina State University for research and
              education in precision fabrication, metrology and control.  Three pieces of
              equipment will be purchased: a large aperture (150 mm) form measuring
              interferometer, a white-light interferometric microscope and a large-sample
              Atomic Force Microscope.  Each device covers a certain spatial
              wavelength/amplitude region of the measurement spectrum and together they
              provide the ability to measure over a wide range - from form error on large
              optical surfaces to the details of surfaces created in a machining process.
              

These instruments will be used by faculty, staff and students to pursue a
              variety of research projects.  Examples include the manufacturing of hard disk
              heads, replication of plastic photonic devices by injection molding, machining
              of injection molds from hard steel and fabrication of targets for inertial
              confinement fusion experiments.  These projects cover a broad range of
              industrial sectors but are similar in that the goal is to understand and
              control a process to produce accurate and repeatable components.  Each project
              requires the ability to measure aspects of the surfaces created - sometimes the
              overall shape is of interest and sometimes the details of the surface finish is
              needed.  The upgraded instruments will enhance the capability to define the
              surfaces created and will lead to improvements in the precision fabrication
              process of interest. 


