Title       : Biophysical Studies on the Additive Effects of Modification in tRNA and rRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0078501

Award Number: 0078501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward P. Nikonowicz edn@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nikonowicz, Edward P.
MCB 0078501

The goal of this project is to understand
              key aspects of the post-transcriptional modification process of tRNA at the
              molecular level, including the basis of molecule specific RNA recognition by
              modification enzymes and the functional basis of modifications within RNA
              molecules. This research focuses on modification sites within the anticodon
              stem-loop E. coli tRNAPhe and the rRNA target of the dual specificity
              modification enzyme pseudouridine synthase RluA.  Specifically, the following
              topics will be addressed: (1) chemical and enzymatic protection of MiaA RNA
              ligands to identify positions on the RNA that contact MiaA protein and to
              monitor binding induced RNA structure changes, (2) structural studies of an RNA
              ligand in complex with MiaA,  and (3) structure determination of Helix-35 from
              E. coli 23S rRNA, the "second" target of the RluA enzyme. The results of these
              studies are directly relevant to understanding the specificity and affinity of
              protein-RNA interactions and the impact of modification on RNA structure and
              dynamics and its relationship to RNA function (e.g. translation). These
              investigations also will complement mechanistic studies of the prenylation
              reaction catalyzed by MiaA. 


Many RNA molecules interact with specific
              protein molecules either to be modified by those proteins or to perform unique
              cellular functions as a protein-RNA complex. Thus, it is of fundamental
              biological importance to learn the molecular principles that encode the
              specificity of individual protein-RNA interactions. At present, the molecular
              details of protein-RNA recognition are known for only a small number of
              complexes and even fewer general principles for recognition have emerged.  The
              overall goal of this research is to determine the rules of protein-RNA
              recognition for two model bacterial proteins and to determine the structural
              and stability effects introduced by their enzymatic action. 

