Title       : Collaborative Research on Behavioral Models of Intertemporal Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0078796

Award Number: 0078796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward D. ODonoghue edo1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Although the rational-choice model has yielded an array of insights across a
              broad range of human activities, research from psychology suggests that it is
              inaccurate in some systematic and important ways. The investigators propose to
              continue their agenda of integrating psychologically more realistic
              assump-tions about human behavior into formal economic models of intertemporal
              choice.
	Most of the investigators' past and proposed future research revolves
              around a single well-established phenomenon: Whereas the standard economic
              model assumes that preferences are time-consistent, evi-dence suggests people
              have present-biased preferences, wherein a person's relative preference for
              well-being at an earlier date over a later date gets stronger as the earlier
              date gets closer. But more than merely examining the implications of
              present-biased preferences per se, the investigators are particularly
              inter-ested in the importance of whether a person is aware of future
              self-control problems. Their research fo-cuses on the differing implications of
              assuming a person is sophisticated - fully aware of future self-control
              problems - or naive - fully unaware of future self-control problems.
	The
              investigators have two continuing projects that they plan to complete during
              the grant period. The first examines the implications of present-biased
              preferences for the consumption of addictive products. People with self-control
              problems tend to over-consume addictive products, but this behavior is affected
              by sophisticated awareness of self-control problems. Because sophistication
              makes people pessimistic about their ability to resist future temptations, and
              hence feel they might as well get addicted now, so-phistication can exacerbate
              over-consumption. Even so, we show that in realistic cases this pessimism
              effect is likely to be overcome by an incentive effect, wherein sophistication
              makes the person realize that current restraint may promote future restraint.
              In current work, the investigators are attempting to gener-alize and extend
              this earlier analysis, to explore such issues as the effects of price for
              consumption. In a second continuing project, joint with George Loewenstein of
              Carnegie-Mellon University, the investiga-tors explore the implications of a
              second systematic error that people make in the realm of intertemporal choice:
              People tend to underappreciate the influence of factors that change their
              future preferences, and hence to project current preferences on their future
              selves. The investigators and their co-author develop a formal model of such
              projection bias, and apply this model to several illustrative economic
              applications. In continuing research, they plan to apply their model in more
              depth to such things as addiction and mis-predictions of diminishing marginal
              utility of consumption.
	The investigators also have several new projects that
              are in the very early stages.  The investigators plan to carry out the
              preliminary phases of these projects during the grant period.  One explores
              procrasti-nation of long-term projects. Whereas most work on procrastination
              assumes that a project requires a sin-gle period of effort, most real-world
              projects take some duration to complete. This distinction is crucial for people
              with present-biased preferences, because whether a person starts a project and
              whether she finishes it become two distinct questions. Self-control problems
              can lead people to start but never finish projects, and, when faced with
              multiple ongoing projects, to choose the wrong projects to work on. In a second
              project, the investigators plan to analyze present-biased preferences in a
              general framework that allows them to build upon some of the points made in
              existing research. There is a simple intuition for how the effects of
              sophistication depend on how indulgence at different moments affect long-run
              well-being. When indulging in one period makes indulging in the other period
              more harmful to one's future well-being, sophistication about future indulgence
              leads a person to perceive high costs of current indul-gence and hence to
              misbehave less now.  When indulging in one period makes indulging in the other
              pe-riod less harmful to one's future well-being, sophistication exacerbates
              indulgence.  Preliminary analysis identifies a stylized setting in which this
              effect dominates, and yields insight on why it does not dominate in general.

