Title       : Theoretical Studies of Water Clusters Interacting with Excess Electrons,
               Protons, and Halide Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0078528

Award Number: 0078528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Jordan jordan@a.psc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kenneth Jordan of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out theoretical studies that
              address the interactions of water clusters with charged particles, in
              particular, excess electrons, halide ions, and protons.  A flexible
              one-electron model-potential code for characterizing negatively charged water
              clusters will be developed and applied in mapping out the rearrangement
              pathways for small negatively charged water clusters.  In addition, spectra
              will be calculated for negatively charged water cluster ions "solvated" by
              variable numbers of argon atoms, with the goal of providing information useful
              in identifying experimentally observed ion spectra.  Motivated by recent
              experiments, theoretical studies will be undertaken to elucidate the
              rearrangement pathways accessible following photoexcitation of iodine
              anion-water clusters.  In a third research thrust, the impact of a single
              proton on the melting behavior of water clusters will be examined and related
              to recent experiments that indicate that products from photoionization of water
              clusters depend on whether the charge clusters are solid-like or liquid-like. 
              The outcomes of this research will provide new insights into the fundamentally
              important water cluster systems, as well as the behavior of charged particles
              in bulk water and interfaces. 

Water is ubiquitous and crucial for
              biological processes.  Studies of clusters of water molecules can provide
              useful insights into biological and chemical phenomena in bulk water and at
              water interfaces with other media.  Recent experimental and theoretical studies
              of water clusters, and clusters interacting with other molecules, ions, and
              excess electrons, have provided considerable insight into the structures and
              other properties of these novel species.  This research will address
              theoretical aspects of new issues raised in the active area of water cluster
              research.
