Title       : Development of a Near-Field Optical Instrument for the Study of Semiconductor
               Nanostructures and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0078939

Award Number: 0078939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lukas Novotny novotny@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A near-field optical instrument for the optical characterization and
              investigation of semiconductor nanostructures will be developed. The instrument
              relies on the field enhancement at a laser illuminated metal tip. The electric
              energy density near the tip will be enhanced by 3 to 4 orders of magnitude over
              the exciting laser light. The tip is held in close proximity over the sample
              surface so that a highly localized interaction between the enhanced field and
              the sample is achieved. Increased signal-to-noise ratio due to non-linear
              effects will allow performance  to perform spectroscopic measurements with high
              spatial resolution.  Favorable tip shapes, tip materials and illumination modes
              will be investigated and a sensitive feedback mechanism will be implemented to
              assure nondestructive interaction forces (10pN) between tip and sample. The
              instrument will be applied to optically interact with semiconductor
              nanostructures on length scales smaller than the extent of their wavefunctions.
              The instrument will also give valuable feedback on the physical properties of
              nanostructered materials and thus provide input for improved nanomaterial
              synthesis. In collaborative projects the instrument will be applied to
              investigate biological membranes and to study electron/energy transfer between
              nanoparticles and surfaces. The instrument will also serve for laboratory
              demonstrations for students attending a course in nano-optics.

A new faculty
              member, his postdoctoral associate and a graduate student will develop a new
              Near Field Optical Microscope. The instrument will be used to study
              semiconductor nanostructures and for student training. The new instrument will
              overcome the limitations of traditional light microscopes which not allow
              resolving features that are smaller than the wavelength of light. This is why
              we cannot see individual molecules and particles that form the building blocks
              of biological tissue and materials. Although these building blocks can be
              imaged by other techniques such as the electron microscope, the colorful
              optical properties are lost. Color is an important property since it provides
              information of the functionality of things: a leaf that is alive is green while
              a dead leaf is brown. It is therefore useful to find techniques, which extend
              the optical resolution to smaller length scales, and to make molecules and
              particles visible. This instrument will have the capability to detect and
              record the color of the tiny illuminated sample area. By using scanning
              technique the entire surface of the sample can be covered. Using the stored
              data a computer can generate an optical image of the entire sample surface. In
              this way, the instrument will establish an optical image with unprecedented
              resolution compared with traditional light microscopes.

