Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Grammar of Huehuetla Tepehua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a0078453

Award Number: 0078453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6405               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony C. Woodbury acw@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research will provide a grammar of the Huehuetla variety of
              Tepehua, a member of the Totonacan language family of Mexico. The precise
              number of remaining speakers of Huehuetla Tepehua (henceforth HT) is unknown,
              but the three varieties of Tepehua are spoken by fewer than 10,000 people in
              the Mexican states of Hidalgo, Veracruz, and Puebla. HT is spoken only in the
              township of Huehuetla and the outlying villages. The grammar of Huehuetla, to
              consist of a basic description of the language, an HT/Spanish dictionary, and a
              compilation of stories and other texts in HT, will be submitted to the
              University of Texas at Austin as a dissertation in linguistics.

This project
              has significance for several fields and groups. First, it will be significant
              for linguistics because it will provide a description of a nearly undocumented
              language, and it will help determine whether HT and the related variety
              Tlachichilco Tepehua are dialects of the same language or separate languages.
              More specifically, it will be important to the field of historical linguistics,
              because a grammar of HT will help facilitate the reconstruction of
              Proto-Totoncan. Second, the project will provide results that will be useful to
              fields that focus on Mesoamerica, such as archaeology and art history, and that
              utilize historical linguistics to decipher glyphs and to reconstruct
              prehistory. Third, the project will be significant for the Tepehua people
              themselves: (i) it will provide a foundation on which to base pedagogical
              materials needed for language preservation, and (ii) it will provide them with
              the beginnings of a body of literature that is written and recorded in their
              native language and culturally relevant to them.

The project involves nine
              months of fieldwork in and around the town of Huehuetla. The collected data
              will consist of elicited words and sentences; elicited narratives such as
              stories, recipes and jokes; and naturally-occurring speech, such as
              conversations and ceremonies. All data will be recorded on minidiscs; the
              narratives will be recorded on Hi8 videotapes as well, both to document speech
              events and to aid in analysis and translation.
