Title       : Return to Robbers Cave: Co-existence between Groups in Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0078867

Award Number: 0078867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Worchel worchel@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project evaluates the impact of a unique program aimed at promoting
              peaceful co-existence between national and ethnic groups currently involved in
              intense and protracted conflict. One aim of the research is to develop a
              developmental model of how changes in perceptions of the self, ingroup, and
              outgroups relate to improving intergroup relations over time. Participants
              include adult leaders and adolescent males and females (ages 13-16) from
              several regions of tension including the Middle East and Cyprus. Participants
              spend three weeks at the Seeds of Peace International Camp, in a summer camp in
              Maine. The camp program includes activities designed to enhance cooperative
              equal status contact between group members, promote the exchange of
              information, and teach skills of communication and co-existence. Since its
              inception in 1993, over 1400 individuals have "graduated" from the camp.
              Although the program has received significant national and international
              attention, there has been no study of its impact. Changes in the cognition and
              behaviors of camp participants will be compared with a Control Group composed
              of individuals who do not attend the camp. Data will be collected on a variety
              of dimensions that have both applied and theoretical importance. These data
              include self-esteem, self-identity, stereotypes of ingroup and outgroups,
              perceptions of group homogeneity and threat, and behaviors between members of
              the different groups. The results of the study will address three issues: 1)
              The degree to which the camp experience has a positive effect on the
              relationship between the different groups at the camp;  2) Whether changes in
              the perceptions and behaviors that occur at camp generalize to the larger
              groups represented by the campers; and 3) The extent to which these changes
              endure over an extended time period (20-24 months). The project represents a
              special opportunity to test and extend theories of intergroup relations. The
              measures employed to evaluate the program are based on existing social
              psychological theories and research. The results will indicate the longevity of
              the effects of intergroup contact on intergroup attraction. Hypotheses relating
              to how intensity of conflict affects the influence of intergroup contact will
              also be examined. The design allows a comparison of the effects of contact on
              perceptions of the self, the ingroup, and outgroups. Several components of
              stereotypes (competence, warmth, salience, and homogeneity) will be measured
              and related to improving intergroup relations. Underlying processes such as
              recategorization and cross-categorization will be inferred from responses. The
              research is significant because it employs theoretically-based measures to
              examine a program that is designed to address a critical social problem. The
              research program also represents a cooperative effort between an academic
              institution and private nonprofit organization.

