Title       : SBIR Phase II: Fabrication of Low-Cost Modules Incorporating Microporous Silica
               Membranes for Natural Gas Purification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0078474

Award Number: 0078474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Higgins higgins@ceramem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CeraMem Corporation
	      12 Clematis Avenue
	      Waltham, MA  02453    617/899-4495

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1414,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses development
              of economical membrane-based devices primarily suitable for: (a) purification
              of sub-quality raw natural gas to pipeline quality and (b) carbon dioxide
              recovery from enhanced oil recovery operations.  A large fraction of domestic
              natural gas reserves are uneconomical for recovery based on current market
              conditions because they contain significant amounts of non-methane gas. 
              Membrane-based devices are currently commercially employed to purify
              sub-quality natural gas, but membranes with improved productivity compared to
              now state-of-the-art devices are required to allow economic use of currently
              unrecoverable natural gas.  The overall objective of this program is to develop
              an innovative fabrication approach to incorporate microporous silica membranes
              within low-cost, highly compact modules.  Microporous silica membranes exhibit
              combinations of carbon dioxide permeance and CO2/CH4 selectivity that are
              unrivaled by conventional organic gas separation membranes, but have not yet
              been incorporated in low-cost modules to allow their commercialization.
              Commercial availability of such modules would greatly reduce costs associated
              with upgrading sub-quality natural gas reserves.  In Phase I, the feasibility
              of the novel module fabrication approach was demonstrated.  In Phase II, the
              separation properties of very small modules will be improved through systematic
              optimization of processing.  Modules with ca. 0.1 m2 membrane area will be
              fabricated and tested for extended duration for separation of simulated raw
              natural gas, and a detailed manufacturing scheme with related costs will be
              developed in preparation for commercialization of the technology.

The
              devices to be developed in this program would significantly reduce costs
              associated with purification of gas streams in the following applications:
              natural gas upgrading, carbon dioxide recovery from enhanced oil recovery
              operations, and biogas processing.
