Title       : Data System Upgrades for Mass Spec/NMR Core Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0078192

Award Number: 0078192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75821              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Louis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, the Department of Chemistry at the University of Minnesota in Twin
              Cities will acquire a data system upgrade for their Mass Spectrometer/NMR core
              facility. This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including
              a) investigations on photosynthetic intermediates; b) metabolic regulation of
              the plant hormones and genomic approaches to auxin biology; c) biochemistry and
              chemical ecology of pine bark beetles; d) nitrogen metabolism;
              structure-function studies of intracellular lipid binding proteins; and e)
              vitamin K-dependent proteins and sulfur dioxide reactions with nitric oxide. 
              

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate structural
              details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a vast array of organic,
              bioorganic, and organometallic molecules.  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the
              elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
              substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules,
              and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution. 
              Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists who are
              carrying out frontier research.  Upgraded data systems will increase efficiency
              of the entire facility, increase educational activities and improve
              investigator access to instrumentation.  The results from these studies will
              have an impact in a number of areas including biochemistry, molecular biology
              and biophysics, chemistry, and plant pathology.  






