Title       : Role of Cdk Phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0078432

Award Number: 0078432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Jiang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0078432
Wei Jiang

Jiang MCB-0078432 In all eukaryotic cells,
              accurate duplication of chromosomes and precise segregation of the sister
              chromatids into two daughter chromosomes are essential for faithful propagation
              of their identity.  The first event, DNA replication, is a tightly regulated
              process that is strictly coupled to the progression of the cell cycle.  It
              occurs at discrete chromosomal locations (replication origins) during the
              S-phase of the cell cycle.  When DNA replication is initiated, the cell must
              ensure that all of its genome is replicated and that the replication of every
              DNA section occurs once and only once per cell cycle.  HsCdc6, a human protein
              homolog to the budding yeast DNA replication protein Cdc6p, plays an essential
              role in the initiation of DNA replication in human cells.  Like all
              Cdc6-related proteins, HsCdc6 contains a bipartite Walker nucleotide-binding
              motif and shows significant sequence similarity to the eukaryotic and
              prokaryotic clamp loaders that load ring-shaped DNA polymerase processivity
              factors onto DNA.  Recent studies have shown that HsCdc6 has intrinsic ATP
              binding and ATPase activity, which play important roles in regulating the
              initiation of DNA replication.  HsCdc6 is a physiological substrate of
              cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk).  Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 is required for
              the initiation of DNA replication and results in its nuclear exclusion via a
              receptor-dependent nuclear export.  Therefore, it is suggested that Cdk
              phosphorylation of HsCdc6 prevents its reassociation with chromatin, thereby
              preventing DNA re-replication.  Nevertheless, the exact mechanisms by which
              phosphorylation of HsCdc6 by Cdk is needed for the initiation and how
              phosphorylated HsCdc6 is specifically exported from the nucleus are unclear. 
              Determination of these mechanisms is the goal of this project.  The first aim
              of the project is to determine how Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 regulates the
              initiation of DNA replication.  Recombinant HsCdc6 and its Cdk phosphorylation
              mutants will be purified from insect cells using the baculovirus-based express
              system.  Purified HsCdc6 proteins will be used to determine whether Cdk
              phosphorylation of HsCdc6 regulates its intrinsic ATP binding and/or ATPase
              activity.  Moreover, the functional roles of Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in
              regulating the initiation of DNA replication will be determined using the
              Xenopus cell-free DNA replication system.  The second aim of this project is to
              determine the nucleocytoplasmic transport pathway that regulates the nuclear
              export of Cdk phosphorylated HsCdc6 and identify factor(s) that specifically
              regulates the process by in vitro binding protein purification or yeast
              two-hybrid screen strategies.  This will ultimately lead to elucidation of the
              molecular mechanism by which Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 prevents DNA
              re-replication in mammalian cells.  These studies will contribute to a better
              understanding of the function roles of Cdk phosphorylation of HsCdc6 in
              regulating the initiation of DNA replication and preventing DNA re-replication.
               The results will also lead to a better understanding of the fundamental
              biological processes of DNA replication and nucleocytoplasmic transport, which
              are still enigmatic in higher eukaryotes.


