Title       : IRCEB: Building a Mechanistic Basis for Landscape Ecology of Ungulate
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0078130

Award Number: 0078130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2834492            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Turchin turchin@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0078130 
P. I.: Turchin, Peter

  	IRCEB: Spatial dynamics are crucial
              for understanding population, community, and ecosystem processes. Two general
              problems in landscape ecology do not yet have adequate solutions: (1)
              translating observations taken at small spatial (and temporal) scales into
              expected patterns at landscape and geographic scales, and (2) understanding the
              influences of spatial heterogeneity on individual movements/demography, and on
              population distribution and dynamics. We propose to address these issues using
              a multi-faceted research program that integrates empirical data collection with
              spatial modeling and GIS analyses. The proposed experimental organism is the
              American elk. This species is of high conservation/natural management interest,
              and several elk reintroduction efforts in North America are currently in
              progress. However, little is known about how fast reintroduced elk populations
              may spread. Thus, by successfully completing the research goals outlined in
              this proposal we will not only be able to address questions of central
              importance to theoretical ecology, but will also obtain insights for improved
              management decisions.
Our specific approach to the two issues above will be
              based on developing a series of spatial models addressing a range of scales,
              from a microscale (tens of m and hours) through a mesoscale (km and weeks) to a
              macroscale (tens to hundreds of km and years). At each scale we will
              parameterize the model using small-scale data on individual movements and
              demography, and test the model by predicting independent data on spatial
              redistribution of populations at broader (landscape and, ultimately,
              geographic) spatial scales. Data on individual movements will be obtained by
              following elk equipped with radiocollars at four different sites, varying in
              landscape heterogeneity and elk population density (two sites where elk have
              been long established, and two where they were recently introduced). Landscape
              heterogeneity will be quantified using a combination of remote sensing methods
              and detailed on-the-ground analyses of such variables as the distribution of
              winter and summer forage biomass and quality, land and habitat classification,
              and landscape structure. We will determine how accurately microscale model can
              predict mesoscale data, and mesoscale model can predict macroscale data.
              Furthermore, the macroscale predictions of the detailed, mechanism-based
              mesoscale model will be contrasted to the predictions from a more
              phenomenological (but much less data-demanding) macroscale model. This
              comparison will allow us to determine whether it is essential to understand
              processes governing movement at multiple spatial scales in order to make
              meaningful predictions of population redistribution at larger (geographic)
              scales. 

