Title       : Collaborative Research: The Thermodynamics of Protein Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0078491

Award Number: 0078491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Paulaitis michaelp@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0078491
Michael Paulaitis
Johns Hopkins U.

The objective of
              the proposed research is to develop quantitative tools for the analysis and
              design of protein separation processes.  These tools will be compared to those
              now used routinely to design conventional separations in the chemical process
              industries.  This development is based on combining theory and experiment to
              enable a new generation of thermodynamic models capable of describing mixtures
              of proteins.

The approach builds on the paradigm that has so far emerged
              from our work, namely that protein thermodynamic properties are dominated by
              specific biological interactions in the form of geometric complementarity.  It
              is believed that these specific interactions can be understood and accounted
              for in terms of electrostatic, dispersion, and hydrophobic interactions.  This
              proposal is centered on extending our understanding of these interactions and
              finding optimal ways in which to manipulate and exploit them in designing
              effective separation strategies.  Specifically, we will:

1. complete our,
              model formulation to allow efficient mechanistic  calculation of
              protein-protein interactions for both like and unlike protein pairs;

  2. 
              measure the model interactions between like and unlike protein
       pairs,
              and correlate results with measure separation performance.

  3.  use
              interactions between unlike protein pairs as the basis for
       developing
              strategies for optimizing protein separation trains.

The molecular theories
              will be based on recently developed computational methods to account for
              interactions, and will be combined into an accurate potential of mean force
              (PMF) describing the interactions between both like and unlike proteins.  This
              PMF is the foundation for the foundation for the description of both the
              physical properties of the protein solution thermodynamic function that
              determine the phase behavior.  Several computational and molecular simulation
              methods will be explored for calculating of the phase behavior of the protein
              solutions.  Our working hypothesis is that is the relative magnitudes of like
              vs, unlike protein interactions that determine how a particular separation can
              best be accomplished.

An array of experimental measurements will complement
              and guide theory.  The experiments first involve characterization of structural
              and functional protein properties using light scattering and small angle
              neutron scattering (SANS).  Next, measurements of thermodynamic and physical
              properties and mixtures of proteins will be made to test the validity of the
              thermodynamic descriptions.  One thermodynamic variable of particular interest
              will be pressure.  Specifically the investigator will investigate the effect of
              pressure on protein stability and how protein folding can be manipulated with
              pressure to control protein separations and purification.  Finally, separation
              experiments will be conducted to evaluate the predictions of performance based
              on the thermodynamic models.  These measurements and calculations will guide
              efforts to find conditions under which adverse interactions impair separation
              effectiveness, and to design and test suitable remedies.  Several proteins and
              protein mixtures will be examined, including eglin C and staphylococcal
              nuclease.

This combination of experimental and theoretical tools will
              identify the properties of proteins important in the design of separation
              processes, and will allow separation performance to be predicted on the basis
              of protein properties.  

The project is part of a group proposal with
              investigators at the University of Delaware (0078844).

