Title       : SBIR Phase II: Low-Frequency Sonochemistry -- A Cutting Edge Industrial
               Processing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0078350

Award Number: 0078350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johan van Walsem hjvanwalsem@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Farrar  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      1901 South Franklin
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9150,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (sbir) Phase II project will demonstrate
              use of the novel low-frequence sonic technology for application as an advanced
              fermentation process. This project objective will establish a fundamental
              understanding of the low-frequency sonic technology capabilities to increase
              the productivity and yield of various aerobic fermentation processes, e.g.,
              bacteria, yeast and mycelial. The Phase II program includes the development,
              design and demonstration of a prototype processing system as an efficient and
              cost-effective method for advanced fermentation applications.  The Phase I
              objectives were fully achieved and feasibility of the innovative technology was
              demonstrated to provide extraordinarily high rates of gas mass transport into
              liquids, at low energy values and at low shear rates.  The quality and amount
              of scientific and engineering data exceeded expectations, providing a solid
              base for a Phase II success.  Post-Phase II experimentation was undertaken,
              which demonstrated a specific commercial applications that have market-pull for
              use of the innovative fermentation methods.  Several potential Phase III
              commercial fermentation applications have been identified.  A commercial
              partner for Phase II co-funding and Phase III funding has been obtained.  The
              commercial partner has also agreed to purchase equipment from Montec for their
              newly acquired fermentation business.

Commercial applications for
              fermentation processes include large quantity drug production for enhancement
              of both human and animal health, amino acids such as lysine for animal feeds
              and phenylalanine for production of aspartame, food preservatives such as
              ascorbic acid (vitamin C), vitamins and a plethora of other commodity
              compounds.  In general, the production of an increasing number of biologically
              active compounds is shifting from traditional organic synthesis to
              fermentation.  In these areas, the development of a lower cost, higher
              productivity technology has strong commercial appeal both in new and retrofit
              situations.  Fermentation is the commercial end of the genetic engineering
              revolution and is virtually used in all of the cutting edge therapeutics.

