Title       : The Determinants of 401(k)Participation: The Role of Economic Incentives, Plan
               Design, Financial Education, and Peer Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0078535

Award Number: 0078535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Duflo eduflo@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel Saez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The importance of saving for personal economic security as well as national
              performance has long been recognized by economists and policy makers. In the
              United States, levels of individual savings are particularly low, which has
              prompted a series of policies designed to encourage saving.  A substantial body
              of research has tried to evaluate their effects. Yet, there is no consensus on
              the effect of economic incentives on saving, and little evidence on other
              important issues. Very few studies have analyzed individual micro-data at the
              firm level and no experimental evidence of the effects of information sessions
              on TDA participation exists. The general objective of this project is to study
              the determinants of Tax Deferred Accounts participation (401(k) or 403(b),
              hereafter TDA participation).  Several connected subprojects study the role of
              economic incentives, program design, financial education and peer effects. The
              objective of this project is to provide a comprehensive assessment of how the
              design of TDA plans, the actions undertaken by the benefits office and the
              environment combine and interact to determine an individual's contribution
              decision.  To answer these questions, this award finances the creation of a
              unique data set, containing current and retrospective data on individual
              participation and contribution of all employees in two universities located in
              the same city. The research combines a variety of empirical methods suitable to
              address each of these questions, from descriptive evidence to more structural
              empirical modeling. Notably, to address the question of the impact of the
              information sessions, a randomized experiment is set up in collaboration with
              the benefits office at one of the Universities.

The project contributes to
              research on retirement programs in two significant ways. First, it provides new
              evidence on a number of under-studied issues about TDA participation behavior.
              Because these projects are based on micro-data in two very similar firms, the
              investigators are able to provide a convincing assessment of the effects of
              each variable using systematic comparisons across the two firms. Second, the
              investigators are able to provide a comprehensive assessment of the effects of
              variables usually considered in isolation.






