Title       : Ionization-Structure-Reactivity Relationships: Multiple Metal-Metal and
               Metal-Heteroatom Bonds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0078457

Award Number: 0078457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Lichtenberger dlichten@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              provides continued support for research on metal-metal interactions by Dr.
              Dennis L. Lichtenberger of the Chemistry Department, University of Arizona. 
              Systems under investigation contain quadruple and triple metal-metal bonds,
              metal-metal configurations beyond occupation of the anti-bonding delta orbital,
              and non-bonding and weakly-associated through-space and through-ligand
              metal-metal interactions.  The metal-metal complexes contain a variety of
              bridging and non-bridging ligands and represent a broad range of
              electron-donating and electron-withdrawing effects associated with key
              structural perturbations.  Complexes with both weak and strong ligands
              coordinated to the axial position are also included.  High-resolution Hel/Hell
              valence and high precision X-ray core photoelectron spectroscopy will be used
              to study both gas phase and condensed species.  The project includes further
              development of instrumental capabilities.  

Metal-Metal interactions
              contribute to the structure, stability, and reactivity of many species and
              influence important chemical, catalytic, and materials processes.  Unique
              instrumentation will be developed to provide detailed electronic structure
              information on these interactions.

