Title       : RUI: Stereoselective Synthesis of Isoflurane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0078750

Award Number: 0078750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith M. Ramig Keith_Ramig@baruch.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project undertakes the formulation of an improved synthesis of isofluorane,
              a commonly used general anesthetic.  In addition to pathways that rely on
              resolution of enantiomers, enantiospecific synthetic transformations are
              proposed.  Specific reactions to be explored include enantiospecific
              decarboxylation reactions, in which the putative carbanion is not
              resonance-stabilized.  Direct asymmetric synthesis will be studied wherein
              fluorination of an oxazolidinone enolate will be carried out;  alternatively,
              asymmetric protonation of a bis-silyl ketene acetal will be attempted.  The
              ultimate goals of the proposal include a practical asymmetric synthesis of
              isofluorane, which will enable pharmacological studies into the chiral
              dependence of the anesthetic effect, as well as the provision of research
              opportunities at the Principal Investigator's predominantly undergraduate
              institution.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program (Organic Synthesis) extends support to CUNY Baruch College for the
              research being conducted by Professor Keith M. Ramig and his undergraduate
              students of chemistry.  Professor Ramig is attempting to establish a practical
              method for the separate production of both individual forms of the commonly
              used general anesthetic isofluorane.  Various chemical reactions will be
              attempted to find the most effective means of carrying out this procedure. 
              Success in this endeavor will enable future studies into the pharmacology of
              anesthesia with a view to the exact way in which this important effect occurs.
