Title       : Temporal Processing in the Auditory System: A Nonlinear Dynamics Approach with
               Theory and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0078420

Award Number: 0078420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101589             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Rinzel rinzel@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rinzel
0078420
     The neural computation by the mammalian auditory system
              to
localize low frequency sound sources relies on processing in the
brain
              stem.  Neurons and circuits there, in the medial superior
olive (MSO), have
              specialized biophysical properties for
processing and preserving precise
              timings.  These neurons have
distinctive firing properties.  When a steady
              stimulus is
presented they fire only once, at stimulus onset; many
              other
types of neurons would behave tonically, firing throughout the
stimulus
              presentation.  This property of phasicness is believed
crucial for the MSO
              cell's role in precise temporal processing.
In contrast, tonic cells are
              assumed to be less capable of
tracking rapidly changing signals.  The MSO
              cells have a special
potassium current, IK-LT, that underlies their phasic
              behavior.
The investigator and his colleagues systematically study how
              the
temporal processing ability of a neuron changes as the neuron
              is
transformed from phasic to tonic mode, say by gradually adjusting
the
              strength of IK-LT (using pharmacological blockers and
electronic methods of
              re-introducing the blocked current).  When a
cell is in phasic mode does it
              track a time-varying signal
better, or does it perform better coincidence
              detection, than
when it is in tonic mode? The research combines both
              experimental
and theoretical approaches.  The experiments involve
              electrical
recording from individual MSO neurons while stimulating them
              with
periodic and other time-varying signals.  Various quantitative
criteria
              are applied to assess the quality of temporal
processing.  From the
              theoretical side, biophysically-based
mathematical models are developed that
              mimic the MSO neurons,
including a term for IK-LT.  The model's performance
              for temporal
processing is evaluated just like the real cells.  In
              addition,
concepts from nonlinear dynamical systems are applied in order
              to
reveal and understand the underlying mathematical structure.
This
              mathematical understanding will shed light on the
significance of phasicness
              in other neural systems where the
mechanism might not involve IK-LT.  This
              project also explores the
influence of randomness on the temporal processing
              abilities.
Some randomness is intrinsic to the auditory nervous system,
              and
it is believed to be functionally important.  Without sources
              of
variability, these nonlinear neuronal systems tend to phase-lock
too well,
              impairing a system's ability to perform discrimination
tasks.  The
              investigator therefore also assesses the effects of
randomness on the temporal
              processing power of phasic and tonic
cells and on the theoretical models. 
              This work seeks to test
whether the commonly accepted notion, that phasicness
              enhances
temporal processing power, passes a set of quantitative
              criteria
and, if so, to develop a theoretical foundation that supports
              the
notion and that extends to other neural and possibly some
chemical and
              physical systems as well.  A related subproject is to
develop computational
              models that help explain the dynamic
effects seen experimentally as interaural
              phase (or amplitude or
frequency) is varied dynamically.  A deeper
              understanding of some
surprising effects, as seen in the auditory mid-brain,
              should
contribute to developing a theory for how motion of sound sources
is
              analyzed in the brain.
     It is believed that some neural computations
              involve
cellular and circuit properties that enable encoding and
              decoding
based on precise timing of action potentials.  Sound localization
in
              the auditory system offers a compelling example.  It serves as
the case study
              for this research, that seeks a more qualitative
characterization of cellular
              properties that correlate with
precise temporal processing.  Many cells in the
              auditory brain
stem contribute to the system's ability to detect coincidence
              of
interaural signals.  These neurons have distinctive firing
properties. 
              When a steady stimulus is presented they fire only
once, at stimulus onset,
              while neurons of many other types will
continue to fire until the stimulus is
              turned off.  This property
of phasicness is believed crucial for precise
              temporal
processing.  In contrast, tonic cells are assumed to be less
capable
              of tracking rapidly changing signals.  The biophysical
basis, a special
              potassium current, IK-LT, appears to underlie
phasicness in the brain stem
              neurons.  This project systematically
addresses how the temporal processing
              ability of a neuron changes
as the neuron is transformed from phasic to tonic
              mode, say by
gradually adjusting the strength of IK-LT.  When a cell is
              in
phasic mode does it track a time-varying signal better, or does
it perform
              better coincidence detection, than when it is in tonic
mode?  The research
              combines both experimental and theoretical
approaches.  The experiments
              involve electrical recording from
individual neurons in vitro while
              stimulating them with periodic
and other time-varying signals, including
              random components.  From
the theoretical side, biophysically-based
              mathematical models are
developed that mimic the neurons, including a term for
              IK-LT.
Various measures are applied to the computer and cellular models
to
              assess reliability and precision of processing.  In addition,
concepts from
              nonlinear dynamical systems are applied in order to
reveal and understand the
              underlying mathematical structure.  This
understanding will enable us to
              generalize about the significance
of phasicness to other neural systems where
              the mechanism might
not involve IK-LT.  A related subproject is to
              develop
computational models that help explain the dynamic effects
              seen
experimentally as interaural phase (or amplitude or frequency) is
varied
              dynamically.  A deeper understanding of these surprising
effects, as seen in
              the auditory mid-brain, should contribute to
developing a theory for how
              motion of sound sources is analyzed
in the brain.  This project is supported
              by the Applied
Mathematics and Computational Mathematics programs and the
              Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the
              Computational
Neuroscience program in BIO.

