Title       : Theoretical Studies of the Dynamics of Proteins and their Hydration Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0078278

Award Number: 0078278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Tobias dtobias@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tobias 
MCB 0078278

The objective of this project is to study the dynamics
              of native and partially unfolded proteins and their solvent on time scales
              ranging from femtoseconds to nanoseconds, using molecular dynamics (MD)
              simulations.  The role of solvent dynamics in affecting the protein structural
              relaxation accompanying the dynamical "glass" transition will be investigated
              using molecular MD simulations of ribonuclease A in crystals, dry and hydrated
              powders, and a glycerol/water solution, at temperatures above and below the
              transition.  MD simulations, in conjunction with neutron scattering
              experiments, will be used  to characterize the picosecond dynamics of the
              molten globule state  of alpha-lactalbumin.  The dynamics of surface associated
              water in simulations of the native and molten globule states of
              alpha-lactalbumin will be compared in an attempt to reconcile the traditional
              view of an expanded, solvent penetrated molten globule with recently reported
              magnetic relaxation dispersion data that challenged this picture.  Finally,
              vibrational energy storage and relaxation in heme proteins will be
              investigated.  A series of MD simulations will be carried out to investigate
              heme cooling and dissipation of vibrational energy by the protein matrix and
              solvent in a myoglobin solution at room temperature, the storage of energy in
              boson peak vibrations following heme excitation in low hydration, low
              temperature glassy states of myoglobin, and CO dissociation in a myoglobin
              crystal to address questions concerning environmental effects in time-resolved
              crystallographic studies.  Techniques of non-stationary time series analysis
              will be employed to generate joint time-frequency distributions for visualizing
              the flow of vibrational energy between modes at equilibrium and vibrational
              energy relaxation following a perturbation.

A complete understanding of the
              folding and function of proteins requires knowledge of the structures,
              energetics, and dynamics of native and denatured proteins.  This project will
              provide an accurate picture of the changes in protein dynamics on making the
              transition from an inactive, glassy state at low temperature, to an active
              state at higher temperatures, as well as further insight into the role of the
              solvent in affecting this transition.  In addition, the work on heme proteins
              will contribute to the understanding of fundamental chemical dynamical
              processes connected to protein function, and will produce new tools for the
              analysis of simulations of complex protein dynamics. It is anticipated that
              this research should prove useful in the interpretation of experimental
              measurements on protein dynamics, as a close correspondence with spectroscopic
              experiments is emphasized in the design of the simulations and the analysis of
              the results.

