Title       : Dissertation Research: Reproduction and Resource Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a0078744

Award Number: 0078744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Howard rhoward@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Allocation of time and energy to reproduction influences both sexes.  In this
              research, the causes and consequences of patterns of sperm allocation in males
              will be investigated.  Historically, most research in this field has
              concentrated on egg production because an egg is more costly to produce than a
              sperm is.  However, although sperm are smaller than eggs, each ejaculate of a
              male may contain enormous numbers of sperm.  Recent research has revealed that
              reproductive resources for gamete production can be limited for males as well
              as for females in many species. Critical to patterns of sperm investment by
              males is the degree to which females mate with multiple males.  Such multiple
              mating sets up intense competition among sperm of different males to fertilize
              the same egg.  One consequence of such sperm competition is the production of
              large ejaculates.  A dynamic program model developed by W. E. Harris has
              provided predictions for sperm allocation in the salamander, Ambystoma texanum.
               This species is highly suitable for such a study because within any breeding
              aggregation, each male may deposit 60+ sperm packets each containing many
              thousand sperm, and each female may induct 20+ sperm packets into her
              reproductive tract before she lays any eggs.  Predictions from the dynamic
              program model will be tested using controlled laboratory experiments.
              


Variation in sperm allocation is a key but understudied aspect of the
              reproductive pattern of most species.  Previously, males of most species were
              thought to produce large ejaculates because most sperm were defective.  More
              recent theory suggests that sperm allocation may be one of several adaptations
              of males to maximize their chances of siring offspring if females have multiple
              mating partners.  The goal of this study is to test several predictions of this
              body of theory.



