Title       : FRG: Synthesis, Properties, and Simulations of Semi-Flexible and Ionomer
               Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a0078863

Award Number: 0078863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude Cohen cc@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando A. Escobedo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Michael Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Carefully tailored synthesis, new analysis of physical characterization
              measurements, and new computer simulation methods have been developed for the
              study of ideal simple networks such as those made of a flexible silicone,
              poly(dimethylsiloxane).  This project consists of using these techniques to
              study elastomers of more complex structures: namely elastomers from
              semi-flexible chains and from ionomer chains.  Poly(diethylsiloxane) networks,
              whose elastic chains have a stiffer backbone than the corresponding
              dimethylsiloxane because of their larger ethyl side groups, exhibit an
              intriguing amorphous-mesophase transition upon uniaxial deformation.  Deuterium
              NMR, X-ray, and computer simulation studies are proposed to elucidate the
              molecular structure of the mesophase, the kinetics of the transition, and the
              role of the network architecture on the onset of the transition.  On the other
              hand, recent developments in the synthesis of model ionomer chains and advances
              in our understanding of the properties of neutral elastomers make a systematic
              study of some model siloxane-based ionomer elastomers very promising.  Such a
              study will serve as the basis for an understanding of ionomer network behavior
              and the synthesis of novel materials.
%%%
Elastomeric materials, and in
              particular silicone-based elastomers, find a wide range of applications in drug
              delivery systems, in oxygen enrichment of air by membrane separation, and as
              stamps in the fabrication of nano-devices, to give a few examples.  This
              project is concerned with the synthesis and characterization of new classes of
              silicone elastomers based on small modification of their chemical structure. 
              These modifications lead to new physical properties such as phase transitions
              in elastomers made from stiffer polymer chains and amphiphilicity) absorbance
              of both water and organic solvents) in elastomers from slightly charged "
              ionomer chains.  These new materials can find applications as "smart" materials
              (e.g. switches and self-reinforced elastomers) and as absorbents of organic
              pollutants in environmental remediation.

