Title       : Spatial and Temporal Integration In the Perception of 3D Shape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0078441

Award Number: 0078441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fulvio Domini Fulvio_Domini@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In our daily life, we move in the environment, grab objects and perform a number
              of actions that are fundamental to our survival.  These actions may seem very
              natural and effortless despite the fact that the brain performs an extremely
              complex analysis of the light pattern that falls on our eyes in order to
              determine the structure and shape of the surrounding objects.  This problem is
              very difficult to solve since objects are three-dimensional but our eyes only
              register their two-dimensional projection (also called retinal image), like the
              film in a camera.  

Most vision scientists have approached this problem by
              asking the following question:  How does the brain derive the 3D structure of
              objects from the information that is present in a certain instant of time in a
              certain region of the retinal image?  Because the image on the retina is
              two-dimensional and time can be added as a third dimension, the visual
              stimulation can be represented in a three-dimensional space.  The research
              conducted so far has focused on the problem of how local regions of this
              space-time domain are analyzed by the visual system, while the problem of how
              the visual system is capable of integrating the information contained in
              different spatial-temporal regions has been neglected.

The overall objective
              of the present research project is to investigate the spatial-temporal
              integration of information in the recovery of 3D shape from retinal
              projections. In particular, three goals will be pursued.  First, the research
              will investigate in which manner local visual processing is affected by
              interactions with stimulus information present in different space-time
              locations.  Second, the research will exploit the stimulus conditions that are
              responsible for spatial and temporal organization. Third, the research will
              determine whether spatial and temporal interactions occur among different
              sources of depth information. Understanding how the human visual system solves
              this problem will not only be a valuable advance in the study of visual
              perception but could also produce novel insights toward the building of
              machines that mimic our behavior and interactions.

