Title       : Growth Regulatory and Survival Functions of the SRC-CAS Protein Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0078022

Award Number: 0078022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy H. Bouton ahb8y@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Homeostasis in multicellular organisms is achieved through a complex process
              involving the integration of environmental signals for survival, proliferation,
              and differentiation. The genetic makeup of a cell, as well as the nature of
              other cells and factors in its environment, dictates how it will respond at any
              given moment in time. The complex regulation of these processes is perhaps most
              apparent from the observation that molecules functioning in pathways leading to
              one type of response may also play a role in generating completely different,
              and often opposing, outcomes. Moreover, pathways that become activated through
              distinct mechanisms may functionally merge to produce a common outcome. These
              fundamental issues of regulation and integration are at the core of this
              project. Specifically, the project focuses on a newly identified function of
              the SRC-CAS protein complex as a modulator of cell proliferation and survival.
              The research plan that is described in this project is designed to test the
              hypothesis that the activity of this complex has unique signaling functions
              that arise from a number of potential factors, including 1) altered temporal
              and/or potency of enzymatic activity; 2) substrate selection; 3) molecular
              targeting to distinct subcellular compartments; and 4) protein stabilization.
              Ultimately, the regulated activation of these functions within the proper
              setting of time (for example, within a particular phase of the cell cycle) and
              space (for example, within a specific cellular microenvironment) is proposed to
              play a critical role in pathways leading to proliferation and cell survival .
              In order to address this hypothesis, C3H10T-one half murine fibroblast cell
              lines will be generated that over-express various c-SRC and CAS molecules.
              Preliminary studies in this system have shown that constitutive association of
              wild-type CAS and c-SRC may circumvent the need for normal positive regulators
              of growth and survival. Based on these initial studies, it is clear that this
              model will serve as an excellent tool with which to probe the requisite
              molecular features of SRC-CAS complex, the specific functions of the complex
              that contribute to its activity, and its overall impact on cellular growth and
              survival. Once the mechanism and biological consequences of SRC-CAS activities
              are better understood, this knowledge will then be applied to more
              physiological conditions with the goal of understanding how the SRC-CAS complex
              may signal in space and time. 
