Title       : Collaborative Research: Power and Economy at the Marana Mound Site: Structure of
               an Early Classic Center Near Tucson, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0078452

Award Number: 0078452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Fish pfish@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne K. Fish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Paul and Suzanne Fish and James
              Bayman will conduct archaeological research at the Marana Mound site, located
              in the Tucson Basin of Arizona. Associated with the prehistoric Hohokam
              culture, the site dates to the early Classic Period (1150-1300 AD) and was
              occupied for approximately 100 years. The mound site was constructed at a
              central geographical point and represents the top level within a broader three
              tier hierarchical community. It is approximately 1.5 km. long and .5 km wide.
              Because it is not situated in a favorable riverine or upland locale, it
              received water from a 10 kilometer long canal constructed from the Santa Cruz
              River. Composed of compounds of ca. 5500 square meters with up to 20 enclosed
              structures, the site population probably ranged between 500 and 750 people. In
              a number of ways the site is unique from its smaller counterparts. Not only is
              it the largest but it also is the only one which contained significant numbers
              of distant trade items. A neutron activation sourcing study suggests that it,
              along with two other large sites, participated in a common exchange network
              that differed from acquisition patterns and ceramic sources in other community
              settlements. Assemblages recovered from house floors are distinctive in the
              number and variety of items represented and the high frequency of artifacts
              linked to craft production and personal ornamentation. Thus there is a marked
              concentration of imported items and manufacturing activities at the mound site
              compared to other settlements. While the Marana Mound is distinguished from its
              smaller counterparts, there appears however to be minimal internal
              differentiation within the site itself and this finding runs contra to
              archaeological preconceptions. As site hierarchies emerge and class structure
              becomes apparent, normally internal differention within individual communities
              occurs as well. Based on limited evidence from Marana Mound however such did
              not happen. 

The team will examine potential differentiation at the site
              through a four-tiered sampling design focusing on compound clusters, compounds,
              rooms and trash mounds. Evidence for differential advantage and competitive
              strategies will be sought in four realms: 1. Access to and consumption of
              exotic or high value items; 2. Economic activities beyond ordinary subsistence
              production and consumption; 3. Involvement in external exchange; and 4.
              Participation in communal or integrative observances as signaled by
              ritually-related items. This research will provide insight into the paths which
              led to the rise of complex societies. It shed new light on North American
              prehistory and provide data of interest to many archaeologists.

