Title       : SBIR Phase II: Tricontinuous Diamond /Carbide/Metal Composite (TCCC) Cutting
               Tools for High Rate, High Precision Machining of Nonferrous Material,
               Composites, and Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0078371

Award Number: 0078371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg Voronov ovoronov@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Diamond Materials Inc
	      120 Centennial Avenue
	      Piscataway, NJ  08854    908/445-2245

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project will conduct
              research to develop a new class of cutting tools for high rate/high precision
              machining of Al-Si alloys, composites, and ceramics.  Advanced cutting tools
              will improve machining economics in the automotive, aerospace and related
              industries.  The new cutters will be made from a patent pending Tricontinuous
              Diamond/Carbide/Metal Composite (TDCC) material formed using high pressure/high
              temperature sintering technology.  The potential of this TDCC technology was
              demonstrated in Phase I, wherein proof-of-principle TDCC cutters outperformed
              conventional PCD cutters and showed up to two times longer tool life in Al-Si
              alloy machining tests.  In Phase II development of the TDCC sintering process
              will be carried out, with emphasis on demonstrating TDCC tool performance
              improvement, cost reduction, and quality control applicable for mass
              production. In addition development and performance demonstration of prototype
              cutting tools that use TDCC inserts are planned. The primary objective of Phase
              II research will be to demonstrate the commercial feasibility of making
              machining tools using TDCC material.  Collaboration with a leading automotive
              parts manufacturer, that will provide facilities and equipment for testing of
              the TDCC tools, has been arranged. This will help insure that the successful
              completion of the Phase II effort will lead to Phase III commercialization in
              the area of high rate / high precision tool manufacturing for automotive and
              other markets.

Use of low wear high impact resistance TDCC tools will
              significantly impact the automotive and aerospace parts manufacturing industry
              allowing high transfer line speeds, lower operation count, and better surface
              finish which in turn will lead to improved production efficiency and lower
              product cost.

