Title       : Computational Modelling of Multi-Level/Multi-Unit Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0078752

Award Number: 0078752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Harrington joe.harrington@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Myong-Hun Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Computational Modelling of Multi-Unit/Multi-Level Organizations

One of the
              most important organizational forms in modern economies is the
              multi-unit
organization. In manufacturing, the typical plant is part of a
              multi-plant manufacturer. In
services, the typical store is part of a retail
              chain. A defining problem of a multi-unit
organization is how to balance
              giving units the freedom to handle the idiosyncratic
features of their
              environments while, at the same time, coordinating the units to take
advantage
              of the commonality among them. How do multi-unit organizations solve this
              problem
and what is the most effective means of doing so? What is the relevant
              set of instruments
and what are the relevant features of the environment
              determining the best organization and
strategy? This project explores these
              questions and more broadly advances our understanding
of multi-unit
              organizations.

Our focus is on retail chains. The central idea underlying
              our approach is that much of the
behavior and performance of a retail chain
              can be explained by understanding how chains
generate, communicate, and use
              information. How new ideas arise and how they are evaluated
and adopted. How
              the authority to use information is distributed within the chain and
              how
incentives are structured to influence the creation and effective
              dissemination of
information. And how competition and technology interact with
              these information processes.

Implementation of this approach involves the
              development of a computational model of a
retail chain in which corporate
              headquarters (HQ) and stores are adapting to their
environments. HQ and store
              managers develop new ideas, evaluate their ideas and the ideas
of others, and
              then decide whether to adopt and communicate them to other members of
              the
organization. Competing chains are simultaneously engaging in an analogous
              exercise while
consumers experience and experiment among stores to find the
              one that best suits their
needs. Our analysis explores how various factors
              influence the rate of improvement of store
practices and chain efficiency.
              These factors include organizational structure (in
particular, the authority
              of store managers to change practices), store manager incentives
(as
              influenced by how they are compensated), the degree of competition within and
              across
geographic markets (and, relatedly, the effect of mergers), the amount
              of consumer search,
the rate of change in consumers' preferences, the degree
              of informational spillovers across
chains, and advances in information
              technology.

