Title       : Regulated Secretion of BDNF
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0078311

Award Number: 0078311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Bothwell mab@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078311
Bothwell


It is currently believed that biologically active
              polypeptides, such as
peptide hormones and growth factors, may be secreted by
              two alternative
processes - an unregulatory secretory pathway and a regulated
              pathway, and
it is thought that all polypeptides share the same regulated
              secretory
mechanism.  For cells that display regulated secretion of several
              different
peptide hormones and growth factors, this model predicts that cells
              cannot
regulate release of these polypeptides independently.  Preliminary
              results
indicate, however, that there must exist at least two distinct
              pathways for
secretion of biologically active polypeptides, potentially
              allowing cells to
independently control the release of hormones and growth
              factors that have
different functions.  The novel pathway is revealed by
              studies of the
secretion of the neurotrophic factor, BDNF.  Regulated
              secretion of BDNF by
brain nerve cells is of profound importance, because BDNF
              participates as an
important regulator of synaptic transmission in the context
              of memory and
learning. The general goal of this proposal is to examine the
              mechanisms
regulating secretion of BDNF in pituitary cells (which serve as a
              convenient
model system for study of regulated secretion) and in nerve cells
              from the
hippocampal and cortical regions of the brain.   Secretion of BDNF
              will be
compared to secretion of structurally related neurotrophic factors,
              NGF and
NT-3.  Also secretion of BDNF will be compared to secretion
              of
neuropeptides, such as ACTH and NPY.  Some experiments will directly
              monitor
the release of these polypeptides, from cultured cells, using
              immunoassays.
Other experiments will compare the distribution of these
              polypeptides in
secretory vesicles within the cell, by immunohistochemical
              techniques.

These studies may have broad importance for understanding
              hormone action in
the endocrine system, and for understanding nerve cell
              communication in the
brain.  The orderly function of all tissues of the body
              is dependent on
communication between cells.  A major method of cell-cell
              communication
involves secretion of specific polypeptides, which act as
              messenger
molecules.  The release of these polypeptides, which may be called
              peptide
hormones, neuropeptides, or growth factors, must be carefully
              controlled.
This project explores the possibility that cells can control
              release of
these polypeptides much more cleverly than was realized
              previously.
Thoroughly characterizing these controlled release mechanisms is
              essential
for a basic understanding of biological processes ranging from
              hormone
action to memory and learning.

