Title       : Collaborative Research: Informational Rationales for Political Parties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0078952

Award Number: 0078952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148458             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Snyder millett@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
What role do parties play in electoral competition?  Why would parties exert
              discipline on their
members?  This investigation links these issues
              theoretically and empirically by modeling parties as
informative brands to
              voters.
As conventional wisdom suggests, most party labels carry fairly
              precise meanings. Democrats
are generally liberal, Republicans are generally
              conservative, and Libertarians are basically conserva-
tive but often socially
              liberal. The theoretical question is, how is this sustained as an
              equilibrium
phenomenon?  In the basic model, the researchers assume there are
              a large number of constituencies, voters are risk averse and incompletely
              informed about candidate ideal policies, and candidates are unable to
commit
              to a declared policy platform. In this environment, parties can play a critical
              role by ag-
gregating ideologically similar candidates. Importantly, party
              membership is endogenous. Certain
types of candidates thereby have an
              incentive to affiliate themselves with a party to reduce voter
uncertainty
              about their preferences.
The results of a pilot by the investigators are the
              following. (1) Parties can be effective screening devices for candidate
              preferences. Intuitively, this screening works because party membership imposes
              differential
costs across candidate ideological types, so that only candidates
              whose preferences are sufficiently
close to a party 's platform are willing to
              affiliate.  Even in a single party system, voter welfare
is increased by the
              information party candidates are able to convey relative to unaffiliated
              candi-
dates.  (2) In a two party system there is a direct link between the
              effectiveness of screening and
platform choices.  When the costs of joining
              parties is high-e.g., parties can effectively discipline
their members or
              screen out certain type of candidates -party labels are very informative, and
              the
parties' platforms converge in Downsian fashion.  When party labels are
              less informative, however,
the platforms diverge.This happens because taking
              an extreme position reduces a party's ideolog-
ical heterogeneity, thus making
              its label more meaningful to voters.  (3) Candidates do not always
affiliate
              with the nearest party, since they also take the electoral benefits of party
              membership into
account.  These benefits may vary depending on constituency
              preferences.  Thus even candidates
with the same ideal policy may affiliate
              with different parties, depending on the preferences of their
district's
              median voter.
Extensions of the basic model provide additional predictions. Of
              particular interest is the
possibility of hot races in which voters learn much
              more about candidates than we assume in our
basic model.  This extension can
              account for the fact that party labels sometimes mean different
things in
              different places.  Another extension is to model parties as democratic
              institutions that must
choose platforms and screening mechanisms collectively,
              perhaps through a primary system. Others
include endogenizing the number of
              parties, exploring alternate electoral systems, and determining
the optimal
              level of screening or discipline.
Both the initial results and the proposed
              extensions are amenable to empirical analysis.  Among
the topics we will
              pursue are the effectiveness of party branding, the relationship between
              party
screening and platform choices, retirement and defection patterns, and
              the evolution of platforms
over time.

