Title       : Genetic Studies on Eukaryotic Transcriptional Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0078940

Award Number: 0078940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley L. Berger berger@wistar.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Berger, S. L.
An important new area in research on gene and genome regulation
              has emerged in the last decade: the direct role of alterations in chromatin
              structure and function in the regulation of genetic processes.  In particular,
              it has become evident that enzymes that directly acetylate nucleosomal histones
              correspond to previously known transcription cofactors.  These histone
              acetyltransferases (HATs) are often components of large protein complexes,
              whose function and regulation is not yet well understood.  A great deal has
              been learned in recent years about the structure, organization and function of
              the Gcn5 family macromolecular complexes that acetylate nucleosomal histones
              and function to promote transcriptional activation.  In contrast, very little
              is known about the complexes that possess members of the MYST family of
              acetyltransferases.  The only complex yet identified is NuA4 from yeast, which
              is comprised of Esa1, an essential gene (and only essential HAT in yeast)
              required for cell cycle progression.  Because it is essential, and involved in
              cell cycle progression, its mechanism of action in vivo is of significant
              interest, and is currently unknown.  Preliminary evidence from this laboratory
              supports a role in repression, as well of activation, of Esa1 in vivo.  The
              project's hypothesis is that the subunit composition of Esa1 dictates its
              function in repression or activation through specific targeting. Using a
              combination of genetic and biochemical approaches, the role of Esa1/NuA4 in
              vivo and how its activity is directed to specific substrates and genes will be
              studied in vivo. Results from these experiments will provide new insights into
              the role of HATs and of acetylation in vivo, and the mechanisms that confer
              specific function.

The question of how gene expression is regulated in the
              context of living cells is fundamental, and underlies the basis for how cells
              adapt to their environments.  In particular, genes are present within intricate
              and extensive chromosomal structures that include special proteins (called
              histones) that permit the packaging of DNA into the tiny nuclear space.  This
              packaging typically inhibits gene activity, and thus certain enzymes exist to
              alter the packaging.  The research will focus on one member of a new family of
              enzymes that has the ability to chemically alter the histones and ultimately to
              regulate gene expression. 

