Title       : Insights into the Evolution of Chordate Body Plans Through Correlated
               Developmental Genetic and Fate Mapping Studies of the Early Embryos of
               Amphioxus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0078599

Award Number: 0078599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas D. Holland nholland@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Z. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078599
Holland

Amphioxus is a lower chordate that represents the closest
              living invertebrate relative of the vertebrates.  In recent years, gene
              expression data from relatively late developmental stages of amphioxus have
              helped to indicate body part homologies between amphioxus and vertebrates.  For
              instance, mapping the expression of neural genes has suggested that amphioxus
              (and, by extension, the proximate ancestor of the vertebrates) has major brain
              regions homologous to those of vertebrates.  In contrast, relatively little is
              yet known about gene expression during early development of amphioxus.  In the
              vertebrates, such early acting genes play key roles in setting up signaling
              centers (organizers), establishing primary body axes, and large-scale
              patterning of the tissues.  This proposal is focused on genes involved in the
              initial establishment and early regionalization of the amphioxus central
              nervous system.  The ultimate aim is to test the hypothesis that mechanisms for
              establishing and large-scale patterning of the nervous system were already
              largely in place in the last common ancestor of amphioxus and the vertebrates. 
              The research comprises two tightly linked approaches.  The first is to isolate
              and study the expression of amphioxus homologs of vertebrate genes known to be
              important in early nervous system development.  The second is to use vital dye
              tracing to elucidate cell and tissue movements associated with the early
              morphogenesis of the amphioxus nervous system, including gastrulation,
              extension of the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo, and establishment of
              regional identities.  Taken together, the expression of key developmental genes
              in the context of a detailed map of cell and tissue movements will provide
              insights into the evolution of mechanisms involved in the establishment and
              regionalization of the central nervous system during the early evolution of the
              vertebrates.

