Title       : Fundamental Crystal Engineering and the Design of Extended Host-guest Networks
               and Molecular-based Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a0078996

Award Number: 0078996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christer B. Aakeroy aakeroy@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic program supports
              research on the development of new crystal engineering protocols and their
              application to the assembly of synthetic zeolite analogs and molecular-based
              magnetic materials by Professor Christer Aakeroy of the Department of Chemistry
              at the Kansas State University. This will be accomplished by constructing
              extended hybrid inorganic/organic architectures using hydrogen-bond
              interactions and custom-designed ligands, notably substituted pyridines,
              triazines and pyrimidines. The latter will be used in conjunction with divalent
              Cu, Co, Mn and Ni ions to produce the molecular magnets. The compounds will be
              characterized by means of IR, NMR, DSC and X-ray diffraction. The utility of
              the catalytic support compounds will be examined using the hydrogenation of
              small alkenes as a model reaction, and the magnetic properties of the  metal
              pyrimidines by means of a SQUID magnetometer.

The goal of this research is
              to develop a fundamental understanding of the principles of crystal engineering
              based on molecular self-assembly and to use these principles to synthesize
              materials with useful physical properties. In particular, catalytic supports
              and molecular magnets will be produced which have important applications in the
              petrochemical and information technology industries. The students involved in
              this project will learn a breadth of skills in both synthesis and instrumental
              methods, and gain experience which links fundamental chemistry with commercial
              use.
