Title       : Transit Mobility, Jobs Access, and Low-Income Labor Participation in U.S.
               Metropolitan Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0078686

Award Number: 0078686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sanchez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Qing Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhong-ren Peng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine whether low-income workers experience low levels of
              accessibility to public transportation and employment in six U.S. metropolitan
              areas.  The project will estimate the extent to which public transportation is
              linked with marginally employed persons and their job locations.  This will be
              done by comparing public transportation and employment access measures for
              current and past Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) recipients. 
              TANF recipients represent the target population of welfare-to-work initiatives.
               Compared to other low-income persons, they are the most likely to have limited
              levels of transportation mobility.  The analysis will control for a variety of
              personal characteristics such as race, gender, length of unemployment, and
              educational attainment as primary factors affecting unemployment.  An empirical
              model will be developed to estimate the likelihood that a person became
              employed and exited the TANF as a function of these characteristics and public
              transit access measures.

This project represents the first cross-sectional
              analysis of how public transportation and employment access affect employment
              opportunities for low-income persons.  Both the descriptive and multivariate
              statistical results will describe the effects of employment and public
              transportation accessibility and clarify areas where policies aimed to increase
              mobility can have the greatest impact.  While analyses similar to this research
              have been conducted in some U.S. cities, disparate methodologies and data types
              do not allow the results to be compared across cities.  Policy-makers continue
              to allocate significant resources to welfare-to-work mobility initiatives while
              having little to base their expectations for success.  The analysis of the six
              proposed metropolitan areas will provide generalizable results that will be of
              interest to many other metropolitan areas, social service agencies,
              transportation providers, and researchers concerned with the success of
              welfare-to-work initiatives.


