Title       : Summer Workshop on Synchrotron Radiation Applications to Materials Science,
               Baton Rouge, LA, June 5-10, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0078892

Award Number: 0078892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5608               (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip T. Sprunger phils@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josef Hormes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie L. Marceau-Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Characterization remains a cornerstone for the development and understanding of
              new materials.  Throughout the last decades, the ability to adequately probe
              physical properties of materials has shifted from "in-house" laboratories
              towards state-of-the-art, regional research facilities (e.g. neutron,
              high-magnetic field, and synchrotron radiation sources). In an effort to
              educate and train young materials scientists in state-of-the-art,
              regional-facility characterization techniques, Louisiana State University's
              Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) is hosting a summer
              school on "Synchrotron Radiation Applications to Materials Science" from June 5
              to June 10, 2000.  
During this one-week course, advanced graduate students
              will learn, through lectures, discussions, and hands-on practical experience,
              how and why the application of synchrotron radiation is indispensable to the
              characterization of a variety of materials.  CAMD/LSU faculty, as well as a
              number of researchers from around the country will give lectures and lead
              discussions (~ 25 speakers total).  The students (~35-45) will take part in
              approximately 35 hours of lectures/discussions on various topics of the
              application of synchrotron radiation to materials science research, as well as
              learn "hands-on" practical/technical knowledge at the CAMD facility.  Such
              knowledge can then be applied to further a participant's research program by
              integrating the unique advantages of synchrotron radiation, as exemplified by a
              regional laboratory like LSU/CAMD, to expand the student's knowledge and
              potential as a materials scientist.
%%%

Characterization remains a
              cornerstone for the development and understanding of new materials.  Throughout
              the last decades, the ability to adequately probe physical properties of
              materials has shifted from "in-house" laboratories towards state-of-the-art,
              regional research facilities (e.g. neutron, high-magnetic field, and
              synchrotron radiation sources). In an effort to educate and train young
              materials scientists in state-of-the-art, regional-facility characterization
              techniques, Louisiana State University's Center for Advanced Microstructures
              and Devices (CAMD) is hosting a summer school on "Synchrotron Radiation
              Applications to Materials Science" from June 5 to June 10, 2000.  
During this
              one-week course, advanced graduate students will learn, through lectures,
              discussions, and hands-on practical experience, how and why the application of
              synchrotron radiation is indispensable to the characterization of a variety of
              materials.  CAMD/LSU faculty, as well as a number of researchers from around
              the country will give lectures and lead discussions (~ 25 speakers total).  The
              students (~35-45) will take part in approximately 35 hours of
              lectures/discussions on various topics of the application of synchrotron
              radiation to materials science research, as well as learn "hands-on"
              practical/technical knowledge at the CAMD facility.  Such knowledge can then be
              applied to further a participant's research program by integrating the unique
              advantages of synchrotron radiation, as exemplified by a regional laboratory
              like LSU/CAMD, to expand the student's knowledge and potential as a materials
              scientist.


