Title       : IRCEB: Plant Genetic Structure as a Controlling Factor in Community and
               Ecosystem Functioning: Studies using Natural and Synthetic Hybrids of a
               Dominant Riparian Tree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0078280

Award Number: 0078280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Whitham Thomas.Whitham@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Keim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Lindroth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory D. Martinsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study will quantify how genetic variation in a stream-side tree,
              cottonwoods, affects a diverse community of organisms, which in turn affect
              ecosystem-level processes such as nutrient cycling.  Predictions tested will
              include:  1). Genetic variation in the tree population has a positive effect on
              biodiversity, productivity and stability of the dependent community.  2) The
              impact of genetic variation on keystone species has great potential to affect
              communities.  3) Important species interactions and community traits have a
              genetic component that can be mapped onto the plant genome.  To study these
              predictions, a team of scientists whose disciplines range from molecular
              genetics to ecosystem processing will observationally and experimentally study
              stands of trees of known genetic composition in plantations and perform a
              biogeographic analyses of river systems from Arizona to Alberta.

Scientists
              have a very poor understanding of the genetic links that tie species together
              to form communities, which affect biodiversity and ecosystems.  Cottonwoods are
              well suited to these studies because they exhibit great genetic variation, and
              are dominant trees in a habitat that supports high biodiversity, but is rapidly
              vanishing due to loss of stream-side habitat.  These studies address major
              issues in ecological genetics, community ecology and conservation biology.  

