Title       : SBIR Phase II: CO-Tolerant Pt-Mo Electrocatalysts for Proton Exchange Membrane
               (PEM) Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0078635

Award Number: 0078635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanwei Lei tjhanwei@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Miller  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : T/J Technologies, Inc
	      PO Box 2150
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481062150    313/213-1637

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
Program Ref : 1417,1972,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the
              development of highly dispersed Pt-Mo electrocatalysts for application as
              anodes in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells.  Alternative anode
              electrocatalysts remain a critical development area for the cost reduction and
              performance enhancement of PEM fuel cells operating on reformate hydrogen fuel.
               Specifically, there is a need for catalysts that are tolerant to reformate
              by-products such as CO.  Supported Pt-Mo is a leading candidate for the next
              generation of these catalysts.  The Phase I research successfully produced
              highly dispersed Pt-Mo catalysts supported on Vulcan XC-72 using two distinct
              methods.  The catalysts produced by both methods show excellent hydrogen
              oxidation characteristics in 0.5 M H2SO4.  The performance of these materials
              in 100 ppm CO/H2 indicated high activity but did not, however, show the degree
              of CO-tolerance expected on the basis of results from bulk Pt-Mo alloys.  These
              findings were surprising in light of voltammetric evidence that showed
              electrochemical interaction between Mo and Pt.

Phase II of this effort will
              develop a more comprehensive understanding of the nature of Pt-Mo interactions.
               The results from the Phase I research at T/J suggest that the promotion of
              enhanced H2 oxidation at lower potentials in CO/H2 fuel streams is critically
              dependent upon the nature of the Pt-Mo interaction.  We intend to examine the
              influence of surface composition/coverage of Mo on solid Pt electrode surfaces
              in the presence of CO/H2 fuel streams as a function of potential using a
              rotating disk electrode (RDE) system.  These fundamental studies of solid
              electrode surfaces will identify the basis of CO-tolerance.  Based on these
              results, we will pursue rational development of supported Pt-Mo catalysts with
              the appropriate surface chemistry and structure using three novel dispersion
              methods.  As a part of this work, we will conduct in-depth physicochemical
              characterization of the catalysts as well as more comprehensive electrochemical
              analysis.  We intend to produce prototype membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs)
              for testing in fuel cells.  In addition, we will supply catalyst materials for
              external evaluation by leading catalyst manufacturers.  These companies have
              committed over $840,000 in follow-on funding for this SBIR project.

Low cost
              CO-tolerant catalysts developed under this SBIR project will enable the
              commercialization of high performance PEM fuel cells operating on reformed
              hydrogen. Reducing catalyst costs addresses a key obstacle hindering the
              commercialization of PEMFCs for vehicle propulsion and off-grid electric power
              generation.
