Title       : Collaborative Research on Updating the Militarized Interstate Dispute Data Set
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a0078401

Award Number: 0078401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16094              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick M. Regan pregan@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award updates the Correlates of War Project Militarized Interstate Dispute
              (MID) data set through 2001.  Such an effort is critical for international
              conflict research, but the enterprise of updating this collection is a
              monumental one that is beyond the scope or resources of any single researcher. 
              Consequently this is a collaborative effort, linking scholars at eleven
              different universities to complete the task in a systematic and timely fashion.
               The MID data set has been at the forefront on international conflict research
              over the past decade or more.  This data set is the most frequently used in
              conflict research and MID data has been employed to explore a staggering
              breadth of topics in international relations research, including most of those
              central to contemporary scholarly debates.  Furthermore, MID data are the basis
              for several other data projects in the discipline as well as highly compatible
              with a range of other data compilations, thereby facilitating the combination
              of data sets and the exploration of broader sets of theoretical
              questions.

Updating the Militarized Interstate Dispute data set requires
              completion of the following major steps:  1) collect and document militarized
              incidents from a variety of sources.  This entails searching global, regional,
              and national sources for indications of a threat, display, or use of force by
              one state against another; 2) checking, archiving, and documenting the
              incidents collected to insure consistency, completeness, and absence of
              duplication; 3) composing militarized disputes based on the collected incidents
              and additional research as necessary.  Because disputes are conflict episodes,
              such things as starting and ending dates, secondary participants, stages of
              escalation, overall fatalities, method of settlement, and general outcome must
              be determined.  A short narrative description of each dispute is also prepared;
              4) checking, archiving, and documenting disputes in order to insure such things
              as conformity with coding rules, compatibility with documentation standards,
              internal consistency, and absence of duplication; 5) resolving issues that
              arise concerning coding procedures, documentation requirements, problem cases,
              and the like; and, 6) preparing a final version (3.0) of the data set for
              distribution via the world wide web.  This requires the resolution of a few
              problems that have been found in the present version (2.1) before it can be
              merged with the 1993-2001 data.

This is a  major infrastructure project for
              the Political Science program and enables the updating of a data set that will
              be used by numerous scholars in international relations and comparative
              politics.

