Title       : Evolutionary Immigrant Settlement Patterns: Spatially Segmented Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0078141

Award Number: 0078141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79992              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Bruce Newbold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The large number of immigrants arriving in the U.S. on a yearly basis continues
              to raise questions relating to their distribution and assimilation within
              American society.  Recently, the older notions of assimilation into white,
              middle class America based upon European experiences early in the 20th century
              have been questioned, particularly in light of the experiences of Asian and
              Latin American immigrants.  As an alternative, the segmented assimilation
              framework developed by Alejandro Portes in 1989 recognizes differential paths
              of assimilation into American society, hinging upon the context of immigration
              (i.e., voluntary or forced), reception by the host country, and the resources
              that immigrants bring with them.  This framework has become an influential
              hypothesis of immigrant assimilation, but lacks a geographical (spatial)
              dimension.  Using segmented assimilation as a foundation, this project proposes
              a spatially segmented assimilation framework, recognizing that differences in
              the spatial organization of immigrant groups will exist.  Embedded within this
              proposed framework are three questions.  First, how do settlement geographies
              differ with respect to national origin, immigrant status, and across
              metropolitan areas?  Second, what differences are observed between successive
              arrival cohorts with respect to settlement and assimilation?  Third, do
              different origin groups follow similar progressions through a generalized
              settlement system?  The objectives of the research include: the assessment or
              empirical testing of spatial extensions to the segmented assimilation
              framework; across-group differences in migration, determinants and
              assimilation; how the geography of immigrant settlement changes over time by
              national origin; and, the impact of admission category upon settlement patterns
              of the foreign-born.  The empirical analysis will study assimilation at the
              intra- (between city) and inter-metropolitan (within city) scales, focusing
              upon the twelve largest immigrant groups in the U.S. in 1990.  Data will be
              drawn from linked 1980 and 1990 Public Use Microdata Samples (PUMS) from the
              U.S. census, along with data from yearly Immigration and Naturalization Service
              (INS) data. This INS data includes information relating to immigrant status and
              allows the settlement pattern of groups to be evaluated in non-census years. 
              The empirical analysis will utilize methods already developed and suitable for
              migration studies, including descriptive and multivariate techniques and more
              recent techniques of spatial data analysis.  

Immigration and assimilation
              have received considerable attention within both the academic and political
              arenas as witnessed by welfare reform in 1996 and California's Proposition 187
              in 1994. Underlying these questions is the very timely assimilation debate -
              what it means, how it is measured, who it is applied to, and its implications
              and outcomes.  Throwing aside traditional and stereotypical notions of
              assimilation, the research argues that assimilation into American society will
              occur differentially over space, time, and by origin group, making it a much
              more complex process than is currently revealed.  The research will extend
              knowledge of the spatial assimilation of immigrants by tracing the evolution of
              the settlement system over space through concurrent census periods while
              focussing upon particular groups of immigrants rather than the aggregate
              immigrant population. As such, the spatial detail within the project will be
              finer than has commonly been achieved in the past.  The research will
              consequently engage the assimilation debate from both a theoretical and
              empirical perspective. Linking the 1980 and 1990 census files, as well as using
              INS data from the 1990s will provide a modest but important temporal dimension
              and insight into the development of the settlement patterns over time. 


