Title       : New Computational and Experimental Methods for the Structural Characterization
               of Organometallics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0078515

Award Number: 0078515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335158             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark R. Landis landis@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  Program of the
              Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Clark Landis, Chemistry Department,
              University of   Wisconsin - Madison, for the development of new computational
              and experimental tools for elucidation of solution structures of organometallic
              molecules.  Valence bond, molecular mechanics and hybrid quantum
              mechanical/molecular mechanics computational methods will be used to model
              transition-metal catalysts and their reaction pathways.  Sophisticated NMR
              studies will be used to correlate the   theoretical models with the structures
              and reactivities of the molecules in solution.  New methods for the
              determination of structures of transition metal organometallic molecules in
              solution will be studied.  The computational methods developed will allow for
              the determination of structures using molecular mechanics methods that are
              specifically tailored to include parameters for transition metals.  While such
              calculations are widely used for small organic molecules and proteins, the
              inclusion of transition metals requires the development of new parameters to
              describe the force fields around the metal atoms. 

This project combines
              sophisticated theory and spectroscopy to devise new methods of determining
              details of the structures of organometallic molecules and of their ability to
              catalyze chemical reactions.  Algorithms derived from this work will be made
              readily accessible to other researchers so that it can be widely used to
              understand catalytic activity and shape interactions involving transition metal
              ions.

