Title       : Control of Ion Energy Distribution at Substrates during Plasma Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0078522

Award Number: 0078522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy E. Wendt wendt@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1062,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0078522
Wendt

Plasma processing of materials is used extensively in the
              semiconductor industry.  In plasma etching, patterns are defined in silicon
              wafers by exposing them to an ionized gas through a lithographically defined
              stencil, or mask.  One of the advantages of plasma etching over liquid chemical
              etching is the directional etching that results from bombardment of the surface
              by positive ions raining down from the plasma.  Because the ion bombardment is
              normal to the substrate surface, undercutting, or etching of material under the
              mask, can be avoided.  This enables the fabrication of ever-tinier transistors
              critical to the continuing advancement in integrated circuit performance.

In
              typical manufacturing plasma processes today, the energy of ions reaching the
              substrate surface is coarsely controlled bv varying the amplitude of an RF
              sinusoidal bias voltage applied to the substrate electrode, but the resulting
              ion energy distribution (IED) at the substrate is generally broad.  The energy
              provided to the substrate surface upon ion impact can enhance chemical
              reactions via several mechanisms, with significant implications for etched
              feature profiles and etch selectivity.  The proposed activity employs a newly
              developed technique for significantly reducing the width of the IED at the
              substrate, with the potential for significantly improving these aspects of
              plasma processes.  Furthermore, because of past difficulties in controlling ion
              energy at the substrate under realistic process conditions, this method opens
              up the possibility of examining the role of ion bombardment energy in etching
              processes for different materials and process gas systems with minimal impact
              on other process parameters.

This technique for ion energy control replaces
              the conventional sinusoidal substrate bias voltage waveform with a waveform
              that produces, on the substrate surface, a constant potential punctuated by
              periodic voltage spikes.  As a result, most ions see a constant voltage drop
              across the "sheath" that arises between the substrate and plasma, and therefore
              arrive at the substrate with the same energy.  Potential measurements have
              confirmed the feasibility of this approach.  In addition, preliminary etch rate
              measurements of blanket films show dramatic improvement in etch selectivity for
              SiO2/Si etching in a fluorocarbon plasma.

This method will be applied to
              several etching problems, as well as to basic understanding of the role of ion
              energy in plasma processing.  The first step will be to directly measure the
              IED at the substrate to both confirm the conjecture that this method produces a
              narrow ion energy distribution, and to verify that average ion energy can be
              effectively monitored through external voltage measurements.  In addition, both
              etch selectivity and etch feature profile control on patterned silicon wafers
              by precise tailoring of the IED using this method will be examined.  A
              particular process of interest is etching of silicon dioxide, which continues
              to pose challenges for plasma processing.  Finally, by scanning the ion energy
              while measuring etch rates, improved understanding of the mechanisms by which
              ion bombardment affects surface erosion during etching processes is
              expected.
***



