Title       : SBIR Phase II: Ultra-Hard Boron Coatings through Vacuum Arc Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0078385

Award Number: 0078385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399996             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Christopher Klepper cklepper@hytechresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HY-Tech Research Corp
	      104 Centre Court
	      Radford, VA  24141    540/639-4019

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to
              demonstrate the operation of a commercially viable boron deposition source
              based on vacuum arc technology.  The source is for the deposition of
              boron-based, self-lubricious coatings of hardness comparable to diamond, which
              are also compatible with high-temperature applications.  A special sintering
              method, developed in the Phase I, produced boron cathodes that survive the
              severe vacuum arc environment, when properly supported and heated.  This
              patentable
Phase I technology will be applied in the Phase II to demonstrate
              the production of the desired films.  The emphasis will be in ultra-hard forms
              of nearly-pure boron, although some compounds are also of interest. Water
              cooling of the anode and surrounding structures will be used to avoid damage in
              continuous operation of the source. Well established wall conditioning
              techniques will be used to reduce contamination of the films from the inner
              surfaces of the vacuum chamber.  Partnering with both a major coatings company
              and with a
major manufacturer of heavy machinery, that require low-friction,
              hard-coatings for components, will enhance this Phase II project with valuable
              in-kind support, as well as a clear path to the Phase III
              commercialization.

Boron coatings have excellent hardness, tribological (low
              friction) and corrosion resistance properties.  Their high temperature and
              combustion environment compatibility would make them ideal for advanced
              automotive applications.  For example, such coatings could potentially
              eliminate the need for added lubricants in high temperature, low heat loss
              diesel engines, leading to substantial reduction in particulate emissions.

