Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research on the Neural Basis of Perceptual Learning and
               Expertise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0078745

Award Number: 0078745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153669             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Tanaka tanaka@cs.oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The goal of the research is to investigate a neural mechanism linking the
              processes of expert object recognition and face recognition.  Previous research
              using event-related potentials (ERPs) have shown that an enhanced negative
              potential (N1) is elicited when participants view faces relative to non-face
              stimuli.  An open question is whether the enhanced N1 is attributale to a
              unique structural property associated with faces or to a special cognitive
              operation used in face processing.  One explanation is that the enhanced N1
              reveals a specialized perceptual process that is reserved for the recognition
              of ecologically imprtant objects, such as faces.  Preliminary data suggest that
              the enhnced N1 reflects a relatively early visual process that is rectuited in
              everyday face recognition, but is also employed in more specialized forms of
              expert object recognition, such as bird watching.

	The experiments in the
              current project explore the behvioral and neuro-physiological bases of object
              expertise as evidenced by real-world experts and normal adults when recognizing
              faces.  These experiments will focus on questions related to the acquisition of
              expertise by recording ERPs of participants as they undergo extensive training
              in the visual recognition of articicial stimuli or birds.  By testing its
              sensitivity to orientation, exposure duration, lateral presentation and
              typicality effects, the functional properties of the enhanced N1 will be
              examined in a series of follow-up experiments.  Studying the behavioral and
              neurological parallels between expert object recognition and everyday face
              recognition provides a method for developing a general framework of object
              expertise.

