Title       : Conference: Seventh FASEB Summer on 'Mechanisms in Plant Development'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0078115

Award Number: 0078115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Richards   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vivian F. Irish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078115
Richards

The seventh FASEB Summer Research Conference on 'Mechanisms
              in Plant Development' will be held August 12-17, 2000 at the Vermont Academy in
              Saxtons River, Vermont.  This conference will bring together biologists
              studying plant developmental mechanisms using genetic, genomic and cell
              biological approaches.  In addition, Dr. Richards plan to highlight two
              emerging areas:  the evolution of plant developmental programs, and the impact
              of epigenetic regulation on plant developmental programs, and the impact of
              epigenetic regulation on plant development and morphology.

Beyond simply
              extending a successful conference series, Dr. Richards believe that this FASEB
              Summer Research Conference can serve two important roles.  First, the meeting
              will provide an intimate venue conducive to creative interaction among
              researchers with different expertise and perspectives.  This is particularly
              important as the maturation of molecular genetic research and the availability
              of  genomic resources usher in a movement towards more integrated approaches
              incorporating biochemical and cell biological data.  Second, the FASEB
              conference will provide opportunity to attend a smaller meeting, where
              interaction between younger and more established researchers can occur. 
              Opportunities to attend such conferences are becoming increasingly rare as the
              field of plant 

