Title       : The Course of Evolution When Selection For A Behavioral Adaption Is Relaxed:
               Host Defenses Against Parasitic Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0078139

Award Number: 0078139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen I. Rothstein rothstei@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Some birds, such as cowbirds and cuckoos, do not care for their own young but
              instead parasitize the parental efforts of other birds, their hosts, by laying
              their eggs in the hosts' nests.  This social or "brood parasitism" depresses
              host reproductive output and some hosts have evolved defenses, such as removal
              of parasitic eggs. This study will determine the extent to which bird species
              retain host defenses when they are no longer parasitized by carrying out egg
              recognition experiments on populations that are not currently parasitized and
              by assessing levels of DNA sequence divergence to estimate the elapsed time
              since such populations became free of brood parasitism.  

Whether an
              adaptation is retained in the absence of benefits is a fundamental question in
              evolutionary biology.  The issue of the retention of adaptations is also vital
              to efforts to understand human nature as behavioral tendencies that were
              adaptive in the past but are no longer beneficial today may still be expressed,
              often to the detriment of society.  Brood parasitism is significant to efforts
              to preserve biodiversity because some endangered host species are impacted by
              the losses suffered to parasitism.  Currently, at least six endangered species
              are protected from parasitism by cowbird control programs that expend
              significant amounts of public funds.  Understanding the extent to which egg
              recognition is retained in the absence of any benefits will reveal whether this
              trait has significant costs and will provide insights into the reasons some
              endangered hosts have not developed this behavior. 

