Title       : SBIR Phase II: Chemically Resistant Gas Separation Perfluoromembranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0078470

Award Number: 0078470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Bowser jbowser@compactmembrane.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Compact Membrane Systems
	      325 Water Street
	      Wilmington, DE  198042410    302/999-7996

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1414,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project will optimize and scale
              up the system developed in Phase I (a nonporous perfluoromembrane system for
              harsh gas separations).  These nonporous perfluoromembrane systems provide
              industry for the first time with a system (membrane module, glue lines,
              potting, valves, etc.) that has good gas transport rates and separation
              capabilities composed totally of perfluorocomponents.  In Phase I, laboratory
              testing and economic evaluations showed these membranes could economically
              remove hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and key non-condensable gases from
              chlor-alkali tail gases and in so doing dramatically enhance the recovery of
              chlorine.  Analysis comparing the Compact Membrane Systems, Inc. (CMS)
              technology to alternative membrane and other unit operations (e.g. absorption)
              technologies, indicated the CMS technology is significantly superior.  Large
              sheet nonporous perfluoromembrane fabrication has been demonstrated in Phase I.
               All the key components are in place for large scale module fabrication in
              Phase II.  In Phase II we will optimize and scale up the system.  Detailed and
              representative (-20oC) end use testing and long term testing will be conducted
              in the laboratory prior to field testing.  While the focus of this program is
              chlor-alkali harsh chemical separations, other harsh chemical processes (e.g.
              fluorochemical synthesis) will be considered.  Our close working relationship
              with a number of large membrane manufacturers and end users allows us to
              rapidly and effectively drive this program.

Phase I testing was done using
              both single gas testing and mixed gas testing.  Materials evaluated include
              chlorine, Cl2CF2, SF6, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and helium. 
              Results showed mixed gas results were equal or superior to single gas results. 
              This suggests that minimal plasticization or other anomalies are occurring
              within the system.  This would suggest we can project actual end use
              performance accurately.
