Title       : Learning Complex Auditory Categories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0078768

Award Number: 0078768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Holt lholt@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Lotto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Categorization is a fundamental characteristic of human cognition. Recent
              research has suggested that at least part of language acquisition and adult
              speech perception depends upon formation of phonetic categories corresponding
              to the speech sounds of the native language. Unfortunately, much of what is
              known about perceptual categorization has been learned from examination of
              categories that are fundamentally different from phonetic categories (e.g.,
              visual categories).

Unfortunately, probing the means by which speech is
              categorized is not so easy as applying methods and results from visual
              categorization to the domain of speech perception. Speech categories are very
              difficult to examine because it is extraordinarily difficult to determine the
              history of speech experience that a listener encounters before entering the
              laboratory. There simply is little experimental control. Fortunately, there is
              a means to address this important question. Pilot work by the PIs has suggested
              that complex non-speech sounds that model the structure of speech categories
              have value in learning about how listeners form categories similar to phonetic
              categories. Using the set of novel methods developed in this pilot work, the
              PIs will investigate the role of experience in forming complex auditory
              categories.

The ultimate goal of this project is to determine the role that
              general perceptual categorization processes play in first and second language
              acquisition. A program of research will employ complex nonspeech sounds to
              provide a detailed account of how human listeners form complex auditory
              categories. These results then will be examined to determine whether some of
              the notable characteristics of speech perception can be explained in part by
              appealing to general processes of perceptual categorization. The results of
              these experiments will allow the PIs to develop efficient methods of exposure
              and training to teach non-native contrasts to second-language learners.
              Exposing the mechanisms of complex category learning will illuminate potential
              aids for training individuals to discriminate nonnative speech categories.
              These aids could extend easily to other complex learning tasks such as musical
              training, acoustic warning systems or auditory data displays.

