Title       : Collaborative Research: The Impact of Migration on Women in Dual-Earner
               Families: A Longitudinal and Geographic Assessment of Family Migration Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0078880

Award Number: 0078880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne D. Withers swithers@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The number of wives in the labor force has doubled over the past three decades
              and household migration behavior is increasingly dependent on a complex process
              of joint decision making.  This research examines, in a longitudinal context,
              the geographic and economic impacts of migration on dual-earner families, with
              specific focus on the labor-force experience of married women.  Research on the
              impact of women's participation in the labor force has indicated that
              two-earner households are less likely to move than single-earner households due
              to their dual labor-force attachment.  Traditional family migration research
              has argued that migration is associated frequently with the loss of earnings,
              interrupted careers, unemployment, underemployment or leaving the labor force
              on the part of the wife.  In contrast, more recent work has raised questions
              about the disadvantaged effects and suggests that employment of married women
              increases with migration.  Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data
              this study considers the full range of potential labor force impacts on married
              women within the larger context of parallel careers in the life course of women
              and families.  The study controls for the bias of migration self-selectivity. 
              It explicitly considers the spatial variation in dual-earner family migration
              and the effects of migration on women in these families.  Furthermore, this
              research uses longitudinal models to differentiate between the short-term and
              the long-term impacts of migration on married women.  It addresses
              participation (employment, unemployment, underemployment, interrupted careers)
              and financial aspects of the impact of migration on married women. 

A better
              understanding of the joint employment and location decisions of husbands and
              wives has the potential to improve the efficiency of the labor market.  Women
              are the most dynamic supply sector of the labor market, and married women are
              an important component of spatial changes in the labor force, by virtue of
              their increased participation and their impact on family migration in general. 
              Industry and organizations invest about 15 billion dollars annually in job
              relocations.  Many of the transferees are married and dual earners, and
              relocating two earners is much more difficult than relocating a single earner. 
              Spouses, relatives, and children are no longer considered mere appendages of
              the employee.  Corporations are recognizing the need for greater incentives and
              support for the spousal job search process.  Further, it is estimated that
              between ten and fifteen percent of all relocations are for the married woman's
              job, and there is reason to believe that this figure will continue to rise in
              the future.  Given contemporary social changes it is an appropriate time to
              reassess family migration theory.  New findings will enrich our knowledge of
              the temporal and spatial variations in the impact of family migration on women
              in dual-earner households.

