Title       : Cellular Control of Endoplasmic Reticulum Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0078287

Award Number: 0078287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Wright wrightr@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eukaryotic cells are composed of a basic set of organelle "building blocks" that
              include (among others) the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi
              apparatus, lysosomes, mitochondria, peroxisomes and, in photosynthetic
              organisms, chloroplasts.  This relatively small number of separate cellular
              components belies the amazing diversity of cell structure and function that
              exists in eukaryotic organisms.  In each case, the specialization of cell
              structure and function is mirrored by changes in organelle composition.  Thus,
              a key feature of cell biology is the regulation of subcellular organization,
              that is, the regulation of which organelles are present and  their size,
              composition, location, number, and life spans.  Surprisingly, given the
              importance of this regulation, there is not yet a single example in which the
              molecular nature of this regulation is well understood.
The experiments that
              will be performed explore this question by focusing on the regulation of
              endoplasmic reticulum structure and function in the yeast, Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae.  As in all other cell-types examined, the organization of the ER in
              yeast is sensitive to the levels of a subset of ER proteins.  One of these
              proteins, HMG-CoA reductase, catalyzes the first committed step in sterol and
              isoprene biosynthesis.  In yeast, expression of increased levels of HMG-CoA
              reductase induces assembly of specialized regions of ER termed karmellae,
              consisting of stacks of paired smooth membranes that are closely associated
              with the nucleus.  The ability to control karmella assembly by merely changing
              the levels of a single protein provides a unique opportunity to explore the
              molecular mechanisms by which cells increase biogenesis of a particular ER
              domain when dictated by physiological demands.  
To uncover these mechanisms,
              Dr. Wright will use a genetic approach that takes advantage of new resources
              available as a result of completion of the Yeast Genome Project.  Specifically,
              she will use a population genetic approach to identify deletion mutants that
              display defects in growth rate when they assemble karmellae.   Coupled with
              information from a Two-Hybrid approach to identify gene products that interact
              with HMG-CoA reductase, this approach should reveal genes that have important
              roles in assembly of karmellae.  The analysis of karmella assembly mutants will
              be guided by in vivo time-lapse light microscopy and electron microscopic
              analysis of karmella assembly.  Completion of these experiments should uncover
              basic features of the communication network that reports and regulates ER
              function coordinately with changing physiological demands.  Such knowledge will
              have specific application to understanding the cellular regulation of ER
              structure and function, but should also provide general insights concerning the
              cellular regulation of organelle biogenesis.  


