Title       : SBIR Phase II: Uncopying Xerox - Acoustic Coaxing Induced Microcavitation (ACIM)
               Assisted DeInking of Paper
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0078897

Award Number: 0078897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397345             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sameer I. Madanshetty sameer@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isabel M. Zambrano  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Uncopiers, Inc.
	      6923 Redbud Drive
	      Manhattan, KS  66503    785/293-4917

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9150,9163,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop an
              optimized prototype of the UNCOPIER-a chemical-free, energy-efficient,
              ACIM-based device designed to non-destructively deink laser-xerographic prints
              one sheet at a time.  Acoustic Coaxing Induced Microcavitation (ACIM) is a
              novel, chemical-free, and energy-efficient process which uses only "Silent
              Sound and Clean Water."  Underlying ACIM's energy efficiency is
              microcavitation's ability to concentrate an enormous amount of energy on an
              extremely small (i.e. sub-microscopic) point.  These controlled concentrations
              of energy result in nearly spontaneous cleaning which does not hurt the
              substrate. ACIM is the ideal technology for deploying energy exactly at the
              point of use.

UNCOPIER technology will revolutionize the paper recycling
              industry in a number of ways, as well as innovation in the recycling process
              itself.  Since the UNCOPIER leaves the deInked paper immaculately white and
              undamaged, it will save environmental resources by making it possible to
              manufacture new print grade paper from the recycled laser-xerographic prints. 
              The UNCOPIER is being developed as an office machine to advocate a pioneer
              method for recycling paper-at-source deinking, "one sheet at a time."  DeInking
              paper prior to recycling protects confidentiality.   This novel approach will
              appeal to banks, hospitals, law firms, government agencies, and other
              institutions interested in recycling, but also concerned with safeguarding
              confidentiality.  The UNCOPIER system will reduce recycling costs and enables
              vital commercial motivations for its improved recycling endeavors.  

