Title       : Genome Sequence for Neurospora crassa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0078148

Award Number: 0078148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5254287            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Birren bwb@genome.wi.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Kinsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew S. Sachs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harris C. Nusbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A genome contains all the instructions needed to define the biological aspects
              of an organism. The ability to read the DNA sequence of genes initiated a
              revolution in molecular biology. Recent technological advances have made it
              possible to determine rapidly the sequence not only of individual genes but
              also of entire genomes. This is critical for understanding cellular processes
              because the expression and function of each individual gene reflects complex
              regulatory pathways encoded by multiple interacting genes. The availability of
              genomic sequence is the single most important resource for understanding the
              biology of an organism. The genome of the fungus Neurospora crassa will be
              sequenced through a partnership between the Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for
              Genome Research (WI-CGR) and members of the Neurospora research community. The
              objectives of this study are to determine within one year the complete sequence
              of the 43 Mb Neurospora genome, and to make a highly accurate version of this
              sequence publicly available. This work will produce annotated sequence and
              large insert clones with endpoints precisely known with respect to the sequence
              that can be used for ongoing functional studies. While the result will be a
              clear boost in research productivity, sequencing the Neurospora genome is not,
              in itself, a research activity. It is a production activity in which proven
              methods will be applied at a specified rate to achieve a predetermined and
              easily measured product. The methods for producing the sequence, including
              shotgun sequencing, detection, and assembly, and the requisite database tools
              for handling the sequence are already employed at WI-CGR at a scale
              considerably greater than is necessary for the Neurospora project. WI-CGR has a
              long history of managing successful large scale projects for genome mapping and
              sequencing and is engaged in several genome sequencing projects, including
              human and mouse. The WI-CGR employs factory-style laboratory automation,
              automated software for data collection and analysis and a production
              environment that stresses high quality and reliable delivery at extremely
              high-throughput. The WI-CGR has worked aggressively to become the most
              efficient publicly funded high-throughput sequencing center in the world, as
              well as the leader in sequence output. The low cost of this project reflects
              the economies of scale, in which highly efficient utilization of personnel,
              equipment and reagents provides great cost savings on a per read basis. The low
              repeat content of Neurospora makes it ideally suited to whole genome shotgun
              sequencing, in which paired reads from the ends of random plasmid clones are
              assembled. In the first phase of the project approximately 1.2 million
              sequencing reads will be generated and assembled to provide on average 9X depth
              of coverage of the genome. Subsequent work involves both automatically-selected
              and human-directed sequence reads needed to close gaps and attain uniformly
              high sequence quality. Sequence assemblies corresponding to 3X, 6X, and 9X
              depth of coverage will be publicly released during shotgun sequencing and
              annotation and verification of the sequence assembly will commence with the 9X
              assembly. The biological value of this sequence is extraordinarily high because
              of the widespread use of Neurospora as an experimental system, the
              applicability of this organism to problems not addressable with other model
              organisms, the well developed genetic methods that will permit researchers to
              exploit the sequence for further experimentation, and the immediate boost it
              will provide to research on a large number of related organisms of economic and
              biological importance.
