Title       : A Public Database Resource for Apoptosis Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0078731

Award Number: 0078731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Bourne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam Godzik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Burnham Institute
	      10901 No. Torrey Pines Road
	      LaJolla, CA  92037    629/455-0181

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Apoptosis (programmed cell death) research is currently among the three fastest
              growing topics in worldwide biomedical research.  Apoptosis plays a critical
              role in a wide variety of normal physiological processes.  Significant data and
              knowledge are being accumulated on the complex apoptotic pathway, yet no
              resource exists to appropriately collate this information for the purposes of
              education and research.  With extremely rapid growth of the available
              experimental data, the problem with redundant research is growing as
              illustrated with conflicting nomenclature and multiple re-discovery of the same
              proteins by independent groups.

This project assists a rapidly growing
              community of apoptosis research by providing a public, WEB based resource that
              brings together all available information about apoptosis and its related
              proteins.  In particular, the resource will contain a searchable database
              containing information about the following:

-Families of proteins involved
              in apoptosis, including their domain structure, phylogenetic relations, and
              functional motifs.

-Links to literature describing specific experiments with
              details about function of all proteins.

-Three-dimensional structure (or
              predicted structure) of apoptosis related proteins.

-Lists of
              uncharacterized proteins with domains known for their role in
              apoptosis.

Expertise of leading apoptosis researchers is used to develop the
              preliminary version of the databases that are then supported by automated
              methods for finding new sequences, structures, and text information related to
              apoptosis that appear in various Internet-accessible resources.  Once
              implemented, these automate as far as possible the collection of current,
              well-annotated data on apoptosis for a worldwide community of users.  In
              addition, novel algorithms for structure and function prediction from sequence
              are used to enhance existing information with hypotheses about structure and
              molecular mechanism of function of apoptosis-related proteins, helping to plan
              and develop new experiments.  This project thus provides the rapidly growing
              community of apoptosis research an access to consistently complete and current
              data.  The prototype resource can be found at http://apoptosis-db.org.

