Title       : Computational Models of Cell Growth and Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0078920

Award Number: 0078920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1266,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The cell division cycle is the sequence of events whereby a living cell
              replicates all its components and divides them between two daughter cells, so
              that each daughter has the information and machinery necessary to repeat the
              process. Because it underlies the growth, development and reproduction of all
              biological organisms, the cell cycle is intensely studied by molecular
              biologists, who have recently uncovered many details of the biochemical network
              controlling cell division. Among eukaryotic cells (plants, animals, fungi), the
              regulatory mechanism is highly conserved, with homologous components
              functioning across species barriers from yeast to frogs to humans. So many
              details of this control system are now known that intuitive methods cannot
              explicate the complex interactions among these molecular components. New
              methods of knowledge acquisition and development are desperately needed. For
              this reason, the Principal Investigator has created computational tools to
              model the cell-cycle control system, analyze its properties, and compare
              hypothetical mechanisms to the actual behavior of dividing cells. This project
              is to extend the understanding of cell cycle control by pursuing previous
              computational approach in new directions. The Principal Investigator's team
              will construct comprehensive models of growth and division in budding yeast and
              fission yeast, focusing on the molecular mechanisms that underlie initiation of
              DNA synthesis, exit from mitosis, and selection of new growth zones. They will
              also construct new models of meiotic cell division (essential to sexual
              reproduction) and cell-cycle modifications during embryogenesis. What is
              learned from modeling the control systems in yeasts and embryos will then be
              transferred to the vastly more complicated network of biochemical reactions
              regulating growth and division in mammalian cells. Aside from developing new
              approaches to the analysis of genetic regulatory mechanisms and training young
              people in the burgeoning field of computational molecular biology, this project
              promises to yield novel theoretical insights into the molecular machinery
              regulating cell growth and division. Deeper understanding of cell-cycle control
              will eventually be parlayed into practical developments in agriculture, tissue
              engineering, and medicine (e.g., parasite control, nerve cell regeneration, and
              cancer treatment). 

