Title       : Sister Chromatid and Homolog Interactions in Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0078138

Award Number: 0078138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Dawson dean.dawson@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Meiosis is the process used to generate haploid cells from diploid precursors.
              It  is characterized by a single round of DNA replication followed by two
              rounds of chromosome segregation. In the first meiotic division, chromosomes
              pair with, then migrate away from, their homologues. A critical aspect of
              meiosis I is crossing-over, or exchange, between homologous chromosomes. This
              form of recombination may be part of a recognition process that allows
              chromosomes to align with their proper partner. This alignment culminates in
              formation of a proteinaceous structure, called the synaptonemal complex (SC),
              along the homologues. Crossovers also clearly play a role in providing a
              physical link between paired homologues, which allows the homologues to attach
              properly to spindle fibers that will mediate their segregation. Crossovers
              alone do not provide a stable linkage between homologues. Following DNA
              replication, each homologue is composed of two identical sister chromatids. The
              cohesion of these chromatids locks crossovers in place allowing the crossovers
              to act as a stable link between the homologues until anaphase I, at which time
              release of the sister arm cohesion allows the homologues to disjoin.
              Accordingly, mutants unable to complete
meiotic recombination usually exhibit
              low fertility or sterility. However some organisms,
including yeast, have
              mechanisms that insure the segregation of single pairs of chromosomes
that
              have failed to experience a crossover in an otherwise normal meiosis.  This
              project addresses two questions. First, what types of interactions between
              chromosomes that have failed to experience an exchange enable them to segregate
              away from one another? Second, how do sister chromatids remain associated in
              meiosis I, thus helping crossovers to link homologues and ensuring that both
              sisters will stay joined until meiosis II? Experiments  will test the model
              that interactions between the centromeres of test chromosomes mediate their
              disjunction at meiosis I. Cytological techniques will be used to test
              centromeric interactions occur between a pair of homeologues, specifically
              tagged with GFP. The second objective, to explore the behavior of sister
              chromatids in meiosis, will be addressed experimentally in three ways. First,
              experiments will be performed to determine whether the loss of meiotic sister
              cohesion observed in spo11 mutants (that do not initiate meiotic recombination)
              is due to a requirement for the Spo11 protein or alternatively a requirement
              for recombination initiation in meiotic sister chromatid cohesion. Second, the
              meiotic behavior of GFP-tagged sister chromatids will be observed cytologically
              in previously characterized meiotic mutants to explore the relationships of
              sister chromatid association, recombination and SC formation. Finally, the GFP
              tagged chromosomes will be monitored in a genetic screen to identify new genes
              involved in mediating proper sister chromatid behavior in meiosis. The
              experiments conducted in this work will help to elucidate the mechanism of
              chromosome segregation.

