Title       : Biogeochemical Cycling of Chlorine through Fungi and Dehalorespiring Anaerobes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0078133

Award Number: 0078133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold D. May mayh@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. P. Meier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin R. Sowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Humans have greatly benefited from the production and use of chlorine and 
              bromine-containing organic compounds.  However, chemical pollution has raised
              alarms over the potential harm that man-made chlorinated compounds can do to
              the health of humans, animals and entire ecosystems.  Until recently it has
              been thought that most if not all of the organochlorides in the environment are
              present due to human activity.  It is now known that thousands of
              organochlorides are produced naturally and that many are generated
              biologically.  Thus, there may be a natural cycling of chlorine in the
              environment similar to the way that other common elements such as carbon,
              sulfur, etc. are cycled.  Microorganisms play a very large role in the cycling
              of chemical elements.  Basidiomycete fungi (mushrooms) are known to produce
              organochloride compounds and some anaerobic bacteria are known to remove
              chlorine from some man-made compounds.  This project is aimed at determining
              how anaerobic bacteria degrade fungal organochlorides and participate in a
              natural chlorine cycle.  Knowing how these fungal metabolites are degraded will
              advance our understanding of chlorine and carbon cycling.  Establishing that a
              link exists between fungi and anaerobic bacteria will confirm that chlorine is
              cycled between these disparate groups of microorganisms and will provide
              insight into the fate of man-made and natural organochlorides once they are
              released into the environment.

