Title       : Excited-State and Interfacial Properties of Electrically and Optically Active
               Pi-Conjugated Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0078819

Award Number: 0078819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Luc E. Bredas jlbredas@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Jean-Luc Bredas of the University of Arizona is supported by the
              Advanced Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry Division to carry
              out theoretical calculations and modeling studies with close collaboration with
              experimentalists.  These studies are to verify the theoretical (ab initio and
              semiempirical techniques including quantum chemistry) approaches, and to
              determine the relationship between microscopic molecular properties and the
              macroscopic bulk properties of conjugated polymers. Oligothiophenes, poly
              (p-phenylene vinylene), related conjugated polymers and their derivatives in
              their ground-, ionized- and lowest excited states will be evaluated for
              electronic structures and charge transfer processes taking place at
              organic-organic interfaces, and organic-metal interfaces in devices. The
              knowledge gained from these studies will be useful to enhance the performance
              and efficiencies of electronic materials and devices such as light-emitting
              diodes.  The computational materials chemistry group, which will be started
              under the award, will have a major impact on the education of students in
              Materials Chemistry.

Computational and modeling studies of electronic
              materials will be carried out in close collaboration with experimental research
              scientists.  These studies will provide theoretical information to optimize
              functions of electronic materials and devices prepared from them. In addition,
              these studies will provide the know-how to design and fabricate highly
              efficient optical devices such as light-emitting diodes at low cost. The
              computational materials chemistry group will provide training and hands-on
              experience to students in this emerging field.
