Title       : SBIR Phase II: Enhanced 3-D Seismic Imaging of Subsalt Gas and Oil Reservoirs
               Using Primary and Converted Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a0078234

Award Number: 0078234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitri Bevc dimitri@3dgeo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : 3DGeo Development, Inc
	      465 Fairchild Drive, Suite 226
	      Mountain View, CA  940432251    415/969-3886

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 1580,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from 3DGeo Development
              Incorporated will develop a software package which utilizes primary and
              converted-wave energy to accurately and efficiently image gas and oil
              reservoirs, and to determine rock properties for reservoir evaluation and
              management.  In the recently completed Phase I project, 3DGeo demonstrated the
              feasibility of imaging with converted waves by analyzing the nature and
              occurrence of converted waves in synthetic seismic data.  Full wavefield
              modeling and ray tracing in realistic models was used to simulate both
              towed-cable and ocean-bottom-cable marine data.  Both acquisition geometries
              show important converted-wave events that will be used in Phase II to
              accurately image reservoirs and estimate rock properties.  In addition to the
              mode converted energy, this project will incorporate two other significant
              propagation phenomena that commonly occur in geological settings which give
              rise to converted waves, namely: (1) multiply reflected events [multiples], and
              (2) transmitted and reflected energy propagating along multiple paths in the
              subsurface [multi-valued traveltimes].  These two phenomena, coupled with the
              mode conversions, which are the main focus of this research effort, comprise
              the greatest challenge to seismic prospecting for oil and gas. This Phase II
              project develops a comprehensive and synergistic subsalt imaging solution that
              exploits the full potential of the seismic wavefield for reservoir imaging and
              rock property estimation in complex areas.

Commercial potential of the
              proposed technology is directly applicable to subsalt oil and gas exploration
              in complex areas such as the Gulf of Mexico.  US companies will spend $50
              billion drilling deep subsalt prospects over the next 5 years, and this project
              could have a direct and significant impact by developing an accurate and
              economical reservoir monitoring and imaging technology.



