Title       : Multiple Structural Changes with Deterministic and Stochastic Trends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0078492

Award Number: 0078492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Perron perron@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5913,5952,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In previous work, we provided a comprehensive treatment of issues related to
              multiple structural changes in the linear model with stationary or
              deterministically trending variables. This proposal addresses issues related to
              multiple structural changes for the empirically important cases where the
              individual variables are possibly integrated and a system of variables is
              possibly cointegrated.  The presence of integrated variables requires a
              drastically different theoretical apparatus and poses serious difficulties in
              the testing strategies to be adopted. This is due to the fact that the limit
              distributions depend on whether or not a unit root is present but, at the same
              time, inference about the presence of a unit root depends on whether structural
              changes are present. Hence, a joint approach is needed. 
The issues to be
              tackled will be new theoretical results as well as more practical aspects
              including extensive simulations about the adequacy of the procedures in finite
              samples. The research will analyze the consistency of estimated break dates
              given changes in the slope of a trend function for a univariate integrated
              series. This is expected to yield more powerful procedures since on ecan then
              test for a unit root using critical values corresponding to the case of a known
              break date. The planned research includes the development of tests for
              structural changes in the trend function of a univariate time series that are
              valid whether a unit root is present or not.  
For the multivariate case,
              research will address the consistency of the break point estimates (whether in
              the deterministic components or the cointegration vectors); tests for the
              presence of structural change being agnostic about the number of cointegrating
              vectors; and tests for the number of cointegrating vectors allowing for
              multiple structural changes. In this  multivariate case, we intend to
              generalize the univariate Modified AIC for choice of lag length.  Finally, we
              intend to develop an efficient estimation procedure for cases in which other
              methods for constructing estimates of the break dates will break down
In all
              the research topics described, we intend to provide applied researchers with a
              comprehensive set of tools and all procedures will be made available in a Gauss
              program that will be distributed on request.

