Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Breaking down the
               controlling state's refusal to bargain with the nationalist rebels. Israel and
               the Palestinian territories.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0078645

Award Number: 0078645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7998               (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Laitin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The project studies the evolving relationship among Palestinian moderates,
              radicals and Israeli politicians.  Based on one year of field work in Israel
              and the Palestinian territories, the primary objective of the project is to
              answer the question:  what caused the breakdown of a twenty-year consensus in
              Israel against bargaining with the Palestinians on the 1967 border question? 
              The broader objective of the project is to specify the general conditions under
              which any struggle, in what the nationalists see as "occupied" territory,
              successfully breaks down the consensus among rulers in the controlling state
              against a bargained solution.  Field  research explores the hypothesis that
              divided nationalist rebels are more likely to secede and thereby to redefine
              the boundaries of the state that seeks to contain those rebels.  Specifically,
              only when a split occurs between nationalist moderates and radicals, and the
              moderates are autonomous from the radicals, is the controlling state's
              consensus of non-negotiation with the rebels likely to break down.  The fear
              that the balance of power could change in the near future in favor of the
              radicals gives politicians at the controlling state a crucial incentive to
              negotiate.

	The project combines a quantitative analysis, a game theoretic
              model, and a qualitative comparison.  On the quantitative side, the development
              of coding criteria allows a comparison of the mix of ideological positions of
              all revolutionary factions.  Modeling the interaction between moderates and
              radicals in controlled territories, and the mainstream politicians from the
              controlling states, helps to identify the conditions in which bargaining for
              territorial change is the best strategy for the actors involved.  Finally, the
              comparative method allows the testing of implications derived from the
              theoretical framework.  An analytic narrative of the Palestinian-Israeli case
              over time also provides crucial lessons for other cases of nationalist
              rebellion-seeking autonomy from the state. 

