Title       : The rsbA Locus and Swarming Behavior of Proteus Mirabilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0078506

Award Number: 0078506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59940              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Robert Belas BELAS@UMBI.UMD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proteus mirabilis is a motile Gram-negative bacterium that was originally
              described and named by Hauser in 1885 for the character in Homer's Odyssey who
              "has the power of assuming different shapes in order to escape being
              questioned." What led Hauser to name this bacterium with such an imposing (and
              surprisingly astute) epithet? The answer: the phenomenon of swimmer-to-swarmer
              cell differentiation and swarming behavior. While differentiation of a P.
              mirabilis swimmer cell into a swarmer cell occurs at the level of the
              individual cell, swarming motility and behavior are characteristics associated
              with the coordinated movement of groups of swarmer cells, suggestive of a
              multicellular organism rather than a bacterial cell. Moreover, this behavior is
              cyclic in nature, so that the movement of the mass of bacteria is punctuated by
              periodic episodes during which the bacteria cease movement and dedifferentiate
              from swarmer cells back into swimmer cells. This dedifferentiation occurs while
              the bacteria are still exposed to the same stimulus that initially induced
              swarmer cell differentiation.
	The cyclic nature of P. mirabilis swarming
              behavior makes this phenomenon unique, even among the other bacterial species
              that produce swarming colonies. While other bacteria may swarm, none but P.
              mirabilis produce the clear and distinct cycles of differentiation and
              dedifferentiation that so well characterize this species. These cycles give
              rise to the bull's-eye colony pattern associated with P. mirabilis. Moreover,
              unlike the other swarming genera, phenotypically well characterized P.
              mirabilis mutants specifically defective in swarming behavior and pattern
              formation are available, thus providing the starting material for successful
              molecular analyses. The long-term goal of this research is to understand how
              bacteria communicate with one another during colony development and how that
              communication affects the expression of those genes required for
              differentiation and behavior.
This research focuses specifically on the
              molecular mechanisms that control the onset of swarming migration and the
              bull's-eye pattern formation. The underlying hypothesis to be tested states
              that the development of swarming migration is a density-dependent process
              requiring both proteolysis from two extracellular proteases and the function of
              a histidine kinase sensor protein. The specific aim to be accomplished is:)
              Characterization of the inducer molecules (proteolytic products) responsible
              for density-dependent swarming migration. The results obtained from this study
              will answer the question "What role does AI-2 have in swarming migration
              behavior?"

