Title       : Ultrafast Studies of Energy Redistribution in Condensed Phase Chemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0078972

Award Number: 0078972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseanne J. Sension rsension@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Roseanne Sension of the University of Michigan is funded by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform experiments on energy
              redistribution in condensed phase chemical reactions.  The reason why these
              studies are of interest is two-fold:  first, understanding the interplay
              between energy relaxation and chemical reactions in the liquid phase is
              important in biological processes.  Secondly, prospects of coherent control of
              reactions would be another important outcome. This proposal seeks to study the
              rate and extent of intramolecular vibrational relaxation in polyatomic
              molecules such as hexatriene, cyclohexadiene and dehydrocholesterol in
              solution.  The PI then proposes to examine the nature of the interactions
              between a hot molecule and the solvent.   A successful outcome of this proposal
              would be a model used to predict, interpret and/or control the outcome of
              chemical reactions in solution.  The proposed work is unique because of the
              PI's ability to produce 30 fs pulses in the deep ultraviolet.  

Studying the
              pathways that energy flows through molecules and the flow rates provides
              information that is directly applicable to biological processes such as
              photosynthesis and vision.  The use of ultrashort laser pulses in the deep
              ultraviolet makes small molecules accessible to these studies.  It is thought
              that the first demonstrations of coherent control of reactions in solution will
              be in small molecules, since there are fewer pathways available to disperse the
              energy and, thus, it is more likely that the energy can be driven to the
              reaction of interest (bond breaking, for example.)  These fundamental studies
              take advantage of recent advances in laser pulse generation that make possible
              the new field of femtochemistry.
