Title       : The C. Elegans GLHs and P Granule Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0078169

Award Number: 0078169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Bennett bennettk@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bennett
0078169

The germline is responsible for carrying on the species;
              without a germline, sexually-reproducing organisms would not exist.  In most
              animals germline precursor cells are set aside during embryogenesis, with the
              precursors dividing later in life.  After proliferation, these cells undergo
              meiosis to produce male and female gametes, the eggs and sperm of the adult. 
              In the model organism, the free-living soil nematode Caenorhabditis elegans,
              the germline is established very early in development.  By the fourth cell
              division of the embryo, a single cell, called P4, is the founder cell for the
              entire germline.  Throughout the life of the worm, cytoplasmic complexes of RNA
              and protein, called P granules, are exclusive to the germline lineage.  Similar
              germ granules are found in the germline precursor cells of all higher organisms
              that possess a germline.  The Bennett laboratory has identified four germline
              RNA helicases, the GLHs, a family of putative ATP-dependent enzymes that are
              exclusive to P granules throughout the life of the worm.  Similar germline RNA
              helicases are found in the germ granules of flies, frogs, mice and men. This
              application proposes to determine the genetic interactions between the four glh
              genes, as well as identifying the RNAs and proteins that interact with these
              RNA helicases in P granules.  Based in part on multiple CCHC zinc fingers that
              are unique to the GLHs, it is hypothesized that each GLH may associate with a
              particular set of RNAs and proteins.  The work to be carried out will include
              the isolation of a null mutation in the glh-4 gene, the only glh gene for which
              a loss-of-function mutation remains to be isolated.  Relevant multiple glh
              mutant strains will be generated, including the glh-1 glh-4 double mutant which
              RNAi (RNA interference) studies indicate will result in complete sterility. 
              RNAs bound by the GLHs will be enriched for with the SELEX technique, while
              proteins that interact with the GLHs will be identified in yeast two-hybrid
              assays.  The yeast two hybrid screens have already identified a putative MAP
              kinase that appears to interact with GLH-3, as well as several other candidate
              proteins.  These analyses will reveal how the GLHs, with their RNA and protein
              partners, affect germline determination, as well as the establishment and
              maintenance of the species.  This work in worms is expected to relate to
              reproductive strategies in all organisms, including humans.

