Title       : Molecular Photonic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0078938

Award Number: 0078938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Meyer meyer@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Professor Gerald Meyer of Johns Hopkins University is a renewal of
              an earlier award and is supported by the Advanced Materials and Processing
              Program in the Chemistry Division.  The focus of the award will be the
              determination of the fundamental mechanisms of excited states and
              photo-initiated interfacial electron transfers in novel photovoltaic materials
              based on sol-gel processed semiconducting materials.  Also, characterizations
              of these materials for interfacial electron transfer reactions with excited-,
              ground- and reduced-state inorganic complexes will be carried out under this
              award.  In addition, the studies to determine the steady state and time
              resolved spectroscopies along with mathematical modeling will be part of the
              award.  The research in photo-driven iodine redox chemistry by steady state and
              transient optical and electrochemical methods will provide information for the
              design of highly efficient regenerative solar cells.  The award will provide
              training to graduate and undergraduate students in this emerging field in
              applying material chemistry theory and applications for the development of
              efficient and low cost solar cells.

Under this award,  semiconducting
              materials will be characterized after preparing them by  sol-gel processing. 
              The award will study the mechanism of the electron transfer reactions in these
              semiconducting materials, which eventually will lead to low cost and efficient
              regenerative solar cells. Undergraduate and graduate education and training in
              material chemistry is part of the award.
