Title       : Exo70 as a Link Between Vesicle Targeting and Vesicle Fusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0078487

Award Number: 0078487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548692             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. TerBush   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
How are secretory vesicles targeted to and fused with the plasma membrane? The
              answer to this question is fundamental to the understanding of how cells form
              specialized plasma membrane domains during growth and differentiation. In
              eukaryotic cells, secretory vesicles bud from the trans Golgi network (TGN) and
              are transported along cytoskeletal tracks to the vicinity of their site of
              fusion with the plasma membrane. The links between vesicle transport, targeting
              and fusion are just now beginning to be understood. This research will examine
              the role of Exo70p in these processes. Exo70p is the 70 kilodalton protein
              component of the yeast exocyst complex that is required for vesicle docking and
              fusion at sites of polarized growth. This complex contains at least 8 protein
              components, but little is known about their biochemical function. To gain a
              greater understanding of the mechanism of secretory vesicle targeting and
              fusion, the investigators will examine:
1)How Exo70 regulates the specificity
              of secretory vesicle targeting.
2)How Exo70 links vesicle targeting to the
              fusion machinery.
The research combines the strengths of yeast genetics with
              biochemical and cell biological approaches. Genetic screens will be used to
              identify proteins that are required for secretory vesicle transport and for the
              specificity of vesicle targeting in an exo70-38 mutant. This project will
              explore the innovative idea that secretory vesicle transport and recognition
              may be directly coupled to vesicle fusion by Exo70p. Towards this end the
              project will determine whether an  exocyst component protein can regulate the
              specificity of secretory vesicle docking.  The expectations are that the
              project will provide new insights into how Exo70p links vesicle transport to
              vesicle docking, recognition and fusion at the plasma membrane. This will be
              accomplished by investigating the role of Exo70p in t-SNARE clustering at the
              site of fusion and how different classes of secretory vesicles can be
              discriminated during vesicle targeting/docking to the plasma membrane.  In
              polarized epithelium, the exocyst complex is required for basolateral vesicle
              targeting and the exocyst is localized to the sites of polarized growth (growth
              cones) in developing neurons. Therefore, it is expected that insights gained
              from yeast studies such as these  will be applicable to the understanding of
              the regulation of
exocytosis in human cells.


