Title       : IRCEB: Interannual Climate Variability and Ecosystem Processes: A Quantitative
               Assessment Combining Modeling with Field and Mesocosm Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0078325

Award Number: 0078325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Arnone jarnone@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yiqi Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Verburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1325,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0078325
Arnone
It is well known that atmospheric CO2 is rising, that changes
              in atmospheric CO2 are likely to affect the earth's climate, that changes in
              climate cause changes in net ecosystem productivity (NEP, a measure of
              ecosystem carbon exchange), and that terrestrial ecosystems act as a regulatory
              mechanism for atmospheric CO2. Although correlative studies have demonstrated
              that there are tight connections between atmospheric CO2, climate, and NEP, the
              fact is that we cannot explicitly quantify the links and feedbacks among them.
              This is perhaps the most critical void in our knowledge making it difficult, if
              not impossible, to predict the rate and consequences of global environmental
              change. 
This IRCEB project has three components - integrating experiments in
              a unique mesocosm facility, field experiments, and statistical and simulation
              modeling - that will allow the investigators to explicitly test four hypotheses
              regarding the relationships among climate, atmospheric CO2 and NEP: (1) an
              observed rapid rise in global atmospheric CO2 in anomalously warm years results
              from temperature-induced decreases in NEP resulting from increased
              heterotrophic respiration (Rh); (2) stimulated Rh will also lead to increased N
              mineralization causing increases in available soil N pools which in turn will
              result in increased plant N uptake and storage; (3) following the warm year, a
              return to more normal temperatures and Rh levels, along with high plant N
              stores causing an increase in NPP, will result in a large increase in NEP; and
              (4) temperature extremes will cause a multitude of ecological responses at
              different time scales and feedback to affect NEP, and therefore atmospheric
              CO2. Other feedbacks will be tested, as well.
The centerpiece of the study is
              an experiment to be conducted in the mesocosm-scale EcoCELL lysimeter
              laboratory at the Desert Research Institute. This facility has the capability
              to continuously measure NEP on an ecosystem scale while simultaneously
              controlling climate variables. The EcoCELL experiment involves the imposition
              of a 4OC increase in ambient temperature during the second year of the
              experiment, which combined with an array of specific measurements to quantify
              physiological processes that control the carbon cycle, will enable the
              investigators to understand how NEP responds to year-to-year variation in
              temperature. Tallgrass prairie, one of the world's most studied grassland
              ecosystems, provides a model ecosystem for the project; and intact soil-plant
              monoliths will be extracted from a prairie field site and transported to the
              EcoCELLS providing the basis for the laboratory test.
The EcoCELL experiment
              will be linked to two other study components, a native tallgrass prairie
              experiment in the field and modeling-data synthesis. The tallgrass prairie
              field study will help to calibrate and scale the observed responses under
              controlled environments and test causal relationships of temperature-induced
              effects on the availability of soil moisture and nutrients, hypothesized to be
              key factors in temperature-induced changes in NEP. These experiments will help
              determine whether variation in temperature affects tallgrass prairie ecosystem
              carbon exchange via direct effects, effects on water availability, or effects
              on nutrient dynamics. Statistical analysis and two specific model will
              represent a range of techniques to identify the processes that control
              ecosystem responses to temperature anomalies, and allow understanding and
              development of linkages between the laboratory and field experiments.

