Title       : Policy Outcomes and Efficiency in Political Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0078870

Award Number: 0078870
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Persico persico@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This project models political systems and studies the efficiency properties
              of their out-comes.  The first part investigates how, in a Downsian model of
              electoral competition, the number of candidates affects the efficiency
              properties of the equilibrium. Initial results suggest that, the larger the
              number of candidates, the larger is the incentive for candidates to engage in
              inefficient tactical redistribution. This suggests that, in political systems
              (or countries) with a large number of parties, political platforms should
              feature a greater fraction of pork-barrel projects, tax cuts, and other
              redistributive policies, at the expense of more efficient (but less targetable)
              public goods.

The second part builds a model that contrasts two electoral
              systems, a proportional system where seats in an assembly are assigned
              proportionally to the vote shares, with a "winner--take-all" system where the
              party with the highest number of votes receives all the spoils of office (for
              instance, the presidential election in the US has this feature).   This project
              shows that politicians competing in a proportional system tend to favor
              policies that are less risky, in terms of the way that they are perceived by
              voters, than in a winner-take-all system. Because politicians in a
              winner-take-all system choose to compete on riskier platforms, vote shares
              should display greater variability than in a proportional system. Preliminary
              empirical evidence seems consistent with this prediction.

The third part
              investigates a way to obtain uniqueness of equilibrium in a plurality voting
              game with N candidates (and strategic voting).


