Title       : SBIR Phase II: Microminiature, High Resolution, Passive Peak Strain Detector for
               Smart Structures and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0078617

Award Number: 0078617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Arms swarms@microstrain.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MicroStrain Inc
	      310 Hurricane Lane
	      Williston, VT  05495    802/862-6629

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1059,9146,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project combines
              hermetically packaged, differential variable reluctance transducers (DVRT)
              capable of peak strain detection (PD) with shape memory alloy (SMA) actuators
              to produce improved passive PDs.  These detectors can withstand harsh
              environmental conditions, e.g., moisture, salt, vibration, and can be reset for
              repeated uses.  Sensors in smart structures generally require system power in
              order to operate, but power outages may result in loss of key data.  Therefore,
              sensors that can record peak information without power, i.e., passively, are
              needed in smart structures.  Earlier passive PDs have relied on measuring the
              magnetic properties of transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) steels. 
              However, these devices suffer from bulky size, low resolution, high
              nonlinearity, and a one time use limitation due to material yielding.  This
              technology addresses these problems by using modified, microminiature DVRT-PDs.
               Phase I successfully designed, built, and tested hermetic packages, and SMAs
              were successfully employed for resetting of the devices.  Techniques for remote
              interrogation using radio frequency identity tags were investigated, micropower
              prototypes were designed and built, and methods for wireless delivery of power
              to the SMA actuator were demonstrated.  In Phase II, highly integrated
              microelectronics will be combined with the hermetic DVRT-PD packages to produce
              self-contained, remotely queried and remotely resettable PDs.  Novel micropower
              sensor excitation circuits, capable of long range interrogation, will be built,
              tested, and packaged for independent laboratory evaluation and eventual field
              deployment.  Field tests will include health monitoring of structural joints,
              repairs, and supporting members of civil structures, including bridges.  The
              physical attachment of the DVRT-PDs to these structures will be designed for
              reliability, low cost, and ease of use.  

Applications include health
              monitoring of composite structures, aircraft, trains, bridges, dams, and
              buildings.  Military and commercial markets for these systems are significant. 
              Health monitoring has the potential to enhance the safety and life of military,
              aerospace, and civil structures.  Sensate structures equipped with passive
              networks of peak displacement or strain measurement devices could be
              interrogated for their response to test loads or potentially damaging events,
              and either replaced or their embedded sensors reset for future interrogation.
              Critical civil and military structures require 'smart' sensors in order to
              report their strain histories; this can help to insure safe operation after
              exposure to potentially damaging loads, e.g., earthquakes, hurricanes, military
              combat, etc.
