Title       : SBIR Phase II: Simulation of Rapid Thermal Processing in a Distributed Computing
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a0078608

Award Number: 0078608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiwen Liu liu@esi-al.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Engineering Sciences Inc
	      1900 Golf Road, Suite D
	      Huntsville, AL  35802    205/883-6233

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue to
              develop and demonstrate a computational tool for detailed simulation of Rapid
              thermal processing (RTP) in a distributed computing
environment by taking
              advantages of the findings in Phase I. RTP has become a key technology in
              the
fabrication of advanced semiconductor devices. As wafers get larger and
              chip dimensions smaller, the
understanding of the highly coupled physics such
              as radiative heat transfer, transient fluid flow and heat
transfer as well as
              chemical reactions through numerical modeling using high-performance computing
              is
the key to the design, optimization, and control of RTP reactors. In Phase
              II, A 3D surface radiation
model based on the modified discrete transfer
              method (MDTM) will be developed to treat radiative
transfer in the lamphouse
              and process chamber as a whole process. The detailed pattern effects will
              be
taken into account by rigorously solving time-domain Maxwell's equations
              through a finite volume
approach. The rarefied gas dynamics in low pressure
              RTP will be modeled by adding Burnett terms into
the Navier-Stokes equations.
              The governing equations that contain various multi-disciplinary
              physical
models will be solved by a 3D unstructured finite volume method. To
              address computationally intensive
3D simulation needs, an efficient parallel
              strategy will be implemented in the solution procedure. Data
communication
              among parallel processors will be conducted by the Message Passing Interface
              (MPI)
library.  To accelerate the overall solution convergence and improve the
              parallel performance, the
algebraic multi-grid (AMG) method will be used to
              solve the discretized equations in each processor. It is
expected that the
              proposed simulation tool can be used to systematically investigate the
              underlying
physics occurring in RTP systems, and to help in the design,
              optimization, and control of RTP reactors.

The proposed simulation tool will
              significantly benefit the semiconductor manufacturing equipment industries that
              require a detailed understanding of multimode and highly coupled transport
              phenomena.  The potential applications include the design, optimization, and
              control of RTP reactors and many other manufacturing and materials processing
              systems.

