Title       : The Intermediate Phase in Network Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0078361

Award Number: 0078361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Thorpe thorpe@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0078361
Thorpe

This senior and distinguished PI works on properties of
              glasses but in the framework of a network model.  In this view, which focuses
              on the geometric details such as network connectivity, the network is derived
              by putting the most important forces in the model to be infinite and the rest
              are set equal to zero.   The resulting model is computationally manageable with
              a large number of particles.   In this model,  at a critical (as a function of)
              average coordination number (generally covalent glasses have large coordination
              number while the polymeric glasses in general have smaller coordination
              number), the states evolve in to a rigid and stressed state.  However the
              numerical results show the existence if an intermediate state which is rigid
              but not stressed.  This grant supports further work on this intermediate phase
              of a network glass. Recent experiments in chalcogenide glasses give preliminary
              evidence for an intermediate phase of this nature.
%%%
This senior and
              distinguished PI is a leader in the broad field of study involving glasses.  In
              particular, guided by his belief that many properties of glasses can be studied
              using a geometric model, i.e. one made from sticks and balls, he has noticed
              the presence of curious phase of glass which may have been seen experimentally.
               Looking at glasses from their dependence on an average coordination number
              (number of atoms that a given atom may be connected to) there are two phases,
              one where the glass has a small coordination number, no rigidity and no
              accumulated stress while at large coordination number, the glass is rigid and
              it has accumulated stress.  Near the transition, and a range of coordination
              number around the critical value, there is an intermediate phase corresponds to
              a rigid but unstressed glass.  He plans to look at the observable properties of
              state.
***


