Title       : Neural-Glial Signaling Deciphered by Hyper-Cluster Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0078055

Award Number: 0078055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Jung jung@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann H. Cornell-Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0078055
JUNG

Only a fraction of the cells in brain tissue are neurons. The
              majority of brain cells are glial cells. The star-shaped astrocytes, a subgroup
              of glial cells form an integrated network known as a syncytium. Astrocyte
              syncytia support waves of calcium release that signal information between
              astrocytes and neurons. The goal of this project is to analyze these signaling
              patterns in cultures of brain tissue to decipher their messages and to
              understand how they differ in healthy and epileptic brain cells.
The project
              will be a collaborative effort between biologists at Viatech-Imaging/Cognetix
              and physicists at Ohio University.  Viatech-Imaging/Cognetix will provide
              fluorescent video microscopy to observe the calcium waves, and will provide the
              expertise necessary to grow, modify, and understand the physiology of the
              cultured brain cells. Ohio University physicists will analyze and model the
              dynamical properties of the calcium waves to provide a basis for understanding
              the coherent signaling and communication between regions of cells.  The central
              analytical tool to be used and further developed in this study is called
              Hyper-cluster analysis. This technique reveals a unique statistical fingerprint
              of the intercellular messaging. Statistical fingerprints will be obtained in a
              variety of healthy and epileptic tissues obtained from Children's Medical
              Hospital in Cincinnati. Once these fingerprints can be deciphered, a wide range
              of exciting biomedical applications becomes possible. These include
              personalized quantitative testing of the effectiveness of anti-epileptic
              compounds and screening of the effectiveness of new drugs in a culture dish
              without the debilitating side effects that often accompany clinical
              testing.



