Title       : Collaborative Research: Signaling Via Opsins and Opsin-Related Proteins in Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0078282

Award Number: 0078282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Borkovich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Opsins are seven-transmembrane helix proteins that bind all-trans or 11-cis
              isomers of retinal to form light-absorbing pigments known as rhodopsins. 
              Previously, opsin-encoding genes had only been cloned from animals and the
              archaea.  The principal investigator recently identified the first opsin gene
              from eukaryotic microbes, Neurospora crassa nop-1.  The NOP-1 protein sequence
              is most similar to that of archaeal opsins, with conservation of all 22 retinal
              binding pocket residues, including the lysine residue that forms a Schiff base
              linkage with retinal.  NOP-1 is also similar to several predicted proteins from
              various fungal species, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hsp30p.  With the
              exception of two predicted proteins from filamentous fungi, all other related
              fungal proteins lack the Schiff base lysine residue and we have referred to
              them as Opsin-Related Proteins (ORPs).
	NOP-1 has been overexpressed in Pichia
              pastoris and its spectral properties determined.  Similar to archaeal opsins,
              NOP-1 binds all-trans retinal with a Schiff base linkage.  The resultant
              pigment has an absorption maximum at 534 nm (green).  The relatively long
              photocycle of the NOP-1 pigment is similar to that of archaeal sensory
              rhodopsins, suggesting NOP-1 functions as a sensory receptor in N.
              crassa.
	The nop-1 message is most abundant under conditions that favor
              asexual sporulation (conidiation) in N. crassa.  Although ?nop-1 mutants do not
              have visible phenotypes at 30oC, these strains exhibit green light-dependent
              defects in asexual spore-forming structures and cell viability at elevated
              growth temperatures (37-42oC).
	Also, the principal investigator identified an
              EST encoding a N. crassa ORP (orp-1).  The predicted ORP-1 protein sequence is
              most similar to HSP30 from Coriolus versicolor.  In contrast to NOP-1, ORP-1
              only shows conservation of 50% of the 22 retinal binding pocket residues with
              archaeal rhodopsins, including substitution of isoleucine for the Schiff base
              lysine residue.
	The sequence similarity between NOP-1 and archaeal
              rhodopsins; the evolutionary relationship between NOP-1 and S. cerevisiae
              Hsp30p; the light-dependent expression of nop-1; the sensory rhodopsin-like
              photocycle of NOP-1; the light-dependent conidiation defect of ?nop-1 mutants
              in the presence of oligomycin, and the light-dependent defects in cell growth
              at elevated temperatures lead to the following hypothesis:  Opsins and ORPs
              regulate cell growth, viability and development during cellular stress
              responses in N. crassa, potentially via light-dependent and independent
              pathways, respectively.  The Research Objectives of this project are 1) To
              determine the localization and native chromophore of NOP-1 in N. crassa and to
              further characterize the involvement of nop-1 in stress and developmental
              regulation; 2) to identify genes that regulate nop-1 gene expression and genes
              whose expression is regulated by nop-1; 3) to create and analyze a ?orp-1
              mutant and to over-express and characterize the encoded ORP-1 protein, and 4)
              to identify other genes encoding opsins and ORPs, and other nop-1 pathway
              components.  During this collaborative research project, one laboratory will
              focus on Objectives 1 and 3, while the other will focus on Objectives 2 and 4. 
              This collaborative research project will strengthen and extend the existing
              collaboration, and exploit the complementary skills and resources available to
              the two principal investigators.  One principal investigator has extensive
              expertise in genome analysis, molecular evolution, the genetics and
              biochemistry of stress responses and the genetics of filamentous fungi in
              general.  The other has significant experience in protein biochemistry,
              mutational analysis of fungal genes, stress responses and signal transduction
              via both G proteins and histidine kinases.  The former has access to the
              resources of the Neurospora Genome Project, including automated sequencing and
              microarray facilities.  The latter is in close proximity to a leader in
              biophysical analysis of archaeal rhodopsins and who has been a past and is a
              current collaborator.
	The existence of seven-helix opsin receptors has been
              postulated in eukaryotic microbes for decades.  Many of these organisms utilize
              light signals to regulate cell growth, reproduction, phototaxis or the
              circadian clock.  Therefore, the identification of an opsin in N. crassa has
              enormous repercussions for filamentous fungi and other eukaryotes. 
              Furthermore, the lack of an opsin in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae points
              to the importance of studying this class of proteins in the model filamentous
              fungus N. crassa.  In addition, very little is known about ORPs in fungi: for
              example, whether they can bind a chromophore, absorb light, etc.  Thus, the
              principal investigators are in the position of making pivotal discoveries in
              this field using N. crassa as an experimental organism. 

