Title       : Mathematical Approaches to Epidemiological Studies of the Emergence,
               Re-Emergence and Persistence of Infectious Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0078250

Award Number: 0078250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Y. Li mli@math.ualberta.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Li
0078250
     The investigator develops mathematical models to
              investigate
several important epidemiological and ecological factors for
              the
emergence, re-emergence and persistence of infectious diseases.
The
              project has three goals: (1) to develop a new mathematical
framework in
              epidemiological modeling that links the human
population to its environment,
              (2) to introduce and develop a new
mathematical approach to the analysis of
              epidemic models, (3) to
stimulate mathematical development of more effective
              analytical
and numerical tools for resolving important computational
              issues
arising from the model analysis.  The work is carried out along
two
              main themes: Theme I.  Develop a mathematical framework in
epidemiological
              modeling using network models that takes into
account the full cycle of a
              disease in nature and encompasses
three interconnected key elements: human
              hosts, intermediate
hosts and disease vectors, and environment.  Theme II. 
              Develop an
approach to the analysis of epidemic models using the method
              of
singular perturbation to further our understanding of several
              key
biological issues such as robust mechanisms for cyclic temporal
patterns
              in disease incidence and the short-term evolution of
disease pathogenicity. 
              Computational issues arising from the
large scale systems in network models
              and from the multiple time
scales that are inherent in disease transmission
              processes are
also investigated.
     The global spread of infectious
              diseases and the emergence
of drug-resistant disease agents are causes for
              alarm at the end
of the 20th century.  As the world population continues
              to
explode, the world economies continue to become globalized,
individual
              interactions and international travel continues to
increase, and the
              environment around the globe continues to be
devastated, the effective control
              and prevention of the global
spread of infectious diseases is destined to be
              one of the grand
challenges facing mankind in the new millennium.  Essential
              to our
success in meeting this challenge is a renewed effort
              in
epidemiological studies, a better understanding of the
transmission and
              spread mechanisms of various diseases, and more
effective disease control and
              prevention measures based on these
studies and the new understanding.  While
              the nature and scale of
the problems at hand inevitably limit the
              effectiveness of
experimental approaches, mathematical modeling has proven to
              be a
valuable approach and an indispensable tool for understanding
              the
problems, for testing hypotheses, and for predicting effective
measures
              of control and prevention.  It is expected that results
from the project can
              advance our understanding of the basic
ecological and epidemiological
              mechanisms for the emergence,
re-emergence and persistence of infectious
              diseases and their
associated temporal patterns, and improve the present
              theoretical
basis for effective disease control and prevention strategies.


