Title       : Ecological Bases of Social Behavior in Capuchins: A Three-Way Comparative Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0078967

Award Number: 0078967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Boinski boinski@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The evolution of the diverse array of primate social organizations is a
              fundamental issue in physical anthropology. Why are males dominant to females
              among many primate species, yet in a smaller proportion of species females
              typically dominate males? Why are some primate species highly aggressive, while
              others are best described as diffident and retiring? Why among most, but
              certainly not all, primate species do males typically emigrate to other troops
              in early adulthood, but all females pass their entire life in the same troop in
              which they were born?  The answers to these questions are crucial to explaining
              the dramatic variation in social behavior exhibited by the more than 200 extant
              species of prosimians, monkeys, and apes. Furthermore, these questions are
              central to the eventual understanding of the evolution of social behavior among
              our hominid ancestors.

Controversy exists regarding the underlying variables
              most important in explaining the variation social organization in primates.
              Ecological models of social evolution see competition for food as the key
              factor determining female grouping patterns, and thus the distribution and
              dispersal options of males. An alternate model attributes variation in social
              organization and female relationships to male competition with other males for
              control of mating with group females. What is clear at this point is that the
              most powerful tests of these models will need to be closely related species
              that vary in their social organization. 

Capuchin monkeys (genus Cebus) are
              noted for behavioral flexibility and variability and are a prime candidate for
              a successful study system. Major differences in mating system are reported
              among the four species.  Brown (C. apella), and, wedge-capped capuchins (C.
              olivaceus)are essentially polygynous. On the other hand, females among the
              white-faced, C. capucinus, and white-fronted capuchins, C. albifrons, typically
              mate with multiple males during the period of conception. However, preliminary
              observations of brown capuchins at Raleighvallen Nature Preserve, Suriname
              suggest a multi-male mating system similar to that of the white-faced and white
              fronted capuchins. 

Researchers will perform a three-year field study of
              behavior, ecology and genetic relationships among the brown capuchins at
              Raleighvallen, Suriname.  In conjunction with long-term field data for brown
              capuchins at other sites (Manu, Peru and Iguazu, Argentina) and for white-faced
              capuchins (Santa Rosa and Lomas Barbudol in Costa Rica), this will provide a
              powerful and important test of current models of primate social evolution. 
              Researchers predict that the mating system and patterns of social interaction
              among brown capuchins at Raleighvallen will resemble Costa Rican white-faced
              capuchins rather than Peruvian or Argentinean brown capuchins. This would
              provide strong support for an ecological basis to capuchin social organization.
              A major goal of this study will be to determine the relative contributions of
              food distribution and mate competition in shaping capuchin social organization.
              Nevertheless, the implications of its findings have the potential to force
              dramatic reinterpretations of the past 30 years of investigations of primate
              social behavior.

