Title       : Collaborative Research SGER: Examination of Ultrasound Use in Hummingbirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0078190

Award Number: 0078190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Millicent S. Ficken fickenm@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ultrasonic sound production has recently been discovered in hummingbirds.
              Behavioral and acoustic studies suggest that these ultrasonic sounds may
              function in communication.  To test this hypothesis, the researchers propose to
              determine whether or not hummingbirds are able to perceive ultrasonic sounds
              (above 20 kHz).  If so, further behavioral studies will evaluate the
              communicative role of ultrasonic signals.  Ultrasound perception will be
              assayed by monitoring hummingbird heart rate responses to presentations of
              ultrasonic signals.  Establishing the use of ultrasound in hummingbirds would
              demonstrate sound production and auditory sensory abilities previously unknown
              in any avian species, and would be the first step towards understanding how
              birds use ultrasound. 

	Basic research of mammalian ultrasound has
              influenced the development of ultrasound and sonar use across such fields as
              medicine, engineering, manufacturing, intelligence, and communication.  Many
              features of mammalian ultrasound exceed the sophistication of artificial
              ultrasound, including the ability to manipulate and respond to changes in
              signal parameters, use binaural processing with separate transmitter and
              receivers, and compensate for the Doppler effect due to relative movement
              between transmitter and receiver.  Much of the current applied ultrasound
              research is directed towards developing effective replications of mammalian
              ultrasound.  Examination of a new animal group, with a distinct ecological
              niche and evolutionary history, may provide innovative design features not
              present in mammalian ultrasound systems, which may be adapted for human
              applications.

