Title       : Malpighian Tubule Transport Physiology: Mechanisms and Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0078058

Award Number: 0078058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus W. Beyenbach kwb1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The overall goal of this project is to identify and characterize
              current-generating and current-dissipating transport systems in the natural
              environment of an intact principal cell in the Malpighian tubule of the yellow
              fever mosquito (Aedes aegypti).  In the basolateral cell membrane, the aim is
              to characterize K channels, and putative Na and Ca channels.  In the apical
              membrane, the focus is on current generation by the V-type H+-ATPase, testing
              the effects of voltage and the two substrates of the pump, H and ATP. 
              Investigating how current is dissipated across this membrane may lead to the
              discovery of a new family of antiporters.

Outside principal cells, the grant
              proposes to characterize the nature of the shunt taken by Cl during
              transepithelial secretion.  One hypothesis to be tested is that the stellate
              cell serves as the shunt pathway.  The alternate hypothesis considers insect
              septate junctions to offer a paracellular pathway for Cl.  They hypothetical
              model proposes that septate junctions house a Cl channel-like structure that is
              regulated by the diuretic peptide leucokinin.

Experiments described in this
              proposal will demonstrate how proton pump, channels, symporters and antiporters
              are organized in principal cells in insect Malpighian tubules to secrete Na and
              K into the tubule lumen via a transcellular path.  Studies of the shunt pathway
              will show how Cl is secreted, presumably via a paracellular path.  Together,
              these studies will reveal the combinatorial arrangement of the molecular
              building blocks of epithelial transport: pumps, channels, carriers, and
              junctions and how they interact to secrete NaCl, KCl, and water into the tubule
              lumen.  Results from the proposed studies of an ATP-driven pump in an intact
              cell will be of wide interest to biologists.


