Title       : Functional Analysis of RGA, a Negative Regulator of Gibberellin Signaling in
               Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0078003

Award Number: 0078003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai-ping Sun tps@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bioactive gibberellins (GAs) are a class of plant growth hormones, which control
              diverse processes including seed germination, stem elongation, flower and fruit
              development.  Although the physiological effects of GAs on plant growth are
              well documented, much less is known about how this hormone signal leads to
              biochemical and morphological changes.  Recent studies using biochemical and
              genetic approaches have identified three negative regulators (RGA, GAI and SPY)
              in GA signal transduction pathway in higher plant.  The genes encoding these
              proteins are highly conserved in different species.  Both RGA and GAI are
              likely to function as transcription regulators, whereas SPY is probably an
              enzyme that modifies other proteins by attaching sugar residues.  The current
              working hypothesis is that SPY may modify and activate RGA and GAI to repress
              GA signal transduction in the absence of (or in low) GA signal.  The basal
              state of GA signaling is therefore to be repressive, and the GA signal
              de-represses the pathway by inhibiting the negative regulators. 

This
              proposal focuses on elucidating the biochemical function of RGA in regulating
              GA signal transduction in the model plant Arabidopsis.  The specific aims are
              to examine whether the activity of RGA is modulated by protein modification
              and/or by alteration of its subcellular localization, and to identify cellular
              protein(s) that interact with RGA.  These studies will shed lights on the
              molecular mechanisms by which GA controls plant growth and development.  This
              knowledge will also facilitate more effective strategies to improve
              agricultural crops in the future.

