Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Dynamics and Structure in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0078458

Award Number: 0078458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Chandler chandler@gold.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Chandler of the University of California, Berkeley, is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his research in
              statistical mechanics directed at understanding structure and dynamics of
              liquids and related systems.  In the first project, charge frustrated models of
              oil-water-surfactant systems will be used to develop and exploit isomorphisms
              between very different phenomena, including metal-insulator transitions in
              liquid solutions and vitrification of supercooled liquids.  In another project,
              hydrophobicity at small and large length scales will be exploited to develop a
              generally applicable statistical field theory.  This formulation will be
              applied as a bridge between large length scale phenomenology and small scale
              atomistic theories of complex fluids, and used to analyze systems such as
              polymer melts and blends, and liquid crystals.   These techniques are also
              expected to enable development of an equilibrium theory for water and other
              associated fluids.  In the area of dynamics, transition path sampling will be
              used to devise phenomenological theories for weak acid dissociation and proton
              transfer in aqueous systems.  Methods for treating quantum effects within the
              context of transition path sampling will be explored, with the goal of enabling
              quantitative treatments of kinetics involving light atoms such as protons in
              water.  In a final project, concepts governing ensembles of trajectories will
              be developed further, especially for systems far from equilibrium.  Outcomes
              are expected to enable the analysis of broken symmetry, corresponding to broken
              ergodicity and to phase transitions of driven systems. 

Improved
              understanding of liquid systems structure and dynamics has far-reaching
              implications for fundamental science and technology applications.  Outcomes
              from this project will impact materials science, including polymers and liquid
              crystal systems.  As well, new results on proton transfer and the hydrophobic
              effect will have strong connections to biologically relevant systems, including
              protein folding.
