Title       : A Novel Calcium Sensor and Its Target Kinase in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0078233

Award Number: 0078233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheng Luan sluan@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
A Novel Ca2+ Sensor and Its Target Kinase in Arabidopsis 

	A number of
              stressful factors such as drought, cold, salinity, can severely hamper plant
              growth and development. To survive these extreme conditions, plants have
              evolved complex mechanisms to "monitor" the stress conditions and respond by
              changing their physiological and developmental programs. The long term goal of
              this project is to understand the signaling pathways that link the
              environmental stress factors to cellular responses in higher plants.  
              
	Almost all extracellular signals, including plant hormones, light, stress
              factors, and pathogenic or symbiotic elicitors, can elicit Ca2+ pulses or
              transients which serve as "second messengers" in further signaling processes.
              Because different signals often induce distinct and specific cellular
              responses, an interesting question is how cells distinguish the Ca2+ messengers
              produced by different stimuli and respond accordingly. Studies suggest that
              signaling components that "sense" and "interpret" the Ca2+ parameters hold the
              key.  
	The laboratory has identified a new family of Ca2+ sensor proteins
              that play a role in plant response to stress signals. One member of the family,
              AtCBL1, is strongly responsive to stress factors including drought, cold, and
              wounding. Another member, AtCBL4 or SOS3, is required for salt tolerance. To
              understand the molecular mechanism for AtCBL1 function, the laboratory has made
              a key finding that AtCBL1 specifically associates with a family of novel
              protein kinases that are found only in higher plants. These AtCBL1-interacting
              protein kinases (CIPKs) are highly related to each other and their kinase
              domains are most similar to SNF1 subfamily of protein kinases. However, all 
              CIPKs contain a unique C-terminal non-kinase domain that is responsible for
              interaction with AtCBL1. Further studies with one of the CIPKs, CIPK1, show
              that AtCBL1 interaction with CIPK1 requires micromolar levels of Ca2+,
              suggesting that Ca2+-binding changes the conformation of AtCBL1 and triggers
              association with CIPK1. Kinase assays using recombinant CIPK1 determined that
              CIPK1 is a serine/threonine kinase but has unique cofactor preference. For
              instance, CIPK1 highly prefers Mn2+ for its activity and functions as a
              Mn2+-binding protein.  
	This project will further explore the functional
              significance of AtCBL1-CIPK1 complex using a combination of biochemical, cell
              biology, and molecular genetic approaches. In the first objective, biochemical
              and cell biology approaches will be used to dissect the native form of CIPK1
              holoenzyme and identify the functional substrates for CIPK1. In the second
              objective, molecular genetic approaches using transgenic plant and "knockout"
              mutant models will be used to unravel the function of AtCBL1-CIPK1 in plant
              growth and developmental processes especially under stress conditions. This
              study will establish a new paradigm for Ca2+ signal transduction, which will
              have major impact on cell biology in general and on signal transduction
              research in particular. 


