Title       : Role of Sensory Experience in Parcellation of Sensory Neocortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0078110

Award Number: 0078110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Pallas spallas@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The broad goal of my experiments is to determine how different areas of
              mammalian cerebral cortex become specialized to process different types of
              sensory information, and in particular, how functionally specialized brain
              circuitry is created during development from non specialized brain tissue.  The
              hypothesis I am testing is that the sensory inputs received during development
              play a critical role in organizing specific circuits in cortex.  To this end, I
              use three groups of animals; one group of normal animals, one which has had
              sensory input to auditory cortex (AI) removed (deafened), and another which has
              had visual input unilaterally diverted into the auditory pathway early in
              development ("rewired").  We have demonstrated that visual inputs can be
              processed by auditory cortex if they are present from early in development, and
              our goal is to determine what changes in auditory cortical circuitry are
              responsible for the gain of function.
	The implications of this work are that
              it provides a uniquely valuable developmental model for mammalian brain
              evolution.  During evolution, neocortex becomes increasingly subdivided, and
              input processing is increasingly specialized.  With our model, we can create a
              new cortical area or a new input to an existing cortical area on an
              experimentally-manageable time scale.  In addition, the work addresses the
              basic mechanisms by which an animal's brain becomes adapted to its environment
              on both an evolutionary and a developmental time scale.

