Title       : The Ecology of Early Food Production in Upland Drainages of Eastern North
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0078782

Award Number: 0078782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen J. Gremillion   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kristen Gremillion and her
              collaborators will conduct two seasons of archaeological and geomorphological
              research in the Red River drainage which flows through the Cumberland Plateau
              of eastern Kentucky. The goal is to advance understanding of the origins and
              development of Native American prehistoric food production in eastern North
              America though an analysis of the ecological and economic variables that shaped
              this process within the uplands of eastern Kentucky between 7000 and 2000 years
              ago. Dr. Gremillion wishes to answer questions about why and how food
              production was a successful behavioral adaptation in this setting whose high
              relief and limited expanses of alluvium (river margin)  imposed unusual
              constraints. To accomplish this, fieldwork will target archaeological sites
              that complement a rich data base already available from a series of dry caves
              which, because of excellent protection afforded, preserve a wide range of
              floral and faunal remains. The team will target occurrences which represent
              repeated occupations of alluvial landforms such as terraces and floodplains and
              that span the period representing the transition from foraging to a mixed
              foraging and farming mode of subsistence. Sites will be sampled intensively for
              macrobotanical, microbotanical and sedimentological evidence of changes in diet
              and environment during this period. The same types of data will be obtained
              through collection of sediment cores from non-archaeological contexts that are
              less directly affected by human activity and more directly indicative of
              environmental conditions. Dr. Gremillion will employ an optimum foraging
              framework both to posit specific questions and to interpret the data
              collected.

This research is significant for several reasons. From the
              standpoint of regional culture history, it will serve to fill a significant gap
              in knowledge of the use of the rugged uplands of Kentucky and thus aid in
              assessing explanations for the early development of food production in North
              America. The project is unusual in its explicit employment of pollen, phytolith
              and macrobotanical evidence to track the development of food production and
              anthropogenic environmental change in eastern North America. Finally, the
              proposed work applies evolutionary ecology to the understanding of
              archaeological data and the explanation of subsistence change. In doing so, it
              promises to contribute to an improved understanding of the underlying processes
              which led to food production on a global scale.

