Title       : Role of eag K+ Channels in Cortical Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0078297

Award Number: 0078297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernardo Rudy rudyb01@med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6974

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078297
Bernardo

The action potential is the universal signal in the nervous
              system throughout the animal kingdom.  Action potentials are very similar in
              different parts of the nervous system and between different animals. 
              Information is instead encoded in the temporal pattern of series of action
              potentials.  Several factors contribute to generating these patterns, among
              these the diversity of ion channels carrying, potassium (K*) ions (K* channels)
              is one of the main contributors to shaping neural signals.  A large number of
              new K* channels have been discovered recently through genetic analysis, and
              this is likely to increase as the full sequence of the genomes of several
              animals becomes known.  A major task of future research is to understand the
              physiological roles of these genes.  This project will study a new K*channel
              gene, known as Eag2, identified and cloned in the applicant's laboratory.  Eag
              genes have been introduced into model cells, where they result in the formation
              properties.  The task is to determine if they have the same properties in their
              native environment in the brain.

To discover the functional roles of Eag
              channels, experiments are design to explore which brain cells normally express
              the products of these genes.  Electrophysiological techniques are then used to
              study their properties in native cells, and their role in shaping neuronal
              signals.  Preliminary studies suggest that Eag genes are specifically expressed
              in neurons in the cerebral cortex that are the main recipients of sensory
              information.  This project will test the hypothesis that Eag channels have
              crucial functions in regulating whether or not sensory information enters the
              cerebral cortex and hence in determining states of consciousness.  This study
              will unravel the function of novel K* channel genes and advance our
              understanding of the mechanisms by which the brain processes application in
              discovering the roles of the newly found genes.

