Title       : SBIR Phase II: Whole Wafer Thermal Imaging for Real-Time Process Monitoring and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0078444

Award Number: 0078444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Cosgrove cosgrove@afrinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harri M. Latvakoski  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06108    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0078444
Latvakoski

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project will develop a real-time, whole wafer sensor for process monitoring and
              fault detection in advanced semiconductor and thin film fabrication processes. 
              The production of future semiconductor and optoelectronic devices will depend
              critically on continued advances in process sensing and control.  In
              present-day manufacturing, process yield and productivity are limited by the
              high sensitivity of layer properties to process conditions, and by an inability
              to control process conditions adequately throughout the process sequence. 
              Current technology relies primarily on open-loop control using indirect sensor
              signals; a costly practice resulting in significant scrap and equipment
              downtime for preventative maintenance.  To address this problem through
              improved closed loop control, this project will develop a high performance
              imaging radiometer with advanced thermographic and wafer mapping algorithms. 
              Phase II includes hardware, software, and applications development that
              addresses important components of the sensor technology for monitoring blanket
              and patterned substrates.  The sensor will provide near video-rate, spatially
              resolved whole wafer measurements of temperature and film properties from a
              model-based analysis of thermal radiance images.  In-house testing on a rapid
              thermal processing tool and field testing on a MOCVD reactor will be
              performed.

Potential commercial applications are anticipated in optimization
              and control of many advanced semiconductor fabrication processes such as rapid
              thermal processing (RTP), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), and metal-organic
              chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).  Improved whole wafer sensors have potential
              for significant increase in the number of process steps performed by RTP and
              thus increase the RTP as a generic process method.  The commercial benefits of
              an in-situ wafer state sensor include reduced scrap, reduced equipment
              preventative maintenance, improved process efficiency, and improved device
              uniformity and performance.

