Title       : NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering: Scaling of
               Microwave Plasma Sources to Small Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0078480

Award Number: 0078480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Grotjohn grotjohn@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jes Asmussen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1062,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This NSF/DOE collaborative research project between researchers at Michigan
              State University and Northeastern University will investigate and establish the
              scientific basis and engineering principles for the design and operation of
              small microwave plasma sources with discharge dimensions ranging from 0.3-10
              mm. Small microwave discharges operate with low input power, while having very
              high power densities and highly reactive species outputs.  The availability of
              physically compact microwave power sources built for mobile communication
              systems combined with small microwave plasma sources opens the possibility of
              many unique microwave plasma applications.  The research project will
              experimentally evaluate and theoretically model the behavior of very small
              microwave discharges, i.e. millimeter and submillimeter size discharges.  Two
              microwave plasma systems will be used including a highly flexible and
              adjustable testbed plasma source and a micromachined, microstrip line-based
              plasma source.  The research methodology is to study, using experimental
              diagnostics and electromagnetic/plasma simulation models, discharges with
              diameters ranging from 10 mm to 0.3 mm in the testbed plasma source.  Then,
              this testbed source knowledge will be used to design, build and test
              micromachined, microstrip line based plasma sources. 

Some of the possible
              applications include plasma sources for MEMS-scale chemical analysis,
              micro-thrusters for spacecraft, miniature electrodeless light sources, and
              miniature sources for spatially focused, plasma-assisted chemical vapor
              deposition. This project will demonstrate two applications including diamond
              deposition on small substrate areas and micro-plasmas for portable, low
              temperature sterilization.
