Title       : SBIR Phase II: Affordable Braille Display Using Novel Microactuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0078660

Award Number: 0078660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Lisy lisy@orbitalresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Orbital Research Inc
	      673 G Alpha Drive
	      Cleveland, OH  441432140    440/449-5785

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1138,9102,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Orbital Research
              Inc. will design and test an affordable, multiline refreshable Braille display
              system (RBDS) able to display computer screen information either from the hard
              drive or the Internet.  The proposed RBDS will combine state-of-the-art
              microelectromechanical (MEMS) actuators with cutting edge electronic assembly
              technology to assure ease in manufacturing and robustness.  Additionally,
              Orbital Research will implement a modular architecture that allows for
              unprecedented versatility through tailoring the Braille surface for various
              applications requested by the end users.  Traditionally, MEMS actuators are
              very small, cost efficient and low power.  However, traditional packaging of
              the MEMS devices results in a much larger and much more expensive component. 
              In Phase I of this project, Orbital Research as produced a MEMS actuator
              capable of producing Braille dots.  In this phase, Orbital Research will
              integrate a flexible assembly process to overcome the traditional complexities
              associated with packaging MEMS actuators.  Orbital Research will take full
              advantage of the features offered by cutting edge manufacturing processes such
              as MEMS, IC processing, flip-chip and surface mount technologies to assure the
              final proposed RBDS is light weight and small in size, cost affordable, robust,
              modula, enables tactile acuity, and is "user friendly."

The refreshable
              Braille Display system proffered by Orbital Research will enhance access to
              electronic information on the job or at home.  It will also provide for
              enhanced educational and employment opportunities for visually impaired
              individuals in line with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
              Act.  This device will create employment and research opportunities for the
              visually impaired, especially for those whose interests extend to mathematics,
              scientific, and technical fields that require frequent access to reference
              works in order to perform their tasks efficiently.



