Title       : Vertebrate Renal Anion Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0078093

Award Number: 0078093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359598             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Larry Renfro jlrenfro@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Physiological demands imposed by the environment are, of course,
fundamentally
              different for marine fish and birds.  The cellular and
molecular processes
              that control inorganic phosphate and sulfate, however,
appear similar, though
              they may be used differently.  It is by comparing
and contrasting these
              systems that we gain insight into the general
principles of ion regulation. 
              The long-term goals of this project are to
better understand the comparative
              physiology of the mechanisms and
regulation of renal transport of inorganic
              phosphate and sulfate. These
anions can alter calcium balance, acid-base
              balance, urinary buffer
capacity, extracellular matrix of bone and cartilage,
              etc., and their
levels are tightly controlled in all vertebrates.  Dietary
              in-take,
intestinal absorption and renal excretion are the sole determinants,
              aside
from growth, of body phosphate and sulfate balance.  Excretion of
              these
anions is a result of renal filtration, reabsorption and secretion. 
              The
kidney is the most important site of regulation of excretion of
              these
anions in the body.  We here propose likely mecha-nisms 
              regulating
phosphate and sulfate transport in members of two verte-brate
              classes
(winter flounder and chicken).  Methods are used which
              permit
characterization of anion transport at several levels of
              organization
(proximal tubule primary cultures, isolated proximal tubule
              brush-border
and basolateral membrane vesicles, and renal clearance).  We also
              have a
reasonable understanding of the basic intracellular signaling systems
              that
activate and inactivate membrane mechanisms for reabsorption or
              secretion
of these anions in both species.   Regulation of transport by
              proximal
tubule involves the interaction of several hormones, acid-base
              status, and
phosphate and sulfate availability.  We will examine a variety of
              hormones
that may control kidney handling of phosphate.  In addition, our
              recent
studies indicate an important role for carbonic anhydrase in renal
              sulfate
secretion by marine fishes.  The enzyme's role probably stems from
              the
membrane anion exchangers responsible for sulfate secretion.  Because
              this
transepithelial transport process is profoundly influenced by
              steroid
hormones in both flounder and chicken, we have here proposed to
              examine a
possible regulatory effect of steroids (including vitamin D3) on
              carbonic
anhydrase activity and renal sulfate transport in both fish and
              chicks.

