Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Nanoreinforced Polymer Composite Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0078990

Award Number: 0078990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Lozano LOZANOK@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1058,1189,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Major Research Instrumentation support will enhance the development of a
              research program at The University of Texas PanAm (UTPA) by acquiring a Torque
              Rheometer, a Dynamic Mechanical Rheometer and an Electrical and Thermal
              conductivity tester. This research program will contribute to fundamental
              understanding of nanoreinforced polymer composites for engineering
              applications.  Project studies will focus on process-structure-property
              relationships for composites prepared by conventional plastic processing
              technologies.  Studies will investigate reinforcement handling, dispersion, and
              reinforcement-matrix interactions.  Effects of the nanoreinforcement on the
              morphological, mechanical, thermal, electrical, and rheological properties will
              be of significant importance for the development of multifunctional materials.
              Conventional manufacturing technologies such as extrusion, injection molding,
              and fiber drawing will be employed as well as advanced manufacturing
              technologies such as rapid prototyping.

UTPA, long respected as a teaching
              institution serving underrepresented minorities, is promoting faculty research
              that will encourage undergraduates to pursue careers in science and engineering
              and train graduate students as leaders in regional industries.  Most of the
              polymer engineering projects will involve UTPA's undergraduates, 85 percent of
              whom are Hispanic and have had limited experience with technical research.  The
              acquisition of the requested instruments will also increase research
              opportunities for faculty from science and engineering departments at UTPA. 
              Finally, the instruments will foster collaborative research with small
              businesses as well as, training programs with the Rio Grande Valley's local
              manufacturing entities, an important segment of which is dedicated to the
              polymer industry.  

