Title       : A Proposal to Support the Next Generation of Curriculum Materials in Science,
               Mathematics and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0103678

Award Number: 0103678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5969813            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Ellen Roseman jroseman@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              George D. Nelson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will build on prior successful work and:

1)  Explore extending
              the applicability of its criteria for evaluating materials to the elementary
              school level and to a greater variety of topics.

2)  Produce a set of
              interrelated on-line databases of instructional components -- research
              summaries, representations, phenomena and questions/tasks that developers can
              use to creat K-12 goals-based textbooks and other materials that focus on
              important ideas and skills in science, mathematics and technology.  It is
              anticpated that these databases will also be valuable to practicing teachers
              (this component forming the basis for Project inservice programs) and to those
              designing preservice courses.

3)  Create an expanded set of conceptual
              strand maps portraying students' growth of understanding for important topics
              such as weather and climate, basic functions of living things, energy
              conservation, and electricity and magnetism; and

4)  Create professional
              development workshop plans and presentation materials designed particularly for
              curriculum materials developers and educators responsible for evaluating and
              selecting textbooks.

In addition, a new component to the initiative
              will:

Design strategies and create materials to help parents,
              decision-makers, and the public in general to understand basic scientific
              literacy.  This component will include the Conover Miller Group/Global Strategy
              Group who will conduct public opinion/market research polls and develop a
              strategic communications plan.  The Project will produce a customized website
              that links the resources of AAAS with other organizations such as the NSTA, NRC
              and the Annenberg/CPB Project to help teachers and parents increase their
              understanding of the important issues related to science education.  This
              component will encourage teachers and parents to become more actively involved
              in their state's efforts to improve science education.

