Title       : NER: Synthesis and Characterization of Genetically Engineered Protein Polymers:
               Effects of Sequence Disorder on Structure-property Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0103468

Award Number: 0103468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Muller muller2@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay D. Keasling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,1676,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nanostructured molecular sensors will report high-resolution spatial and
              temporal system data during industrial processes, health care diagnostics, and
              other applications without significantly affecting the systems they monitor. 
              These nanosensors require specialized elements for sensor attachment to the
              target, assembly of a structural framework, sensing a particular physical or
              chemical state of the environment, and transducing this state into an output
              signal.  Protein receptors offer a paradigm for nanosensor development as they
              have developed domains that perform each of these functions.  It is proposed to
              develop a protein-based nanosensor based on the paradigm of cell adhesion
              complexes.  Upon receiving the appropriate environmental stimulus the sensor
              will self-assemble subunits for supporting structural roles, sensing signals,
              and generating chemical messages.

The initial aim of the project is to
              optimize adhesion of a sensor subunit to an inert solid matrix. 
              Glutathione-S-Transferase (GST) will be employed to adhere GST-fusion proteins
              to glutathione, a GST ligand, covalently linked to a glass surface.  The next
              project goal is to demonstrate detection of an enzymatic modification of the
              GST fusion protein on the surface.  A GST fusion of a tyrosine kinase ligand
              will be attached to the surface and activation, or phosphorylations, of the
              ligand will be detected using radioactive phosphate or antibodies that
              specifically recognize phosphorylated proteins.  The final stage of the project
              will investigate detection of sensor activation based on recruitment of
              structural and signaling components to an activated sensor subunit. 
              Phosphorylated tyrosine residues bind to SH2 protein domains.  An SH2 domain
              will be fused to a fluorescent protein, enabling detection of sensor activation
              by a simple fluorescence measurement.

