Title       : NIRT: Biologically Based Assemblies of Electronic Materials at the Nanoscale;
               Improving on Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0103473

Award Number: 0103473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela M. Belcher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Korgel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen S. Browning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0103473
Angela Belcher, University of Texas Austin

This
              proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE)
              solicitation, NSF-00119, in the category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research
              Teams (NIRT). 

Biological systems efficiently and accurately assemble
              nanoscale building blocks into complex
and functionally sophisticated
              structures with high perfection, controlled size and compositional
uniformity.
              The self-organizing processes found in these systems rely largely on
              non-covalent interactions that enable elegant rearrangement between usable
              architectural forms and self-correction.  The research will take advantage of
              the atomic composition and plane specific recognition that a biomolecule can
              exhibit for an inorganic phase, and the nanostructural control and regularity
              that biomolecules typically impose on crystal phases and crystallographic
              orientations to control nanostructure formation. Furthermore, RNA templates
              will be used to direct the parallel self-assembly of multiple electronic
              components with high precision. Using combinatorial peptide evolution, peptide
              sequences will be identified that select for and bind to specific nanocrystal
              and nanowire substrates, such as magnetic and semiconductor quantum dots and
              silicon nanowires synthesized in solution. The peptides provide recognition
              specificity between the biological molecules and the inorganic substrate. The
              peptides couple the inorganic electronic "building blocks" to the biological
              machinery that directs the architectural "blueprints" for organization. In
              essence,  genetically encoding biological-electronic interactions are selecting
              the mRNA sequences that code for specific amino acid sequences, but beyond
              that, specific secondary and ultimately tertiary structures can be achieved;
              thus, leading to supermolecular architectures. 

An interdisciplinary effort
              will include synthetic chemistry, electrical and materials engineering, and
              molecular biology, which targets the development of specific recognition
              chemistries between biological and inorganic substrates for the creation of
              nanostructured materials and devices with novel applications. The proposed
              project offers highly interdisciplinary educational and research opportunities
              for graduate students. 

