Title       : NER: Direct Electron Beam Writing for Fabrication of Functional Nano-Scale
               Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0103061

Award Number: 0103061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff S. Drucker jeff.drucker@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Kouvetakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was recieved in response to NSE, NSF-0019. Focused electron beam
              decomposition of molecules adsorbed on surfaces will be investigated as a means
              for fabricating electrical contacts to individual or small arrays of
              nanostructures.  This direct write technique offers a convenient, flexible and
              practical method for bridging the gap between mesoscopic lithography and the
              nanoscale.  Of primary importance is the purity and resistivity of the
              deposited film.  Resistivity will be correlated with process parameters by
              depositing between predefined metallic contact pads.  Contamination of
              deposited metallic features will be avoided by using inorganic precursor
              molecules such as TaF5,  TiCl4 and WF6 .  Film purity will be determined in
              situ ,using standard surface science techniques.  Preliminary estimates of
              write speeds achievable in environmental electron microscopes indicate that 1:1
              aspect ratio,nm-scale wires can be written at rates of 0.1 um /sec. 
              Additionally, use of environmental electron microscopy will allow simultaneous
              identification and contacting features of interest.  The flexibility of this
              technique will allow tailoring the deposited structures for different
              applications.  Examples are nanowires for electrical contacts, metal nanodot
              arrays for attachment of functionalized organic molecules or specially shaped
              metal gates deposited on semiconductor surfaces to allow charge confinement and
              manipulation in nanoscale regions.  Thus,success of this technique will enable
              rapid prototyping of diverse concepts cutting across several nanoscience and
              technology subfields.  Longer term, the capability for e-beam writing of entire
              nanodevices is envisioned.  Electron-beam decomposition of inorganic species
              leading to growth of semiconductors and insulators will also be investigated. 
              Novel precursor chemistries will be developed for e-beam growth of insulating
              and semiconducting phases compatible with Si-based nanoelectronics. 
              Essentially,this is an athermal method for depositing nanoscale features at
              temperatures below that for which the features 'melt' via surface diffusion of
              deposited atoms.
