Title       : NIRT: Molecular Nanomagnets: Magnetic and Electronic Properties of Novel
               Magnetic Nanostructures and Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0103455

Award Number: 0103455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1680000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald G. Naugle naugle@physics.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim R. Dunbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn Agnolet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F. Albert Cotton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valery L. Pokrovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,1682,1767,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on synthesis of nanoscale magnetic molecules whose
              magnetic and electrical properties can be tailored by design, and on techniques
              to "wire" these molecular magnets together to create new nanostructures and 
              nanostructured magnetic materials. The impact of these nanostructured materials
              on material science may be comparable to that of fullerenes and nanotubes. The
              studies will focus on high-symmetry molecules, for which phenomena associated
              with quantum coherence (resonance effects, high magnetic susceptibility,
              generation of radiation with adjustable frequency) can be observed at
              reasonable temperatures. Research goals include: 1) designing and synthesizing
              new magnetic nanoscale molecules; 2) understanding the quantum properties of
              these large-magnetic-moment molecules; 3) assembling new nanostructures from
              these molecular building blocks that will exhibit magnetic and electronic
              effects useful for a new type of electronics based on electronic spin;
              4)understanding the interaction of these molecules in complex nanostructures.
              Graduate students will learn state-of-the-art technology and develop skills
              that prepare them for careers in industry, academia or government. Selected
              high school, junior college and four-year college teachers will participate in
              the research in outreach efforts.
%%%
This research  focuses on synthesis of
              nanoscale magnetic molecules whose magnetic and electrical properties can be
              tailored by design, and on techniques to "wire" these molecular magnets
              together to create new nanostructures and nanostructured magnetic materials.
              Research goals include: 1) designing and synthesizing new nanoscale magnetic
              molecules; 2) understanding the quantum properties of these
              large-magnetic-moment molecules; 3) assembling new nanostructures from these
              building blocks that will be useful for a new type of electronics based on
              electronic spin; 4) understanding the interaction of these molecules in complex
              nanostructures. This project will establish foundations for a new spin
              electronics technology with potential applications in data storage, mobile
              communications and quantum computing. Graduate students will learn
              state-of-the-art technology, and develop skills that prepare them for careers
              in industry, academia or government. Selected high school, junior college and
              four-year college teachers will participate in the research in outreach
              efforts.


