Title       : Alexandrov's Geometry and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0103957

Award Number: 0103957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton Petrunin petrunin@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract DMS-0103957:

The project contains the following main topics: 
1.
              Approximation of Riemannian 
manifolds by polyhedral metrics and
              generalization of Alexandrov embedding
theorem. The PI has proved that
              approximability by polyhedral metrics
implies a new kind of curvature bound
              which appears naturally but has never been
considered in geometry before. The
              proof is interesting in its own right,
as it uses a Lemma closely resembling
              the Alexandrov embedding theorem
(which states that any positively curved
              metric on a 2-sphere is isometric
to a convex surface in a Euclidean space).
              This brings us back to a more
geometrical point of view on Riemannian
              Geometry, according to which
``interesting'' curvature bounds should arise
              from properties of
embeddings of manifolds into Euclidean space. This circle
              of ideas also
gives a new approach to the old conjecture that every simply
              connected
Riemannian manifold with positive curvature operator is
              diffeomorphic to a
sphere; 
2. Collapsing with lower curvature bound. The
              general goal of this topic
is to understand how collapsing with lower
              curvature and diameter bounds
happens and, in the very best case, to construct
              a structure analogous to
the one obtained by Cheeger-Fukaya-Gromov for the
              case of bounded
curvature.
3. Gate spaces.  Gate spaces are related to a
              circle of problems arising
from the question of K.Grove of whether there is an
              Alexandrov space that
has two different smoothings into Riemannian manifolds
              of the same
dimension and lower curvature bound;
4. Applications of megafolds
              to collapsing with bounded curvature and to 
Ricci flow.  Megafolds are a
              generalization of Riemannian manifolds and
orbifolds that has already proved
              it usefulness for collapsing with
bounded curvature; in particular, they were
              used by the PI to prove, in
coloboration with W.Tuschmann, the main part of
              the Klingenberg-Sakai
Conjecture. Such a collapsing also arises naturally from
              the rescaling of
the Ricci flow; it can be used to construct singularity
              models for the
Ricci flow with no injectivity radius estimates; 
5. Theory of
              Alexandrov spaces.  Alexandrov spaces appear naturally as
limits of Riemannian
              manifolds with lower curvature bound. Most geometric
results which are true
              for Riemaninan manifolds with lower curvature bound
are also true for
              Alexandrov spaces; however, there are several such
results that cannot be
              generalized. For example, it is not known whether a
convex hypersurface in an
              Alexandrov space is also an Alexandrov
space. Such problems are mostly due to
              the lack of local analysis, and
that is what the PI proposes to
              study.


Riemannian manifold, which could be considered as a simplified
              version of
space-time, is a way too complicated object. The first topic in
              this
proposal is aimed at studing Riemanian manifolds by means of
              approximation
by simpler objects. These objects are polyhedral spaces, i.e.
              spaces glued
of Euclidean polyhedra. The other topics considers a different
              approach to
studing Riemannian manifolds. It is based on considering extremal
              metrics,
in an appropriate sense, for example how Riemannian manifolds
              collapse to
lower dimenssional objects. This method makes possible to get new
              results
in the main stream direction of Riemannian geometry: how to
              make
conclusions about global structure of space basing on local
              properties.


