Title       : NER: Nano-Textured Surfaces: Super-Hydrophobicity and Liquid Adhesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0103514

Award Number: 0103514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick F. Lange flange@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103514
Lange
               This proposal was submitted in response to the
              solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119)
   Surfaces can
              be made either super-hydrophobic or super-hydrophilic by producing a textured 
              surface that resembles hills and valleys, provided that the wetting angle of
              the liquid on a flat surface of the same material is > 90 degree .   The
              mechanism that produces the effect is based on the fact that the liquid only
              wets the tops of the hills and gas (air) is trapped within the valleys. Simple
              analytical functions have been developed for different periodic, textured
              surfaces to show that the wetting angle is related to the area fraction of
              wetted 'hills' and the wetting angle for a flat surface.  
The lotus leaf is a
              natural example of a super-hydrophobic surface.  In 1997, micron size wax bumps
              were discovered to produce this effect.   Water drops on the lotus leaf are
              nearly spherical (q ~ 170 degree) and easily roll around collecting dust
              particles to produce a self-cleansing effect that has made the lotus plant
              revered for its purity. Synthetic super-hydrophobic surfaces have been produced
              by coating a surface with a  'rumbled' thin film and with a micromolding
              method. These surfaces  are promising for practical applications that include
              rain-repellent surfaces, surfaces designed to decrease the resistance to fluid
              flow, and surfaces designed for selective liquid condensation.
Recently, we
              demonstrated that super-hydrophobic surfaces could be produced by simply
              dip-coating a substrate into a slurry containing small, dispersed particles. 
              The particles were attracted to the substrate by to their opposite surface
              charge, relative to the substrate.  We demonstrated that the area fraction and
              particle size can be systematically controlled and that surfaces can be
              textured with commerically available particles in the range of 5 nm to 300 nm. 
              By reacting the surface with fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane molecules, a flat
              surface is rendered hydrophobic, and super-hydrophobic, when textured.
We
              observed that the super-hydrophobic effect was related to the area fraction of
              adsorbed silica particles and that the super-hydrophobic effect disappears when
              the average spacing between the spherical particles exceeds a critical value. 
              When the particles are very small the water droplet shows absolute adherence to
              the surface.  Both of these latter two effects can be predicted with the
              Laplace equation, which relates the equilibrium curvature of a meniscus to the
              pressure exerted by the water drop.  
Systematic experiments are planned with
              nano-textured surfaces to study these two new phenomena in relation to specific
              functions derived with the Laplace equation.  This will be accomplished using
              glass substrates that will be coated with colloidal silica particles that are
              commercially available in the size range of 5 nm to 300 nm. The prepared
              nano-textured surfaces will consist of randomly distributed silica sphere on a
              glass substrate. The silica particles will be fixed to the substrate by
              sintering. The nano-textured substrates will then be reacted with
              fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane molecules to ensure optimum hydrophobicity.  All
              experiments will be conducted with deionized water on nano-textured surfaces
              treated with the same fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane molecules.  With these
              constrains, the surface energy per unit area, g, and the contact angle of a
              flat surface, q, will be keep constant.
Spontaneous Wetting Experiments: 
              Spontaneous wetting will occur when the Laplace pressure exceeds a critical
              value to produce an instability; spontaneous wetting is expected to be a strong
              function of both the area fraction and particle size. Experiments will be
              designed to determine the validity of this expected result that can be
              formalized as an analytical equation.  These experiments will include contact
              angle measurements vs. drop size, area coverage and particle size (5 nm to 300
              nm).  
Adhesion Experiments : Tilting experiments will be carried out to
              measure the a) advancing and receding contacts angles and b) the critical angle
              for drop movement, all as a function of the drop size and the characteristics
              of the textured surface (area fraction and particle size).  Experiments will be
              carried out to determine the critical drop size that can still adhere to the
              surface when the substrate is held up-side down; these results will be related
              to an analytical equation that describes the critical pressure for spontaneous
              de-wetting.
***


