Title       : NIRT: Zeolitic Materials for Nanoscale Electronics and Quantum Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0103034

Award Number: 0103034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1160000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Soghomonian soghomon@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. McCord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sergio E. Ulloa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean J. Heremans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas E. Bonesteel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103034
Soghomonian

This proposal addresses an avenue toward self-assembled
              collections of molecular electronic devices, via the synthesis, experimental
              characterization and theoretical study of zeolitic materials as hosts for
              single-electron transistors.  The open zeolitic framework is synthesized to
              possess single-electron transistor functionality at lattice sites.  Individual
              addressability is obtained through the conducting framework of the zeolitic
              material: some chains of the framework carry current, others fulfill the role
              of voltage gates.  The individual chains comprising the zeolitic structure are
              in turn connected to external, macroscopic, metallic electrodes by flexible and
              functionalized biopolymers such as DNA wires.  This cross-disciplinary endeavor
              also addresses quantum-computational aspects of the zeolite transistor arrays
              and lithographic two-dimensional analogs, and comprises theoretical and
              experimental studies of the collective charge transport phenomena that surface
              in arrays of interconnected nanoscale or molecular devices.
%%%
Molecular
              electronics promises to shrink electronic devices to the nanoscale, by
              utilizing properties of chemical species at the molecular level.  This project
              aims to adapt zeolitic materials to host vast arrays of molecular-scale,
              single-electron transistors.  The transistors are formed during the crystal
              growth, as part of the crystal lattice, and thus vast numbers of near-perfect,
              near-identical devices may be produced at once.  The problem of accessing each
              of the electrical locations on the crystal/chip is solved through the inherent
              conducting chains of the zeolitic material.  The result is a self-assembled and
              chemically contacted dense and vast array of single-electron transistors, with
              implications for future quantum-computational architectures, nanoelectronics
              and memory devices.  Educationally, graduate, undergraduate and two-year
              technical college students will be introduced to new interdisciplinary concepts
              with potential future impact in a variety of disciplines.

This proposal was
              submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering"
              (NSF 00-119). The award is jointly supported through this initiative within the
              Ceramics and Electronic Materials programs of the Division of Materials
              Research in MPS.

