Title       : The Role of Coulomb Interactions in Low Carrier Density, Disordered Sytems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0103892

Award Number: 0103892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. DiTusa ditusa@rouge.phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Experiments exploring itinerant magnetic and nearly magnetic states in low
              carrier density metals and semiconductors are the focus of this research
              program. Such materials are particularly sensitive to external magnetic fields
              as is apparent in their transport, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties. This
              sensitivity results from mechanisms unrelated to those found in the well
              studied local magnetic systems where carrier scattering can be controlled by
              magnetic fields. Instead, disorder, poor screening, and strong exchange
              interactions lead to surprisingly large and robust quantum interference
              effects. The control over carrier densities, disorder, and magnetic ground
              states that these materials offer, along with their sensitivity to magnetic
              fields, suggest that innovative device technologies may result from these
              investigations. Other experiments included in this program involve the
              exploration of many body effects in low dimensional systems such as bulk
              one-dimensional magnets and homogeneous ultra-thin films. This research
              involves undergraduate as well as graduate students and participants in the
              Teach For America program who obtain a full exposure to experimental science
              from the synthesis, characterization, and careful measurement of the materials,
              to the data analysis and publication of results. 
%%%
Many of the new
              concepts for advanced electronic device design rely not only on the electronic
              carrier charge, but also on the carriers intrinsic angular momentum, or spin,
              as well. Much of the progress in realizing these novel technologies has been
              made in semiconducting and metallic systems where local magnetic moments,
              magnetic moments associated with the ions that make up the crystal lattice, are
              either intrinsic to the material or can be added as impurities. In this
              research program we are exploring magnetic systems where the magnetism and
              electrical conduction are due to the very same electrons in order to search for
              novel physical properties. These itinerant magnetic systems may offer greater
              control over both the magnetic and electronic attributes, which may allow
              innovative design technologies. The focus of this experimental program is the
              exploration of materials and mechanisms by which sensitivity to external
              parameters, and thus controls of physical properties occur. This research
              involves undergraduate as well as graduate students and participants in the
              Teach For America program who obtain a full exposure to experimental science
              from the synthesis, characterization, and careful measurement of the materials,
              to the data analysis and publication of results. 


