Title       : NIRT: Molecular Brushes as Components for Nanomechanical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0103307

Award Number: 0103307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei S. Sheiko sergei@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Rubinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Matyjaszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0103307
Sheiko

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).  Miniature actuators, which
              produce large strains at short response times are of interest for nano- and
              biotechnologies. They can be used to construct micro fluidic pumps, tiny
              locomotives, and micromanipulators. It is generally believed that extremely
              efficient and fast actuators can be prepared from single macromolecules.
              Cylindrical brush molecules consisting of a flexible backbone and densely
              grafted side chains are possible candidates because they can change their
              length in response to variations in their surrounding environment and the
              effect of an external field. It is proposed to use soft cylinders with a
              stimuli-responsive shape as a multifunctional platform for the development of
              nanomechanical devices. One of the most interesting applications is envisioned
              for an array of molecular brushes, which are tethered with one end to a solid
              substrate and change their conformation under incident light. The layers will
              be designed to generate surface-relief-gratings, which propagate along the
              substrate plane and transport different fluids, small particles, and ultimately
              biological cells. For this purpose, either IR-absorber dyes or photosensitive
              azobenzene and spiropyran moieties will be introduced in the chemical structure
              of brushes. Similar to tracheal cilia, the tethered molecules will beat back
              and forth in a coordinated way and propel overlaying substances in a certain
              direction.

The project will address three fundamental questions:

(i) What
              are the molecular and external parameters controlling the length of brush
              molecules?

(ii) What is the force developed during contraction/extension of
              brush molecules?

(iii) What are the dynamic properties of the tethered
              brushes under the effect of polarized light?

The PI's will achieve their
              goals of answering these important questions by taking the following steps.
              First, they will prepare a series of well-defined brushes and investigate the
              specific effects of the side chain length, the grafting density, and the
              photoisomerizable groups on the length of brush molecules. Second, they will
              study mechanical properties of individual molecules and tethered monolayers by
              stretching them uniaxially with an atomic force microscope and magnetic
              tweezers. The experimental studies will be supported by theoretical analysis of
              brush conformations. Third, an optical set-up combined with an atomic force
              microscope will be built for in-situ investigation of the morphology and the
              diffraction efficiency of the surface relief grating. This will allow the
              measurement of the access and relaxation times of the double-brush monolayer,
              and the monitoring of the transport of the overlaying substances.

This
              interdisciplinary project will be based on precise chemistry, rigorous physics,
              and biological concepts. It presents a perfect opportunity for students to
              master several of these fundamental disciplines and at the same time gain
              experience at the cutting edge of nanotechnology.


