Title       : NIRT: Collaborative Research: Spin Transport and Dynamics in Nanoscale
               Hybrid-Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0103302

Award Number: 0103302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jia G. Lu jgl@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shan X. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. O'Handley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jagadeesh S. Moodera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team brings together expertise in
              state-of-the-art spin-tunneling science with proven success in fabrication and
              characterization of single-electron transistors.  The goal here is to
              understand science in spin-based nano-fabricated structures by probing the
              quantum states and dynamics of spins on nano-sized islands, laying the
              foundation for a new generation of ultra-fast and non-volatile electronics.
              This program begins with the fabrication of simple nanostructures based on
              proven single-electron transistor architecture and processing, with
              ferromagnetic electrode(s) to inject polarized spins.  These new nanoscale
              hybrid structures will be used to test various theoretically predicted
              phenomena such as enhanced magnetoresistance, single-electron charging effects,
              conductance oscillations, and spin diffusion. One of the novel features of this
              effort is to inject fully polarized spins into nonmagnetic materials such as
              carbon nanotubes, nonmagnetic metals, and superconductors, by spin filtering
              through the use of a magnetic semiconductor. Ultimately, the localization of a
              single-electron of controlled spin in a highly sensitive nanostructure will
              enable novel and more versatile spin-based devices, which so far is being
              pursued based on the behavior of large numbers of spin-polarized electrons.
              This program represents an excellent opportunity for the students (of all
              levels) involved being educated in the nanoscience; participate in a true team
              effort with complementary and collective goals. The students will work in
              multidisciplinary areas - physics, materials science, and nano-devices, getting
              trained and educated in the spin-based research laying the foundation for
              future technology, which is already in short supply in the U.S. 
%%%
The
              recognition of electron spin as a binary variable analogous to its charge as
              currently used in semiconductors, opened new fields of science and technology
              that have already led to commercial devices, called spin electronics. This
              interdisciplinary team will address the underlying fundamental science and
              engineering research issues that are critical to the emerging field of
              nanoscale spin electronics (also called as spintronics). In spite of the recent
              progress and potentially promising for applications, the field of spintronics
              just beginning to unravel, (remains largely unexplored) and requires extensive
              research efforts.  The proposed research (elucidating spin transport including
              spin tunneling and injection from a ferromagnet into a nonmagnetic metal,
              superconductor or a semiconductor) holds great promise for nanoscale science
              and future information technology. This aim is supported by the investigation
              of promising new materials combinations for spin transport and the development
              of powerful, innovative probes of spin dynamics in nanostructures. This team,
              with complementary knowledge and expertise - of physicists, material scientists
              and electrical engineers, will efficiently address all the issues from the
              conceptual level to the near-device stage.  The proposed program will
              ultimately lead to novel spin electronic devices that meet the criteria for low
              power, broadband, and ultra high density including extremely powerful
              computers. Many PhD students, and importantly undergraduates and high school
              students will take part in this program under the guidance of the PIs and
              postdoctoral fellows. The training will generate future scientists and
              engineers in high demands in the area of nano-science and spin-based
              information technology to maintain the future technological prowess of the
              country, critically necessary for the national security. 
***

