Title       : Nanoscale Exploratory Research: Dispersion of Nanopowders in Solidifying Molten
               Metals and Formation of High-Strength Nano-Composite Solders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0103159

Award Number: 0103159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98565              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guo-Xiang Wang gwang@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tirumalai S. Srivatsan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1676,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project is an exploratory study aimed
              at understanding the key physical mechanisms governing the dispersion of
              nano-particles in molten metals and the concomitant solidification of the
              nano-particle-reinforced molten metals resulting in the formation of
              nano-particle reinforced composite solders having attractive combinations of
              strength, durability and reliability.  Carefully orchestrated and planned
              experiments will be performed to produce nano-particle reinforced composite
              solders based on commercial tin-lead and lead-free solder mixtures blended well
              with nanopowders.  In the first phase of this research nanopowders of copper,
              iron, molybdenum and nickel will be chosen and in the follow phase nanopowders
              of titanium dioxide and aluminum oxide will be the candidates. Innovative
              techniques will be developed after several trial and error experimentation to
              establish an efficient means for blending the nano-powders with the micron-size
              powders of the solder resulting in a molten solder mixture having a near
              uniform dispersion of nanoparticles.  Quantitative measurements will be
              conducted to characterize the dynamics of solidification of the composite
              molten solder mixture.  Metallurgical observations using both optical
              microscopy and scanning electron microscopy will be made to characterize the
              nature, morphology and distribution of intrinsic microstructural features and
              the presence and distribution of artifacts such as micro and macro porosity,
              voids and microscopic cracks.  Mechanical tests, to include microhardness,
              tensile deformation and cyclic fatigue, will be conducted to demonstrate the
              overall superiority combination of mechanical properties of the nano-particle
              reinforced composite solders. 

It is anticipated that the findings of this
              research study will provide a viable solution to engineering high strength
              materials by adding trace amounts of nanopowders into a solidifying molten
              metal to form nano-particle reinforced composite.  The engineered composite
              solders will have attractive combinations of strength; damage tolerance and
              durability coupled with improved reliability thereby enhancing the  probability
              of its use on in a spectrum of microelectronic and opto-electronic devices and
              assemblies. Results of this research exercise will also have far reaching
              consequences beyond soldering materials.  It is expected that the study would
              also shed light on several fundamental issues related to the formation of
              nanoparticle-reinforced metallic and even non-metallic composites.  A study of
              the influence of nano-particles on crystalline nucleation kinetics and
              microstructural development will contribute to enhancing our understanding of
              modern solidification theory.

