Title       : Control of Nanostructures Via Metal-Carbon Interactions Over Multiple Length
               Scale Via Metal and Metal Carbide Nanojunctions and Nanowelds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0103585

Award Number: 0103585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1125000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Foley hankfoley@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. W. Castleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Eklund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent H. Crespi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Albert Vannice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The main technical theme of this research is to undertake an interdisciplinary
              study (chemical engineering, physics and chemistry) of the structuring and
              restructuring of nanophase carbons, including nanoporous carbons, nanotubes,
              nanoropes, C60 fullerene and MetCars and the nanoscale processes leading to
              control of specific metal-carbon interactions. The main purpose is to study 
              rearrangenment of amorphous carbons into nanocrystalline domains by the action
              of alkali and transition  metals, welding of carbon nanotubes to one another
              through the formation of metal carbide nanojunctions and other metallic
              nanowelds, bonding of three dimensional structures consisting of vertically and
              horizontally oriented carbon nanotubes oriented orthogonally and welded through
              the metal-carbide nanojunctions, and the fabrication of monolithic metal
              carbide membranes with regular, uniform and aligned pores (vias) through the
              bulk normal to the average macroscopic membrance surface. The near term
              intellectual products of this research will lead to novel nanofabrication
              processes and to unique nanomaterials that can be used for electronic,
              mechanical and chemical applications.
%%%
The direct products of this
              research will be new physics, new chemistry, and  new materials nanofabrication
              processes. The students trained in these interdisciplinary nanomaterials areas
              will be highly competitive in the nanoscience and -technology based industrial
              job markets of  nanomedicine, nanoelectronics and nanochemical structures and
              processes. This grant is being co-funded by the Solid State Chemistry, Ceramics
              and Metals Programs of the Division of Materials Research, and the Kinetics,
              Catalysis and Molecular Processes Program of the Division of Chemical and
              Transport Systems.

