Title       : FETI Algorithms for Mortar Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0103588

Award Number: 0103588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan S. Edelman EDELMAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Stefanica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator, Dan Stefanica, extends the Finite Element Tearing and
              Interconnecting (FETI) algorithms to mortar methods, thus taking advantage of
              the inherent flexibility of the mortar elements.  He establishes that the
              resulting algorithms preserve the convergence properties of the FETI methods
              for conforming elements.  This agrees with extensive numerical experiments for
              FETI algorithms for low order mortar finite elements.  He checks whether the
              condition number estimates obtained for the FETI algorithms for mortars are
              sharp.  He extends the FETI method to spectral methods and mortar spectral
              elements, by providing numerical and theoretical convergence analysis for these
              algorithms.  Finally, he designs Dual--Primal FETI algorithms for both
              geometrically conforming and geometrically nonconforming mortar methods.
              

The algorithms analyzed in this project are part of the larger family of
              domain decomposition methods, which are powerful, fast, and easily
              parallelizable methods for the numerical solution of partial differential
              equations arising from a large spectrum of practical applications.  The
              investigator couples one of these methods, the FETI method, with a versatile
              discretization of the equations, called the mortar method.  Thus, he is able to
              solve problems with very complicated geometry while concentrating most of the
              computational effort on resolving the critical parts of the problem.  The FETI
              method has already been implemented in huge parallel codes for a large spectrum
              of applications.  Improvements in it developed by this project will be
              important for such applications as aerospace design, computational mechanics
              and fluid flow problems.

