Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Mesostructured Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0103952

Award Number: 0103952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey I. Zink ZINK@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the synthesis and properties of mesostructured thin films
              of metal oxides based on surfactant and block copolymers as the
              structure-directing agents.  A central concept involves the chemically
              different and spatially separated regions of the mesostructure.  On the
              molecular level, the mesostructures consist of two distinct regions: the
              "framework" that is formed by the sol-gel metal oxide, and the "organic" region
              that is formed by the template.  The project contains two complementary
              objectives.  The first objective is to deliberately place dopants in specified
              regions of transparent mesostructured silica.  The location of specific
              molecules will be characterized by optical spectroscopy, and the spatial
              relationships between multiple dopants will be probed by energy transfer. The
              second objective is to synthesize semiconductor frameworks in mesostructured
              films and to characterize their formation processes.  Mesostructured films of
              tin dioxide will be synthesized and optical probes will be used to monitor and
              interpret the dynamics of both micelle and metal oxide framework formation. 
              The optical methods to be used provide 50 nm resolution of the dynamic
              transformations taking place in a time frame of a few seconds over film
              dimensions of several centimeters.  The experiments are directed at determining
              the evolution that occurs from the dissolved "unimer" (individual dissolved
              copolymer molecules) to the micelle to the mesostructured metal oxide film. 
              These dynamic measurements will correlate the chemical changes and structural
              development occurring as the film is deposited.  The second set of experiments
              will monitor the development of the semiconductor framework.  Electron
              transport in mesostructured films will be measured and interpreted.  
%%%
The
              prospects for creating mesostructured films with unique electrical and optical
              properties. The development of these novel materials will have a significant
              impact on the fields of optical physics, and device areas such as sensors for
              medical applicatons (e.g., implants and in vivo and in vitro biosensors).
              Students trained in these areas will compete very favorably in the job market. 
              This project is to be funded jointly by the Chemistry Division and the Division
              of Materials Research.

