Title       : 100 Years of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) - A Paradigm for Transgenic Organisms:
               A Critical Scientific Assessment to be held March 30-April 1, 2001, in Tucson,
               Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0103809

Award Number: 0103809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher A. Cullis                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Nester   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda S. Thomashow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              100 Years of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)- A Colloquium                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
One of the major issues
              in the public domain today is the controversy regarding the cultivation of
              modified plants. This issue is international in scope and involves farmers,
              consumers, pesticide manufacturers, environmentalists, and multinational
              corporations. Heated debates on the Internet and demonstrations on the streets
              outside meeting rooms have ensured that these issues receive daily press
              coverage. 

Perhaps the single trait most vigorously discussed is the use of
              the toxin of the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). The gene for this toxin
              has been cloned and introduced into a wide variety of plants, including cotton,
              corn, and wheat. Previously, the toxin has been sprayed on crops- apparently
              without ill effects-protecting primarily against Lepidopteron insects.

A
              major controversy has not erupted with the demonstration that, under certain
              conditions, the toxin will kill monarch butterflies. The use of Bt to improve
              plants serves as the paradigm for all genetic engineering of plants.

The
              primary objective of the proposed colloquium is to consider all aspects of Bt,
              but focus on modified plants. We will analyze the scientific background of Bt
              and consider such questions as its mode of action, mechanism of insect
              resistance to the toxin, and its effect on nontarget organisms. Other questions
              that will be considered are questions of food safety of modified plants,
              threats to biodiversity from the use of Bt, and the effect on the use of
              chemical pesticides resulting from these modifications. We plan to convene this
              colloquium March 30-April 1, 2001, in Tucson, Arizona.

Although the toxic
              properties of Bt were discovered a century ago, this is the first far-ranging
              colloquium that has been held on this subject. The colloquium will bring
              together scientists with broad expertise to consider the science of an issue
              with broad political and social implications. Participants will have expertise
              in the following scientific disciplines: microbiology, entomology, ecology,
              population biology, risk assessment, and plants. Following the colloquium, a
              report will be developed-in both print and electronic formats-that will be
              analytical and comprehensive, yet offer practical recommendations.

