Title       : NER: Dynamic Behavior of Ligand-Receptor Interactions in Living Cells on the
               Nanoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0103080

Award Number: 0103080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Wang wangr@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nick Menhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported by the Division of Integrative Biology and
              Neuroscience, will be carried out by Dr. Rong Wang, Dr. Nickolas Menhart and
              their students at the Illinois Institute of Technology.  The target of the
              research is to develop a novel approach that allows a real-time study of the
              dynamic behavior of individual ligand-receptor pairs (typical size of several
              nanometers) in the living cell environment.  The essence of this approach is to
              guide the tip of the atomic force microscope (AFM) to desired receptor proteins
              regardless of the roughness and complexity on the cell membrane surface. 
              Besides imaging of biomolecules at the submolecular level under physiological
              conditions, dynamic and kinetic processes of the biorecognition events can be
              clarified on the nanoscale.  
The research will involve novel experiments
              aimed at fundamental studies of single ligand-receptor interaction in the
              natural environment. This will provide the molecular basis for biological
              activities and molecular communications within cells.  One of the promising
              applications is to elucidate a vaccine or drug target at the particular
              cell-surface protein in a diseased cell or an activator target in a growth
              cell.  This revolutionary approach shows strong promise to elevate the
              development of the fundamental understanding of molecular functions in
              bioscience to an entirely new level, and will stimulate progress in the study
              of biological and biologically inspired systems in which nanostructures play an
              important role.

