Title       : Asymptotic Problems for Stochastic Processes and PDE's
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0103589

Award Number: 0103589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97599              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Freidlin mif@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Several classes of asymptotic problems are considered.  The averaging principle
              for deterministic and stochastic perturbations, asymptotic problems for
              reaction-diffusion equations, and problems related to stochastic resonance are
              among them.  The long-time evolution of perturbed systems with conservation
              laws, even in the case of purely deterministic perturbations, leads, in
              general, to stochastic process on complexes defined by the conservation laws. 
              So the classical averaging principle (say, for deterministic perturbations of
              integrable Hamiltonian systems when the Hamiltonian has many critical points)
              should be treated in the stochastic framework.  In this research small
              diffusion asymptotics for reaction-diffusion in an incompressible 2D-fluid,
              which is closely related to the averaging for Hamiltonian systems, is studied. 
              Another class of problems concerns the large deviation theory and stochastic
              resonance.  A number of new effects such as large amplitude oscillations and
              stabilization induced by the small noise in autonomous systems are
              considered.

The asymptotic approach is one of the most powerful tools of
              applied mathematics.  In particular, the averaging principle plays the leading
              role when systems combining multi-scale processes are considered.  Such
              problems arise in mechanics, in material sciences, in biophysics, and in other
              areas.  This research does not just consider problems concerning the
              mathematical justification of the averaging principle, but also describes new
              applications and new effects.  In recent years stochastic-resonance-type
              effects, which first appeared in the theory of long-time evolution of the
              climate, have attracted the attention of specialists in many areas of physics,
              engineering, and biology.  The mathematical theory of these effects is 
