Title       : Mathematical Analysis of the Orientation of Symmetric Particles Sedimenting in
               Newtonian and Viscoelastic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0103970

Award Number: 0103970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni P. Galdi galdi@engr.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the last 40 years the study of the motion of small particles in a viscous
              liquid has become one of the main focuses of applied research. The presence of
              the particles affects the flow of the liquid, and this, in turn, affects the
              motion of the particles, so that the problem of determining the flow
              characteristics is highly coupled. It is just this latter feature that makes
              any fundamental mathematical problem related to liquid-particle interaction a
              particularly challenging one. The goal of this project is to furnish a
              mathematical analysis of one of the several important and still not completely
              understood aspects of this fascinating subject, namely, the orientation of
              homogeneous, symmetric particles sedimenting in Newtonian and viscoelastic
              liquids. In particular, the PI intends to furnish a quantitative and rigorous
              explanation of the challenging "tilt-angle phenomenon" that is observed in
              certain viscoelastic liquids, where particles orient themselves at a preferred
              angle with the main flow. The angle depends on the shape of the particle, their
              mass and on the physical properties of the liquid. Liquid models such as
              Oldroyd-B with shear-dependent viscosity will be used, along with some suitable
              analytical tools (the "splitting method") that the PI with his collaborators
              has been developing over the last few years for the study of well-posedness of
              several viscoelastic liquid models.

The orientation of homogeneous long
              bodies in liquids of different nature is a fundamental issue in many problems
              of practical interest. In composite materials, the addition of short fiber-like
              particles to a polymer matrix will to enhance the mechanical properties of the
              material; for instance, it could make the material softer or harder, and more
              durable. The degree of enhancement depends strongly on the orientation of the
              fibers and the fiber orientation is in turn caused by the flow occurring in the
              mold. Another important application occurs in separation of macromolecules by
              electrophoresis. Modern applications include weight determination of proteins,
              DNA sequencing, and diagnosis of genetic disease. Electrophoresis involves the
              motion of charged particles (macromolecules) in solution, under the influence
              of an electric field. The orientation of the molecules plays an important role,
              since it is responsible for the loss of separability during steady-field gel
              electrophoresis. A final, but not less important application of particle
              orientation, occurs in blood flow, where the blood cells under certain flow
              conditions tend to chain themselves along the axis of the artery at certain
              preferred angles (tilt angle). 

