Title       : Nanoscale Single-electron Switching Arrays for Self-evolving Neuromorphic
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0103059

Award Number: 0103059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin K. Likharev klikharev@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Mayr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1674,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to carry out a detailed multi-disciplinary study of
              single-electron
latching switches and of possible use of 2D arrays of such
              switches for hardware
implementation of self-organizing (plastic) neuromorphic
              networks. Preliminary estimates
show that such networks may provide
              unparalleled possibilities for complex information
processing. By these
              estimates, the networks may also have remarkable scaling properties:
if
              implemented using a 10-nm technology, they may have density about 10 8 neurons
              per
cm 2 at manageable power dissipation below 100 W/cm 2 , and feature full
              learning cycle time
of the order of a few seconds. This scaling gives every
              hope that the networks will be able,
after initial (largely unsupervised)
              learning, not only provide complex information processing
including complex
              image recognition, but possibly reproduce biological evolution of the
cerebral
              cortex at a time scale some 6 orders of magnitude shorter.
The objective of
              the proposed project is to carry out a preliminary study of this
remarkable
              opportunity, addressing all its basic aspects at several structural levels.
              In
particular, research will include the following components:
A.
              Single-electron switch node design (D. Averin, K. Likharev, J.
              Wells).
Detailed theoretical analysis and modeling (on two basic levels of
              single-electron transport
theory) of statics, dynamics, and statistics of the
              proposed single-electron latching switches.
B. Low temperature prototyping (J.
              Lukens). Fabrication and experimental
study of Al/AlOx/Al prototypes of
              single-electron latching switches, with the goal to scale
single-electron
              islands down to 100 nm and tunnel junctions to 10 nm, respectively,
              which
would bring the reliable operation temperature up to about 10 K.
C.
              Molecular single-electron device development (B. Brunschwig, J. Lukens,
A.
              Mayr). Exploration of the opportunity to implement the basic component of the
              switches,
the single-electron transistor, by chemical self-assembly of
              molecular components. The
molecular components will be deposited in solution
              on the prefabricated metallic wire
structures, and then characterized using a
              set of electrical, electrochemical, and time-resolved
laser-spectrometry
              methods.
D. Top level modeling and analysis (J. Barhen, M. Bender, K.
              Likharev).
Large-scale computer simulation and a partial analytical study of
              the growth, dynamics, and
self-adaptation of neuromorphic networks based on
              these switches.
Hopefully, the project will achieve enough progress to justify
              a large-scale R&D effort
in this exciting direction. In particular, a reliable
              evidence of self-organization of adaptive
neuromorphic networks during largely
              unsupervised learning would certainly be followed by
the first hardware
              implementations of sizable networks (possibly, after an initial stage
              of
purely-CMOS-based prototyping using commercially available FPGA
              technology).
The project will have a substantial educational component.
              Specifically (besides
participating in general educational Stony Brook
              initiatives), at least 4 FTE graduate
students will be involved in the project
              each year, and some 20 undergraduate and
graduate students will take part in
              the project during its full 4-year period. At least one
student will work in
              BNL and one in ORNL most of the time. Working in a multi-disciplinary
team
              will allow these students to overcome inter-departmental barriers in their
              education.
As another specific educational initiative, we plan to organize a
              Web-based undergraduate
course on massively parallel supercomputing and neural
              networks, using the IBM SP3
computer at Oak Ridge.
Work on the inter-related
              aspects of this multi-disciplinary project will be constantly
coordinated by
              its P.I. (K. Likharev). In particular, regular meetings of all Stony Brook
              and
Brookhaven participants of the team working on the project (including
              postdoctoral
associates and students), and annual meetings with Oak Ridge
              collaborators, are planned.
