Title       : CISE Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Parallel
               Hierarchical Methods for Computational Electromagnetics (CCR-NSG; ACIR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0103748

Award Number: 0103748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Aluru aluru@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0103748
Aluru, Srinivas.
Iowa State University

CISE Postdoctoral Associates
              in Experimental Computer Science: Parallel Hierarchical Methods for
              Computational Electromagnetics

The goal of this research is to develop
              parallel algorithms and build parallel software for the solution of a wide
              variety of problems involving the computational analysis of electromagnetic
              scattering.  Specific problems of interest are: 1) electromagnetic scattering
              from quasi-planar surfaces, 2) dielectric random rough surfaces, 3) multiregion
              surfaces, 4) three-dimensional problems where the fields are characterized by
              frequency and 5) three-dimensional problems where the field behavior is
              dependent on time history.  The unifying theme in addressing these problems
              will be the use of the hierarchical Fast Multipole Method and its variants.  A
              major goal of the research is to develop the capability to solve highly
              non-uniform problems efficiently.  Emphasis will be placed on the development
              of distribution-independent algorithms, i.e., provably efficient algorithms for
              which the run-time is independent of the distribution without making any
              assumptions on either the range of distributions or the limited precision of
              computer arithmetic.  The postdoctoral research associate will develop and
              validate software employing these algorithms in close cooperation with experts
              in electromagnetics at Iowa State University.  Validation of the results will
              be carried out via comparisons against experimental data as well as numerical
              results obtained from slower, established solvers.  The associate will perform
              experimental evaluation of the performance of the software using conventional
              parallel computers and high-performance clusters.



0103748
Aluru,
              Srinivas.
Iowa State University

CISE Postdoctoral Associates in
              Experimental Computer Science: Parallel Hierarchical Methods for Computational
              Electromagnetics

The goal of this research is to develop parallel algorithms
              and build parallel software for the solution of a wide variety of problems
              involving the computational analysis of electromagnetic scattering.  Specific
              problems of interest are: 1) electromagnetic scattering from quasi-planar
              surfaces, 2) dielectric random rough surfaces, 3) multiregion surfaces, 4)
              three-dimensional problems where the fields are characterized by frequency and
              5) three-dimensional problems where the field behavior is dependent on time
              history.  The unifying theme in addressing these problems will be the use of
              the hierarchical Fast Multipole Method and its variants.  A major goal of the
              research is to develop the capability to solve highly non-uniform problems
              efficiently.  Emphasis will be placed on the development of
              distribution-independent algorithms, i.e., provably efficient algorithms for
              which the run-time is independent of the distribution without making any
              assumptions on either the range of distributions or the limited precision of
              computer arithmetic.  The postdoctoral research associate will develop and
              validate software employing these algorithms in close cooperation with experts
              in electromagnetics at Iowa State University.  Validation of the results will
              be carried out via comparisons against experimental data as well as numerical
              results obtained from slower, established solvers.  The associate will perform
              experimental evaluation of the performance of the software using conventional
              parallel computers and high-performance clusters.




