Title       : NIRT: Integration of Carbon Nanotubes, Magnetic Nanocrystals, and Silicon
               Microstructures for Ultra-High-Resolution Magnetic Force Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0103548

Award Number: 0103548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Moler kmoler@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongjie Dai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Kenny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Moungi G. Bawendi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9102,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) is one of the most promising and best-known
              techniques for probing magnetic phenomena on length scales approaching 10
              nanometers, but the spatial resolution of MFM is presently limited to about 30
              nanometers. Factors limiting the spatial resolution include both the the force
              sensitivity of the cantilevers used for MFM and the ability to create
              controlled magnetic nanostructures on the cantilevers.  The PIs propose that
              MFM sensors based on the integration of nanomagnets, carbon nanotubes, and
              optimized silicon microstructures can push these limits to allow sub-10-nm
              spatial resolution. The PIs individually have experience in atomic force
              microscopy, novel magnetic microscopies, the growth of single-walled and
              multi-walled carbon nanotubes, the integration of carbon nanotubes with silicon
              microstructures, the growth and characterization of cobalt nanomagnets and
              nanorods, and the fabrication of high-bandwidth ultra-sensitive force
              cantilevers with integrated displacement sensors.  This research requires the
              participation of an interdisciplinary research team, populated by a collection
              of graduate and undergraduate students from many departments in science and
              engineering. The fabrication of these sensors will require the integration of
              advanced nanomaterials and modern fabrication processes, benefiting researchers
              and industrial developers. The processes that are developed during the course
              of this research will be published in the NNUN's on-line process library, as
              well as in research journals. Undergraduate and graduate students whose
              research includes the development of these techniques and their application to
              materials science will be well suited to make ongoing contributions to
              nanoscience and technology. 
%%%
Research on "nanomaterials" such as
              bucky-balls, nanotubes, nanomagnets, molecular manufacturing, and many other
              examples has led to excited speculation regarding the technological promise of
              nanoscience. However, these nanotechnologies do not easily merge with
              conventional technologies, including microfabrication. Stanford has recently
              demonstrated methods for localizing the growth of carbon nanotubes on specific
              locations within a conventional microfabrication process, a breakthrough that
              could allow nanotechnology to approach important technological applications.
              The propsed work would use this breakthrough to integrate nanotubes and
              nanomagnets into MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) fabrication, producing a
              useful new family of ultrasensitive physical probes and developing realistic
              processes for the integration of nanomaterials and silicon
              microstructures.

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).  The award is jointly
              supported through two directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences and (ii) Biological Sciences. Additional support comes from the
              National Facilities and Instrumentation program of the Division of Materials
              Research (DMR).


