Title       : NIRT: Nanostructured Optoelectronic Materials: New Concepts in Theoretical
               Design, Synthesis, and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0103009

Award Number: 0103009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry R. Dalton dalton@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Jen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Steier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses theoretical methods to
              design new families of nanostructured building blocks and to guide the assembly
              of these blocks into mesoscale lattices. Dendritic and molecular self-assembly
              synthetic techniques will be used to implement theoretically-inspired nanoscale
              structures. Novel 3-D circuit fabrication techniques will be employed to
              pattern materials on both the nano and mesoscales to achieve integration of
              nanoscale materials with traditional micron scale optics and electronics.
              Equilibrium statistical mechanics and kinetic Monte Carlo theoretical methods,
              relevant to treating long-range and spatially-anisotropic intermolecular
              electrostatic interactions, will be refined and implemented. Theory will be
              used to guide design of the shape of nanoscale molecular objects to permit
              realization of highly-ordered mesoscale acentric molecular lattices. Such
              organic lattices do not occur naturally but are critical to device-related
              phenomena of electro-optic (EO) activity, unimolecular rectification, and
              photorefraction. Kinetic Monte Carlo calculations will also be employed to
              investigate nanoscale phase separation and molecular ordering phenomena and to
              guide the development of processing conditions relevant to the realization of
              optimized nanostructured acentric material lattices. Precisely sized and shaped
              nanoscale dendrimers permit inhibition of unwanted intermolecular electrostatic
              interactions and the realization of a wide range of desired auxiliary
              properties. Included are  low optical loss at telecommunication wavelengths,
              high thermal and photochemical stability of induced acentric molecular order
              (electro-optic activity), and processability that permits the fabrication of
              buried channel EO waveguides and the integration of such waveguides with VLSI
              electronics and with fiber optics. Second order nonlinear optical chromophores
              (required for EO activity) can be assembled into a variety of dendrimer
              structures including those containing multiple chromophores. The operation of
              dendrimer-based EO devices requires half the drive voltages and extends to
              twice the bandwidth of current commercial lithium niobate devices. EO
              dendrimers can be constructed using fluorinated and cyanurate dendrons, which
              reduce optical loss at 1.55 microns telecommunications wavelength to 0.1-0.2
              dB/cm. Use of such dendrons also permits precise control of material refractive
              index relevant to circuit integration. Surface functionalization of dendrimers
              with crosslinkable moieties can lead to materials with exceptional thermal and
              photochemical stability. EO chromophore-containing dendrimers will be assembled
              into electro-optic materials by a variety of methods including sequential
              assembly and self-assembly methods; however, the primary method employed for
              such assembly will be electric field poling. Once prepared, dendrimer-based EO
              materials will be fabricated by reactive ion etching, two-photon lithography
              and multi-color lithography into 3-D passive/active optical circuitry, which
              will be integrated with semiconductor VLSI drive electronics and silica
              transmission fibers. Organic EO materials will also be integrated with photonic
              bandgap structures and with controlled-birefringence block copolymer and
              layered organic materials to realize special device performance. A variety of
              devices, including spatial light modulators, phased array radars, ultra high
              bandwidth signal sources and detectors, etc., will be fabricated and evaluated.
              
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science with high technological relevance. The proposed research and
              the format of education/technology exchange contribute to positive economic and
              social impacts. An integrated research/education program based on an
              undergraduate student/graduate student/faculty team will be implemented
              building upon experience NSF-IGERT, NSF-EEC, UW UIF Nanotechnology Center, and
              UW international exchange programs. A new course will be offered to permit
              wider dissemination of specialized nano-engineering tools developed in this
              research/education program. Extensive interactions exist with industry,
              government laboratories, and international research centers. The project is
              co-supported by the DMR/EM, ECS/PFET, and EEC Divisions.
*** 

