Title       : NER: A Block Copolymer Precursor Approach to Novel Functional Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a0103000

Award Number: 0103000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy W. Mays   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel P. Gido  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF 00-119.  This Nanoscale
              Exploratory Research award is part of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
              (NNI).  It will exploit self-assembly of block copolymers of styrene and
              1,3-cyclohexadiene into a core-shell cylinder-in-cylinder morphology, followed
              by crosslinking of poly(cyclohexadiene) (PCHD) and removal of the polystyrene
              (PS) segments, as a means for producing novel functionalized PCHD nanotubes. 
              PCHD may be aromatized to poly(phenylene) (PP), a strong, crystalline, and
              thermally stable engineering polymer.  As an alternative, PCHD can be
              carbonized by pyrolysis.  These materials will be thoroughly characterized in
              terms of their sized, shapes, surface chemistry and mechanical properties.  To
              conduct this work, an interdisciplinary collaboration between the polymer
              chemistry group of Dr. Jimmy Mays (University of Alabama at Birmingham, UAB)
              and the polymer physics/morphology group of Professor Sam Gido (University of
              Massachusetts, UMass) is proposed.
%%%
Composites incorporating such
              nanotubes could lead to a new class of robust, lightweight, high strength
              materials.  By controlling molecular weight and processing conditions, we
              should be able to create nanotubes of varying radius, wall thickness, and
              aspect ration.  By varying the composition of the block copolymer, other shapes
              besides tubes (cylinders, plates) can also be made.  Reactive hydroxyl groups
              present on the surface of these molecular objects can be used to manipulate
              their processing characteristics and to provide strong bonding to matrix
              materials.  The PP nanotubes may be insulating or they may be made conducting
              by doping.  Such materials could be used as component in a smart composite
              designed to transmit an electronic signal, for example, if impacted. 
              Opto-electronic, nanoprobe, and medical applications are also envisioned for
              these materials.

