Title       : RUI: Some Problems in Percolation and Stochastic Dynamics of Ising Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0103994

Award Number: 0103994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The aim of this research is to study several random spatial models on various
              infinite graphs. Four topics concerning stochastic dynamics of Ising spin
              systems, the random cluster and Ising ferromagnetic model, and the contact
              process are proposed to be studied. The first topic concerns stochastic
              dynamics of an Ising spin system on an infinite lattice where spins evolve
              according to the usual Glauber dynamics. Some typical questions are: does a
              spin flip infinitely many times or only finitely many times? what is the
              probability that a spin has not yet flipped at time t? The second topic is
              about Ising models on hyperbolic lattices. Although Ising models on the
              hypercubic lattices have been studied intensively and extensively since they
              were introduced, these models on hyperbolic lattices have just started to
              receive attention from physicists and mathematicians. They are found, by both
              numerical studies and mathematical proofs, to exhibit a phenomenon of multiple
              phase transitions. Although some results have been rigorously proved, many
              statements suggested by numerical studies are to be proved, and many more are
              to be explored. Some GHS type inequalities in the random cluster model and a
              related question of uniqueness of the random cluster measure are the contents
              of the third topic. The final topic deals with phase transitions of models with
              low-dimensional inhomogeneity. These models include percolation, Ising
              ferromagnetic systems and contact processes.
	Models of the sort to be studied
              in this research arise naturally from physical sciences. Percolation is a
              probabilistic model of studying flow through a discrete disordered system, such
              as particles flowing through the filter of a gas mask, or fluid seeping through
              the interstices of a porous medium, while the contact process can be regarded
              as modeling the spread of an epidemic through a population.

