Title       : An Interdisciplinary Approach to Understanding the Growth of Nanoporous
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0103010

Award Number: 0103010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Monson monson@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raul F. Lobo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Auerbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dionisios G. Vlachos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Tsapatsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0103010
P. Monson, U of Massachusetts Amherst 

This proposal
              was submitted in response to solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              (NSF 00-119)" and requests support for an interdisciplinary research program
              concerned with understanding the growth of nanoporous materials- focusing on
              zeolitic materials. A research program in this area will have immediate impact
              on an enormous worldwide effort for developing porous materials with properties
              tailored at the nanoscale for applications such as catalysis or separations.
              Moreover, a central feature in the growth of such materials is the assembly of
              supramolecular precursor particles to form complex organic-inorganic structures
              with crystalline order. This mechanism is paradigmatic for the synthesis of a
              whole range of new materials, ranging from substrates for quantum confinement
              and laser applications to biomaterial implants with controlled porosity and
              nanostructure.


The proposal has its origin in a collaboration among some
              of the PI's on the problem of crystal growth of silicalitc-1 zeolite, in which
              important features of a growth mechanism involving the formation and assembly
              of subcolloidal zeolite particles were elucidated. The collaboration featured
              both experimental work and modeling of the growth process. As this work
              developed it became clear that further progress would be greatly enhanced with
              a larger research team. In particular, it was clear that expertise was required
              in detailed atomistic modeling of the growth process as well as in
              characterization by light scattering and atomic force microscopy. The NSF NIRT
              initiative has created an opportunity for this research team to come to full
              fruition. Our interdisciplinary team involves researchers in four departments
              at the Universities of Massachusetts and Delaware, partnerships with companies
              at the forefront of applications of nanoporous materials and collaboration with
              a government laboratory.

The project is divided into two main research
              areas:

 Synthesis, Purification and Structure of Subcolloidal
              Particles:

Assembly of Subcolloidal Particles and Silicalite Crystal
              Growth

In addition to elucidating fundamental aspects of zeolite growth, we
              anticipate that in the longer term our research will lead to novel assembly
              methods and the development of new materials grown by assembly of subcolloidal
              zeolite particles. Each of our research areas will feature both experimental
              and modeling investigations. A spectrum of modeling techniques will be employed
              spanning length scales from the atomistic level, required to understand the
              formation and structure of subcolloidal zeolite particles, to the mesoscopic
              level, required to understand the crystal growth habit of zeolite materials.
              

The research program has substantial educational component including: the
              development of new graduate courses on nanoscale materials and on computational
              materials science at both partner Universities, industrial internships for
              graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, as well as involvement of
              undergraduate students in the research. 

