Title       : Self-Assembly of Magnetic Nanostructures and Related Enabling Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0103587

Award Number: 0103587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Weili Luo Luo@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Belfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aniket Bhattacharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This multi-disciplinary proposal will unite researchers from physics, chemistry,
              and biology to work synergistically on a coherent project that involves one
              basic concept, the development and synthesis of novel materials from
              self-assembled magnetic nanostructures whose configuration and/or functions can
              be tuned and controlled by external fields. We will demonstrate that, by
              understanding physical mechanism of self-assembly and field-controlled
              phenomena and by bringing together two frontiers of the new century---the
              nanoscale science and the field of soft matter, we will be able to develop
              functional materials that enable new technologies ranging from memory devices,
              drug delivery agents, field-controllable nanomachines, magnetically actuatable
              polymers, and many other liquid, gel, or solid devices.
We propose to perform
              experimental and theoretical research to study the conditions for self-assembly
              phenomena in surfactant-stabilized magnetic fluids. Experimental observations
              using scattering techniques such as neutron and light scattering, imaging
              (Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)/Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM)), and
              thermodynamic measurements (e.g. heat capacity) will be supported and evaluated
              by using computer simulations. We propose to use realistic quaternion molecular
              dynamics simulations in viscous media to study the dynamics of isomer
              transitions under varying conditions and to present a correct interpretation of
              the experimental results. Based on the configuration of self-assembled
              structures in zero field and its response to external fields, novel structures
              can be synthesized that have important applications.
The proposed research
              will provide the basis for the design of new, smart materials and externally
              controlled systems that can respond to an external environment through the
              unique combination of theory, computer simulations, and experimental
              investigations. This work will have an important impact in applied physics,
              chemistry, material sciences, biology and medicine, and device industries. Our
              approach aims to facilitate the education of tomorrow's scientists in
              nanoscience and technology through the involvement of students in every aspect
              of proposed research.

