Title       : Engineered Nanoparticle Electronic and Photonic Device Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0103543

Award Number: 0103543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry A. Atwater haa@daedalus.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Flagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). We propose a joint Caltech/NASA-JPL/Agere
              Systems research program to develop new materials for Si nanocrystal
              nonvolatile memories and related nanoscale electronic devices. Under the
              program:

o	New aerosol-based Si nanoparticle and nanowire engineering
              methods will be developed to enable formation nanoparticle and nanowire arrays
              with precise control of particle size, particle number and array structure.
              These methods 'will be compatible with Si ultralarge scale integrated (ULSI)
              circuit process technology.
o	Aerosol-synthesized and colloidally processed
              silicon nanoparticle and nanowire arrays with novel configurations will be
              integrated into Si-based metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) devices at
              state-of-the-art device dimensions yielding nanometer-scale memory
              devices.
o	A dielectric heterostructure layered tunnel barrier will be
              developed to achieve simultaneous ultrafast chargc injection and extremely long
              charge retention times, which are mutually exclusive for existing conventional
              dielectric tunnel baffler designs.
o	Nanocrystal charging via electrical
              injection and photoexcited carrier injection will be studied to assess layered
              tunnel barrier performance and to determine whether quantum size effects on the
              density of electronic states can be exploited for control of electronic
              charging energy.

The focal point of the work is a recently demonstrated
              high-performance aerosol silicon nanocrystal memory device, developed by the
              present nanoscale interdisciplinary research (NIRT) team under prior NSF
              support. Silicon nanoparticles comprise the floating gate that is the storage
              node of a nanocrystal nonvolatile memory. Aerosol synthesis allows control of
              Si nanocrystal size and shape that are difficult to achieve by other synthesis
              methods. Uniquely, our team has successfully integrated vapor-synthesized
              aerosol nanoparticles into a high-performance silicon-based electronic device,
              fabricated at 0.18 micron design rules on 200 mm substrates by ultraclean
              processing at state-of-the-au device dimensions. Extensive electrical
              characterization of transistor subthreshold and turn-on performance, retention
              time, program-erase cycling, gate and drain disturb characteristics indicated
              that these devices are high performance memory devices. The Caltech/JPL/Agere
              NIRT team is unusual in its combination of basic research on new electronic
              materials developed at Caltech followed by direct materials integration into a
              flexible, state-of-the-au silicon device process carried out at Caltech and
              Agere System's fabrication facilities.

