Title       : NER: Molecular Dynamics Study of the Transverse Current During the Translocation
               of DNA Through a Fabricated Nanopore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0103140

Award Number: 0103140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shengting Cui scui@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Ramsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hank D. Cochran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0103140
Cui
This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.  A
              promising new method for rapid DNA sequencing will be explored. Molecular
              dynamics simulations will be performed to establish the potential feasibility
              of a proposed method for resolving individual bases of single-strand DNA in
              aqueous electrolyte medium being driven through an artificially fabricated
              channel of nanometer cross section by an axial electric field. The magnitude
              and duration of electrical current variations will be determined between a pair
              of biased electrodes positioned transverse to the channel axis, as individual
              bases on the fully-elongated DNA strand are driven between the electrodes. The
              crucial feasibility issues to be explored in this calculation are the
              reproducibility of the current signature of a given base, the
              distinguishability of one base's signature from others', and the magnitude of
              the signature compared with random fluctuations. If calculations demonstrate
              the feasibility of this approach, there will be strong incentive to study it
              further both experimentally and computationally, for it offers the potential to
              speed up DNA sequencing from ca. 0.3 bases per second using current technology
              based on the Sanger method to perhaps millions to billions of bases per second.
              Such rapid sequencing could enable sequencing of an individual genome within
              time scale and cost appropriate for individual diagnostics and genome-based
              treatment. Techniques exist today that, in principle, allow fabrication of
              channels of ca. 2 nm cross section with embedded electrodes of dimensions
              comparable to those of a single base. Experimental realization of such systems
              is expected within the next few years. Already, experiments with DNA and RNA
              detection during electrically-driven flow through nanometer scale protein pores
              in natural membranes have excited great interest, but these systems fall far
              short of the promise of the fabricated channels proposed for study and have
              many other disadvantages, as well. Success in the proposed exploratory
              simulations is certain to stimulate and guide efforts toward experimental
              realization and will provide the tools for optimizing and understanding these
              future experiments.
