Title       : Dynamics and Control of Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0103895

Award Number: 0103895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Bloch abloch@math.1sa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0103895
 
PI: Anthony M. Bloch

Dynamics and Control of Mechanical
              Systems

Abstract:

This is a proposal for the continuation and extension
              of the 
proposer's research into the dynamics and control of nonlinear
              
mechanical systems in finite- and infinite-dimensions. In 
particular,
              research is proposed in the following areas: integrable 
dynamical systems in
              finite- and infinite- dimensions including both 
Hamiltonian and nonholonomic
              systems, the stabilization and control of 
nonlinear mechanical systems via
              energy methods and the extension of 
these methods to systems with
              nonholonomic (nonintegrable) constraints, 
the geometry of the smooth and
              discrete dynamics of rigid bodies, and 
the control of quantum mechanical
              systems. A general area of interest 
that encompasses several parts of this
              proposal is the relationship 
between energy preservation and asymptotic
              behavior in dynamical systems 
and between reversible and irreversible
              behavior. In the integrable 
systems area the proposer is interested in the
              nonabelian Toda lattice, 
infinite-dimensional generalizations of Toda, and
              generalized smooth 
and discrete rigid body systems. Finally he intends to
              analyze the 
dynamics and control of various coupled mechanical systems in
              both the 
classical and quantum regimes.

This proposal is aimed at studying
              the behavior of various mechanical 
systems that are important for
              applications in science and engineering. 
These include systems such as
              wheeled or articulated robots, aerospace 
systems, submarine vehicles, and
              quantum (microscopic) devices. Quantum 
devices, where the laws of motion of
              atoms and molecules play a key role, 
have become increasingly important in
              such areas as communication and 
coding theory. In addition to studying the
              behavior of these systems 
the proposer intends to analyze their control and
              optimal control -- 
that is, to provide methods for using such systems in
              engineering 
applications in a practical, stable, and efficient manner. The
              proposer
intends to analyze various key examples of such mechanical systems
              with 
mathematical structure which is particularly amenable to
              detailed
qualitative and quantitative analysis. Further, the proposer intends
              to
analyze the transition between the behavior of systems at the
              quantum
(microscopic) level and the large scale (macroscopic) level. This
              
transition is important for the application of physical devices in the 
real
              world as well as interesting from the scientific point of view. 



