Title       : Creating Windows of Opportunity for Success in the SMET Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0103501

Award Number: 0103501
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3007411            (Estimated)
Investigator: Johnnye M. Jones johnnye_jones@jarvis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glendora Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Syed M. Muniruzzaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jarvis Christian College
	      P.O. Box 1470
	      Hawkins, TX  75765    903/769-5882

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Jarvis Christian College, ``the college with the personal touch and where
              
dreams come true,'' proposes an aggressive and comprehensive model
              Historically 
Black College and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
              engaging a 
community of academic partners working together to significantly
              increase minority 
participation and access to science careers. The Program
              goal is to develop, 
implement, evaluate and institutionalize a program that
              will achieve and sustain a 
high quality and competitive science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology 
(SMET) education program. The comprehensive
              program proposed for Jarvis 
emphasizes the following four elements:
              Pre-College Outreach Programs; 
Undergraduate Student Scholars; Faculty
              Development Opportunities; and 
Curriculum, Equipment and Laboratory
              Development. The specific objectives are: 
(1) to implement a summer
              enhancement and skills development summer workshop 
for rising high school
              students who have demonstrated an interest and aptitude in 
the science areas
              that will ensure that 80% of the participants will complete the 
twelfth grade
              and enroll in college as a SMET major; (2) to implement a summer 
``bridge''
              program for students entering Jarvis in the Fall that will impact 90% 
success
              rate during the first year; (3) to develop an implement a Scholars program
              
customized to achieve 90% undergraduate retention and graduation rates and
              
result in at least 70% enrollment in graduate or professional SMET programs;
              (4)to 
develop and implement a comprehensive faculty development program,
              develop 
new curricular offerings and expand existing courses for improvement
              and (5) to 
increase diversity and the number of SMET majors by 20% annually.
              
All proposed activities support the mission of the National Science
              
Foundation, ``to provide access to quality science education for all
              students'', and 
the mission of Jarvis Christian College, ``to provide a
              quality education to increase 
the competitiveness of its students in
              post-baccalaureate efforts.'' The extensive 
evaluation process and the
              involvement of the total college community and the 
community partners will
              insure its success. This proposed Jarvis Program 
represents the model for
              ``Creating Windows of Opportunity for Success in the 
SMET areas.'' 


