Title       : NIRT: Multi-Scale Modeling and Simulation of Adhesion, Nanotribology and
               Nanofluidics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0103408

Award Number: 0103408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark O. Robbins mr@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiyi Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noam Bernstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Francois Molinari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103408
Robbins
This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).

This Nanoscale
              Interdisciplinary Research Team brings together investigators from a research
              university (Johns Hopkins), the Naval Academy, and the Naval Research
              Laboratory, with backgrounds in physics, chemistry, mechanical engineering and
              materials science.  Together they will develop new multiscale modeling tools
              and apply them to problems in adhesion, nanotribology and nanofluidics that are
              of both fundamental scientific interest and technological importance.

One
              approach to multiscale modeling will be hierarchical.  Results from different
              scales will be calculated independently, and the outputs used to determine
              inputs needed at other scales.  For example, atomic scale
calculations will
              provide constitutive relations and boundary conditions for continuum
              calculations, while continuum calculations determine contact geometries and
              stresses for atomic calculations.  The second approach will involve
              simultaneous calculations at multiple scales.  Specific strategies for linking
              tight-binding simulations to classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and
              for linking MD to continuum solid and fluid calculations are
              described.

Studies of adhesion will examine how surface roughness, surface
              chemistry, and capillary forces affect stiction.  This is the major cause of
              failure in micromachines and becomes more important as device size
              decreases.
Research on nanotribology will start from contact geometries
              determined in the adhesion studies.  Quantitative comparison between continuum
              mechanics and MD simulations will be performed at different scales to determine
              how continuum mechanics breaks down and at what scale.  The effect of molecular
              structure of boundary lubricants, surface roughness, and other factors on
              friction in nanocontacts will be studied.  Work on nanofluidics will focus on
              changes in flow as the mean free path becomes comparable to some dimensions of
              the flow path, with an emphasis on understanding lubricant transport to and
              around nanoscale contacts.

Participation in the project will give
              undergraduate and graduate students, midshipmen and postdoctoral fellows a
              unique multidisciplinary educational experience that will be strengthened by
              newly developed course sequences.  Modeling tools developed by the team will be
              designed for portability and to be integrated into publicly available
              simulation tools.
***
