Title       : Anatomy of a Biodiversity Hotspot: Marsupial, Rodent, and Bat Diversity in
               Northwestern Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0103711

Award Number: 0103711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Mares mamares@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ANATOMY OF A BIODIVERSITY HOTSPOT: MARSUPIAL, RODENT, AND BAT DIVERSITY IN
              NORTHWESTERN ARGENTINA

A three-year survey of marsupials, rodents, and bats
              in northwestern Argentina will be conducted.  This is the southernmost part of
              the Tropical Andes Hotspot designated by  Conservation International as the
              biologically richest area in the world when data on plants, amphibians,
              mammals, birds, and reptiles are considered together, supporting an exceptional
              concentration of endemic species.  The region also is considered "Vulnerable,"
              "Regionally Outstanding" biologically, and has been given the Highest Priority
              at both an International and Regional Scale by the World Bank.  This
              biogeographically significant region is largely unexplored biologically. The
              study area, 469,000 km2, encompasses the high- and low-elevation Andean region
              and the pre-Andean foothills of the provinces from Jujuy to La Rioja. Major
              habitats include puna, prepuna, Yungas forest, montane grasslands, Chaco,
              montane Chaco, and Monte desert. Microhabitat diversity is high and numerous
              isolated valleys and montane islands exist. The area is a natural corridor for
              north-south migration of biota and has been hypothesized as a center of
              diversity for many taxa. It is an ideal area for geographic isolation and
              subsequent speciation. While the region is being recognized as the most
              biologically diverse in the world, it also is undergoing exceptional rates of
              loss of habitat. Economic development activities involving agriculture,
              overgrazing, tourism, deforestation, mining, dam construction, and oil and gas
              exploration are placing considerable stress on all habitats. 

Marsupials,
              rodents, and bats will be surveyed at numerous localities in northwestern
              Argentina and voucher specimens will be collected and deposited in museum
              collections. Data on habitat use, habits, molting, reproduction, and natural
              history will be recorded. A project database, accessible through the SNOMNH web
              site, will provide information on identifications, localities, and specimen
              data. Surveys, checklists, and identification keys will be produced in print
              and electronic format. New taxa will be described. 

Research will examine
              phylogenetic relationships, biogeography, and conservation. Data will aid in
              choosing sites for preservation and provide baseline information on habitat
              selection, reproduction, and species composition for major habitats in this
              threatened region. Related projects include the development of an expedition
              website, submission of a proposal for an REU supplement, and submission of a
              proposal for an ISE (Informal Science Education) supplement. The project will
              include collaborators from the US and Argentina. Argentine and US students will
              be supported and trained in the field and in the laboratory.



