Title       : NER: Magnetic "Smart-wires" for Spintronic Nanostructured Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0103430

Award Number: 0103430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Tonner tonner@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hiroshi Matsui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.

The  project
              involves blending of molecular biology, polymer chemistry, and materials
              physics, in an attempt to create a new class of spin-tronic functional
              nanostructures.  A  new architecture is proposed to create  
spin-tronic
              magnetic devices, using a biologically modified, metal coated, polymer nanotube
              process. The advantages of spin-tronics include higher speed, greater storage
              density, low power dissipation, and non-volatility. The proposed  architecture
              uses a form of molecular self-assembly based on biological models. The magnetic
              nano-wires are formed from a tubular polymer backbone, that can be coated with
              various metallic layers. By functionalizing the ends of the tubes with special
              molecules, the nano-tubes become what we call "Smart Wires". Smart-Wires are at
              the center of our proposed new architecture for nanoscale device fabrication,
              since the instructions for "wiring" the circuits are built into the molecular
              nanostructures 
themselves, rather than having to be imposed afterwards using
              a patterning process. The "Smart-Wires" use molecular recognition, modeled
              after the biological antibody-antigen bonding reaction, to attach the wire ends
              to the appropriate substrate structures.  Under this  project metal coated
              nano-tube will be fabricated and the work will be extended to include the
              "Smart Wire" functionalization and bonding, and also metallic 
multilayer
              coatings.  A  full range of sensitive magnetic and electronic probes will be
              used  to measure the nano-tube properties, using methods perfected in a
              previous NSF project to study epitaxial spin-valve structures. The research
              team plans to develop a prototype of a magnetic nano-tube assembly with a
              switchable magnetic state.

