Title       : Game-Theoretic Variance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0103811

Award Number: 0103811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jozsef Beck jbeck@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator outlines how to continue his work started in the prior proposal
              to develop a new, probabilistic  approach to positional games (i.e.
              combinatorial board games).  The straightforward way to analyze a position is
              to examine  all of its options and all the options of these options and all the
               options of the options of these options and so on.  The obvious difficulty of
              this exhaustive search through the game-tree is that it takes enormous amount
              of time.  An attempt to make up for the lack of time is to study the random
              walk on the game-tree, i.e. the randomized game where both players play
              randomly.  The basic idea is that the statistical analysis of the randomized
              game can be  efficiently converted via potential arguments into deterministic
              optimal strategies.  It is basically a game-theoretic adaptation of the
              so-called Probabilistic Method in Combinatorics ("Erdos theory") applied to
              hopelessly complicated games where the exact methods fail to work.  It is very
              surprising how this ``desperate'' attempt turns out to be  successful for
              large, interesting classes of positional games.  Carrying out the program
              sketched in his prior proposal the investigator have developed a "game
              theoretic second moment method" for fair games, and applied it to solve
              long-standing open problems in graph and hypergraph games.  Another great
              success was his work toward "game-theoretic independence" (i.e. game theoretic
              Lovasz Local Lemma).  In this direction the investigator achieved an important
              partial result, which led to the solution of the long-standing Hales-Jewett
              conjecture about the multi-dimensional Tic-Tac-Toe game.  In this new proposal
              the investigator aims for a biased generalization of his game-theoretic second
              moment method, which would create a breakthrough in "game-theoretic random
              graph theory".  Also the investigator wants to continue his work to prove a
              perfect game-theoretic analogue of the probabilistic Lovasz Local
              Lemma.

Traditional game theory focuses on games of incomplete information. 
              The traditional theory provided good insights to  Economics, and many areas of
              social science (Management, Military  Strategy, etc.).  One can expect at least
              as many new applications from a successful theory of games of complete
              information.  Positional games, i.e. 2-player "pure conflict" games of skill
              like Chess and Go, form the most natural and interesting subclass of games of
              complete information. An extremely exciting aspect of studying positional games
              is that they give unique insight to how human intelligence works.  It concerns
              fundamental questions like whether human understanding is a computational or
              non-computational process.  Or more specific problems like to understand why
              (say) Go playing computer programs are nowhere close to the best human players.
               In contrast to Go, the best Chess-playing programs have reached the level of
              human Grandmasters.  Game-playing computer programs examine millions of
              positions before deciding what to do next.  On the other hand, even the best
              Grandmasters do not search more than 50 positions per move. In human Chess and
              particularly in human Go pattern recognition plays a  far more important role
              than search.  How to supply this human knowledge to a computer is a puzzle that
              no one has solved yet.  A more concrete theoretical significance of this
              proposal is that it brings the seemingly separated subjects of Probability
              Theory, Combinatorics, and Game Theory closer to each other in an unexpected
              way.

