Title       : Human Migration in Early Neolithic Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0103984

Award Number: 0103984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77666              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R A. Bentley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. T. Douglas Price and R. Alexander
              Bentley will continue their analysis of archaeological skeletons of the
              earliest farmers in Central Europe. They will attempt to distinguish between
              two hypotheses which account for the appearance of agriculture in Europe: the
              spread of actual populations vs. the spread of ideas across essentially
              immobile groups. Because agriculture appears suddenly in Central Europe and is
              accompanied by a suite of other cultural items such as distinctive ceramic
              styles, many archaeologists have accepted this as evidence of human migration.
              Other researchers however have noted that humans are adaptable, can accept new
              modes of behavior and that it may have been ideas rather than people which
              moved. To select between these options Drs Price and Bentley will continue
              their examination of isotope values in skeletons from relevant populations. The
              ratio of two isotopes of strontium in bones and teeth provides a record of the
              geological environment in which the person lived. Since bone tissue is replaced
              continually over an individual's lifetime while the competition of teeth is set
              at adolescence, a measured difference in the strontium isotope ratio between
              bones and teeth can identify an immigrant. The foreign signal in an immigrant's
              tooth can then be traced to a likely region of origin based on regional
              geology. 

In their research to date, analyses have indicated that a mixture
              of the two models best explains the skeletal data. These suggest that most
              likely a small number of migrants may have initially brought farming into
              Europe, but its adoption by indigenous Europeans also played a major role. To
              improve on these preliminary finding the team will expand the analysis to a
              larger number of skeletons. In order to create a baseline "map" of strontium
              and also lead isotope signatures, the researchers will analyze archaeological
              animal teeth collected from different geological provinces in regions adjacent
              to the study area in southwestern Germany and eastern France. On this basis
              they hope to identify immigrants' points of origin.

This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide insight into an important time
              period and seminal event in European prehistory. It will shed light on the
              basic processes which drive culture change and help to develop an analytic tool
              potentially applicable to a wide array of archaeological questions in many
              parts of the world

