Title       : "Complex Manifolds with special Structures"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0103282

Award Number: 0103282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhuang-dan Guan zguan@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
              Complex Manifolds with special Structures, Abstract

         
                             author: Zhuang-dan Guan

       

My research has been
              largely in the area of complex manifolds and have a 
number of problems to
              work on. Recently, I am working on three major 
directions: (1) Classification
              of compact hyperkahler manifolds, (2) 
Stability and extremal metrics, (3)
              Classification of Complex homogeneous
spaces. Our research was highly
              concentrated on these directions for the last 
4 to 5 years. We expect to work
              on extremal metrics and hyperkahler manifolds
for some other years since many
              breakthroughs are happenning in these 
directions. The picture for extremal
              metrics is becoming clear after many 
years of research. It can be described
              by the geodesic stability principles. 
The uniqueness comes from the convex
              property of the modified Mabuchi 
functional on Mabuchi moduli space of Kahler
              metrics and the existence of 
geodesics between Kahler metrics [GM4]. The
              existence should be the same as 
the geodesic stability [GM7]. I already test
              these principles by both the 
examples in my dissertation and those in [GM7].
              For the toric manifolds, we 
already proved the uniqueness and that existence
              implies the geodesic 
stability. We are trying to solve the final part of the
              geodesic stability 
principles that geodesic stable implies existence for
              toric manifolds. We also 
test the geodesic stability for many toric
              manifolds, e. g., the manifold 
obtained by blowing up two points in a 2
              dimensional complex projective space.
This will eventually solve the
              historical problem of existing Kahler-Einstein
metrics and extremal metrics.
              The best condidates of Hodge diamonds for the 
complex 4 dimensional compact
              hyperkahler manifolds are described by the 
possible pairs of the second and
              third Betti numbers (5,36),(7,8),(8,0),(23,0)
([GHS4]). Now it is the time to
              work on classification with many tools as 
Lagrangian fibration,
              Rozansky-Witten invariants, geometric elliptic genera. A
sandwich inequality
              of Rozansky-Witten invariants suggests further results for 
higher dimensional
              case. The classification of compact complex homogeneous 
spaces is reduced to
              the better understood manifolds as parallelizable 
manifolds, reductive spaces
              and primary spaces in [GH7]. We will try to 
understand more about the higher
              step primary spaces in the future. 

The research of Kahler-Einstein metric
              has been pioneered by many well-known 
mathematicians including several Fields
              Medal receivers. It turns out that
there are many similarity between this
              field and the Hitchin-Kobayashi
correspondence in the holomorphic vector
              bundles on compact Kahler manifolds.
Both fields are closed related to Physics
              Science, e.g., Einstein equation,
general relativity, Yang-Mills, Mirror
              Symmetry, Calabi-Yau, etc. We will 
write up a textbook in Kahler geometry
              describe a clear picture on both of 
these fields. Hyperkahler manifolds and
              homogeneous manifolds are some 
important manifolds which have some physics
              origin as that of Calabi-Yau 
manifolds and are unsolved classical topics in
              complex geometry. The pictures 
for these fields become clearer recently.  

