Title       : Differential Equations resulting from the interaction of Gravity with other
               Force Fields, and Shock-Waves in General Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0103998

Award Number: 0103998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel A. Smoller smoller@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103998 

Mathematical Sciences: Differential
              Equations resulting from the interaction of Gravity with other Force Fields,
              and Shock Waves in General Relativity  


Abstract DMS-0103998 
Smoller
              


This project is concerned with mathematical problems involving gravity,
              as described by Einsteins theory of general relativity, on two different
              scales: (A) elementary particles, whereby gravity is coupled to other
              fundamental forces (e.g., nuclear forces), and quantum mechanical effects are
              taken into account, via the Dirac Equation; and (B) astrophysics, in
              particular, shock-wave explosions in the universe.  In Part A, we study the
              behavior of elementary particles (fermions) in a rotating black-hole geometry. 
              We also study the decay and stability of solutions of the Teukolsky equation
              (which applies to gravitational waves, electromagnetic waves, etc.), in a
              rotating black-hole background geometry.  In Part B, we investigate a new
              cosmological model, different from the Big-Bang model.  The model, which agrees
              with astronomical observations, is based on shock waves that can occur beyond
              the Hubble length.  We will also investigate the validity of the
              Hawking-Penrose singularity theorem for situations involving interacting shock
              waves.  Finally, we will study the dynamics of a star collapsing to a black
              hole, modeled as an initial-value problem for the Einstein-Euler equations,
              with certain constraints on the initial data.  This study will also help us
              learn more about the constraint equations that all initial data for the
              Einstein equations must satisfy.

This project is concerned with mathematical
              problems involving gravity, as described by Einsteins theory of general
              relativity, on two different scales: (A) elementary particles, whereby gravity
              is coupled to other fundamental forces (e.g., nuclear forces), and quantum
              mechanical effects are taken into account, and (B) astrophysics; in particular,
              shock-wave explosions in the universe.  In Part A, we study the behavior of an
              elementary particle (electron, proton, etc.) near a black hole.  We also study
              the stability of electromagnetic and gravitational waves near a black hole.  In
              Part B, we explore a new model for cosmology, different from the usual Big Bang
              scenario, which is based on a shock-wave explosion.  We will also study the
              collapse of a massive star to a black hole.

