Title       : The Semiclassical Limit of the Focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0103909

Award Number: 0103909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Miller millerpd@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103909
Mathematical Sciences: The Semiclassical Limit
              of the Focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger Equation

Abstract

0103909 
              Miller



This project addresses the behavior of solutions of the focusing
              nonlinear Schroedinger equation in the singular semiclassical limit, with
              particular attention paid to solutions that are tied to definite given initial
              data.  Specific research goals include (i) generalizing a steepest-descents
              procedure for matrix Riemann-Hilbert problems to recover asymptotics of the
              initial-value problem for general real-analytic and oscillatory-analytic
              initial data, (ii) computing rigorous spectral asymptotics for the
              nonselfadjoint Zakharov-Shabat operator and taking estimates of the error into
              account in the inverse-scattering problem, (iii) studying sets of minimal
              weighted Green's capacity in the upper half-plane and relating them solidly to
              semiclassical asymptotics, and (iv) determining the sensitivity of the
              asymptotics to the presence of singularities in the data and also robustness to
              structural perturbations.  The analysis will employ numerical methods, careful
              asymptotic spectral analysis of a family of nonselfadjoint differential
              operators, and potential-theoretic aspects of functional and complex
              analysis.

The focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation is a ubiquitous model
              equation for the propagation of waves of many different kinds (water waves,
              light waves, etc.) in the simultaneous presence of nonlinear effects that can
              "self-amplify" the waves and "dispersion" which can pull the waves apart.  In
              particular, it is a tested and accepted model for the transmission of lightwave
              pulses along certain types of glass optical fibers.  This project will produce
              new understanding of this model equation relevant to situations where the
              coefficient of the dispersive term in the equation is relatively small, or
              alternatively, nonlinear processes dominate the evolution of broad disturbances
              for short times.  "Dispersion-shifted" optical fibers currently being installed
              in many modern telecommunication systems provide an environment where the
              effects of dispersion and nonlinearity are present in precisely such a skewed
              proportion.  The results of this project will be likely to influence the
              analysis and design of the next generation of high-speed optical
              telecommunications systems.   

