Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Molecular Opto-Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0103175

Award Number: 0103175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart M. Lindsay stuart.lindsay@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gari Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Otto F. Sankey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael N. Kozicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0103175
Lindsay

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).  It brings together experts
              in organic photochemistry, experimental and theoretical physicists and
              engineers in a University (Arizona State)-Industry (Motorola)collaboration
              aimed at developing nanoscale molecular optoelectronic devices based on
              paradigms from photosynthetic electron transfer.

The first phase of the
              project builds on the PIs' current work on the basic building blocks of
              molecular electronic devices. They will use bifunctionalized molecules
              covalently bonded at one end to a gold-coated conducting AFM tip and at the
              other end to a gold substrate. In this way they will measure the electrical
              properties of simple molecular insulators (n-alkanes) and molecular wires
              (carotenoids) at the single molecule level. These measurements will be compared
              to first-principles simulations, with the goal of developing both theory and
              experiment until they have a reasonably accurate description of transport in
              both the molecules and their contacts to the metal electrodes. Armed with this
              information, they will insert the molecules into nano-scale gaps in gold
              electrodes on oxidized silicon wafers.These devices will be made at Motorola.
              Final gap fabrication uses active-feedback control of electrochemical
              deposition, a technique developed by a consultant to the group.The goals of
              this step are to (1)make two electrode devices on wafers that can be
              characterized in terms of the single-molecule AFM data and (2) explore the
              current-voltage characteristics of these devices with greater flexibility than
              possible in the AFM (for example, making temperature-dependent
              measurements).

The second phase will focus on the electronic properties of
              optically excited molecules, and molecules in high-energy charge-separated
              states. The use of light to provide additional inputs to molecular-scale
              electronic devices offers several advantages, and may lead the way to the
              design and fabrication of technologically useful constructs. They will use much
              the same approach as outlined above, but with the addition of controlled
              optical excitation of chromophores. They will start with the carotenoids, as
              the simplest system, but will go on to study molecules containing porphyrins
              and fullerenes that are built to make transitions into long-lived triplet
              states, or into long-live charge-separated states. These systems present
              theoretical as well as experimental challenges, and they propose computational
              approaches for dealing with nuclear-relaxation on excitation or charging and
              for dealing with highly correlated molecular electronic states.

They propose
              a single-molecule opto-electronic switch as a candidate device on which to
              focus the long-range efforts of the group. The device might prove useful as an
              optoelectronic molecular-scale building block. But developing the science and
              technology that would go into building the device and understanding it are the
              main motivation for this project.

This group provides an extraordinary
              opportunity for training minority students in multidisciplinary approaches to
              nanoscience in both academic and industrial research environments.

