Title       : NIRT: Novel Energy Conversion Devices Based on Nanowire Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0103609

Award Number: 0103609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1343226            (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar majumdar@newton.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peidong Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Sands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The goal of this
              proposal is to develop the scientific and engineering foundations of a broad
              range of energy conversion devices based on the novel approach of using 1-D
              semiconducting nanowire heterostructures.  These heterostructures will consist
              of nanowires made of two or more single crystal semiconducting materials that
              are spatially arranged in such a manner that confinement effects are exploited
              in new and unique ways.  The approach will rely on a promising chemical
              synthesis technique called vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) process that can be used to
              grow monocrystalline nanowires Si, Ge, SiGe, ZnO and various III-V and II-VI
              semiconductors.  Electron and phonon confinement as well as the availability of
              new material phases in nanowire heterostructures will be used to tailor
              electronic, thermal, thermoelectric, optical and electromechanical properties. 
              Based on the fundamental understanding of these properties, three different
              types of integrated devices will be developed to convert energy between
              thermal, mechanical, optical, and mechanical forms.  The first will concentrate
              on high-performance thermoelectric devices for refrigeration and power
              generation.  The second will investigate light emitting devices that can be
              used for low-loss coupling to optical fibers.  Finally, the piezoelectric
              properties will be used for developing nanoelectromechanical sensors and
              actuators.  



