Title       : Geometric Analysis of Vortex Sheet Evolution and Value Distribution of Harmonic
               Maps into Hadamard Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a0103888

Award Number: 0103888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zheng-Chao Han zchan@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal Number: DMS-0103888

Han's proposal comprises of two research
              projects and an education project.
In the first research project Han proposes
              to adapt recent techniques from
geometric analysis to study certain
              geometrical and analytical problems in
the evolution of vortex sheets in two
              dimensional Euler equations. 
In particular, the project proposes to study  a
              possible notion of 
weak solution in terms of rectifiable varifolds, which, if
              successful,
should provide more geometric description to the evolution of
              
singular vortex sheet than the currently available notion of 
weak solution
              in terms of integrable vorticity functions.
In some prototype situations, Han
              also proposes to study the more precise
geometric behavior in the roll up of
              intersecting vortex sheets.  
In the second project, Han proposes to establish
              a 
value distribution theory for harmonic maps into negatively curved
              surfaces.
Recent results in this area have suggested very rich geometric
              
behavior of such harmonic maps in terms of induced foliation structures
and
              tree-like structures in the vicinity of infinity.
The geometric description of
              such behavior is closely related to
the solvability of asymptotic boundary
              value problems of the relevant
system of partial differential equations. The
              interaction of geometric analysis, 
partial differential equations, and their 
              application to some interesting 
applied analysis problems is the thread
              connecting the two projects.  
In the education project, Han proposes to
              rejuvenate an undergraduate geometry course  
mostly for  math education
              majors and an undergraduate differential geometry course 
to better serve the
              need of a wider audience that has grown out of 
today's rapidly changing
              technological environments
and emergence of new interdisciplinary
              fields.


A good understanding of the evolution of concentrated vortices,
              such
as vortex sheet, has immensely important practical values. 
The
              mathematical equations that govern the evolution of vortex sheets
exhibit many
              features very similar to those that have been
successfully studied in
              geometric analysis in recent years. The PI hopes
that the interactions of
              ideas and tools from across the fields will
bring some fruitful results in
              understanding better the geometric aspects
of vortex sheet evolution. In his
              second project, the PI also hopes to
combine closer the geometric and the
              analytic approaches, the success of which
may provide further insight back to
              purely geometrical or analytical problems.
The successful implementation of
              the third proposed project will 
will be a positive contribution to the K-12
              math education through 
better training of math education majors.

