Title       : Investigating Small-Scale Effects on Dynamic Properties of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0103704

Award Number: 0103704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jutta Luettmer-Strathmann jutta@physics.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103704
Leuttmer-Strathmann
Understanding the relationship between the
              structure of polymer chains and the properties of polymeric materials has been
              a long-standing goal of polymer science.  A case in point are the transport
              properties of polymers in the liquid state (viscosity, thermal conductivity,
              diffusion coefficients) which are important in polymer processing and
              applications, but cannot typically be predicted from the structure of the
              constituents and the thermodynamic state of the system.  The purpose of this
              theoretical research grant is to add to our understanding of the
              structure-property relationship by investigating small-scale effects on the
              dynamic properties of polymeric fluids.  Local chain structure and environment
              affect dynamic properties as different as viscoelasticity and thermodiffusion. 
              They do so most strongly in concentrated systems like polymer melts and blends,
              but even in dilute solutions, signatures of the local structure can be
              detected.  This grant focuses on three aspects of this large area: the first
              two relate to the friction experienced by chain segments while the third
              addresses heat transfer between chain segments.  The three parts of this
              project are steps toward a consistent description of small-scale effects for
              all dynamic properties of polymeric fluids.  Furthermore, all three contribute
              towards a prediction of these effects from the structure of the molecules and
              the thermodynamic state.

Both local chain structure and local environment
              affect the mobility of polymer chains in blends and melts.  In this project,
              local effects on polymer dynamics will be investigated through a small-scale
              simulation approach.  Expressed as local friction coefficients, the simulation
              results can be combined with coarse-grained theoretical models to make
              predictions about viscoelastic and diffusion coefficients.  Several polymer
              systems will be investigated in detail in this work and predictions for their
              dynamics compared with experimental data.  Experiments on a large number of
              miscible polymer blends have shown that blends display complex dynamic behavior
              resulting from differences in the local environment of the chain segments.  The
              nature of the local heterogeneities, however, is still under discussion and
              different models for local environments have been proposed.  In order to
              investigate this problem, small-scale simulations will be evaluated based on
              different models for local heterogeneity and the resulting predictions for
              dynamic properties of miscible blends will be compared with experimental data. 
              The transport of thermal energy through a dense polymeric fluid is not well
              understood and often treated independently from other dynamic processes.  The
              work proposed here extends a microscopic lattice network model for heat
              transport through polymer melts in order to investigate heat transfer between
              segments on different chains.  The results will enable us to develop a
              coarse-grained lattice model for dynamic properties that incorporates both
              chain mobility and heat conduction in dense polymeric fluids.
%%%   
              
Understanding the relationship between the structure of polymer chains and
              the properties of polymeric materials has been a long-standing goal of polymer
              science.  A case in point are the transport properties of polymers in the
              liquid state (viscosity, thermal conductivity, diffusion coefficients) which
              are important in polymer processing and applications, but cannot typically be
              predicted from the structure of the constituents and the thermodynamic state of
              the system.  The purpose of this theoretical research grant is to add to our
              understanding of the structure-property relationship by investigating
              small-scale effects on the dynamic properties of polymeric fluids.
***

