Title       : Mathematical modeling and analysis of high precision sensors for polymer
               characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0103907

Award Number: 0103907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilberto F. Schleiniger Schleini@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emeka Nwankwo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0103907
PI: 			Schleiniger,
              Gilberto
Institution: 		University of Delaware
Program: 		Applied
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: GOALI:
              Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of High Precision Sensors for Polymer
              Characterization

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) research project will address the mathematical modeling and analysis of
              piezoelectric transducers for polymer characterization. The principal
              investigator and a graduate student will work in cooperation with a researcher
              at DuPont to develop mathematical models and corresponding analytical and
              numerical tools to describe the response of thickness-shear mode resonators to
              contact with inhomogeneous viscoelastic media, a critical step in developing
              piezoelectric based transducers into operational chemical sensors. DuPont will
              participate in the development of the models by providing access to
              experimental facilities, data and involvement of the graduate student at the
              industrial site. The mathematical modeling is based on boundary-value problems
              for the linear and nonlinear systems of partial differential equations
              governing the physical processes at work in the sensor. Both perturbation and
              numerical methods will be used to obtain results, simplify the problem when
              appropriate, and to gain insight into special limiting cases. 

The design of
              low-cost, high performance sensing systems is of great interest both to
              research and commercial applications. Examples of areas that can benefit from
              such systems are processing waste material from mining and other industries
              which are of environmental concern, coating (e.g. in the automotive industry as
              well as in medical applications), packaging (e.g. food, medical) and pollution
              control sensors. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) research project will address the mathematical modeling and analysis of
              sensors for polymer characterization. The DuPont company will collaborate with
              the principal investigator and a graduate student to develop models for the
              improvement of these sensors. The project will benefit from this collaboration,
              including an industrial training opportunity for the mathematics graduate
              student. 


Date: June 4, 2001

