Title       : Large Random Matrices and Determinantal Random Point Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0103948

Award Number: 0103948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Soshnikov soshnikov@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will work on several problems in random matrix theory
              and determinantal random point fields.  The main emphasis of the research is on
              statistical properties of the eigenvalues of large random matrices, in
              particular on the universality conjecture.  Building on the previous work on
              the largest eigenvalues of certain Wigner matrices he expects to extend his
              results to a wider class of Wigner matrices and prove similar results for
              sample covariance matrices.  He also proposes to study universality in the bulk
              of the spectrum by using the renormalization group approach.  Another foci of
              the project is concerned with determinantal random point fields.  The goal is
              to find sufficiently general conditions for Central Limit Theorem type results
              for (rescaled) linear statistics and to study the ergodic properties of
              translation-invariant random point fields.

The random matrix models that are
              proposed to study come from, or have applications in multivariate statistical
              analysis (principal component analysis), nuclear physics (statistics of energy
              levels of heavy nuclei), solid state physics (modelling transport properties of
              small metallic particles and quantum dots) and theoretical computer science
              (computational complexity, statistical analysis of errors and linear numerical
              algorithms).  The importance of the field increases as many different areas of
              mathematics and physics including combinatorics, representation theory,
              operator algebras, number theory, integrable systems, quantum chaos, nuclear
              physics, statistical physics appear to have deep and fruitful connections to
              random matrices.  Besides the various applications of the results indicated in
              the proposal the principal investigator believes that it is equally important
              to achieve a better understanding of some mathematical phenomena in random
              matrices, in particular, universality of local distribution of eigenvalues.

