Title       : Giant Physical Response in Multi-scale Inhomogeneous Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0103858

Award Number: 0103858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sang-Wook Cheong sangc@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on the microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural
              inhomogeneity found in functional oxides, and its corresponding roles in the
              macroscopic physical response of these materials, such as magnetoresistance,
              magnetic permeability, piezoelectric constants, and linear and/or non-linear
              optical characteristics.  Understanding and controlling the inter-relationship
              between the inhomogeneity and physical response are of paramount importance for
              the development of new advanced electronic and magnetic devices.  The concepts
              of thermodynamic or quantum criticality, soft modes, disorder effects and
              electronic phase separation will be important to understand the coexistence or
              fluctuations of neighboring phases in phase space.  The activities envisioned
              in this program include a few important classes of complex oxide materials. 
              The first topic is the area of magnetoresistive materials (such as
              CuIr2S4-CuCr2S4 and also (Bi,Sr)MnO3-(La,Sr)MnO3), showing a competition
              between, as well as a coexistence of, charge-ordered-insulating and
              ferromagnetic-metallic phases.  Other topics include the enhanced piezoelectric
              response near MPB of ferroelectric relaxors (PMN-PT) and chemical pressure
              effects in geometrically frustrated antiferromagnets such as ZnCr2O4.  We will
              also study tunneling magnetoresistance in polycrystalline films as well as a
              trilayer structure of double perovskite (Ca,Sr,Ba)Fe0.5Mo0.5O3.  The success of
              this project will critically depend on a comprehensive characterization of the
              functional, complex oxides (or chalcogenides) as well as the fabrication of
              high-quality polycrystalline materials and single crystals.  Materials
              synthesis and classical characterization including magneto-transport,
              susceptibility, and thermodynamic measurements will be done in the PI's lab at
              Rutgers University.  In addition, x-ray scattering, neutron scattering, TEM,
              microwave, Raman, and low-temperature STM experiments will be performed through
              inter-institutional collaborations. This research will be conducted with the
              assistance of students who will thereby be prepared for entry into
              scientific/technological careers in industry, government or academia.
              
%%%
Modern electronic and magnetic devices often utilize physical responses
              of materials when the materials are exposed under external parameters such as
              magnetic or electric fields, pressure, or optical irradiation.  Recent
              investigation has suggested that the large-scale physical response such as
              magnetoresistance, piezoelectricity, or linear and/or non-linear optical
              response can be drastically enhanced in materials with microscopic
              electronic/magnetic/structural inhomogeneity.  Thus, this enhanced response in
              microscopically inhomogeneous materials can provide the scientific underpinning
              for future technologies.  In this project we focus on understanding as well as
              controlling the inter-relationship between the microscopic inhomogeneity and
              macroscopic physical response.  The inhomogeneity can be associated with
              various charge/spin/orbital degrees of freedom, and may accompany dynamic
              fluctuations, in addition to static spatial fluctuations.  We will primarily
              investigate functional, complex oxides and also other chalcogenides, showing
              various competing or mutually antagonistic ground states.  The success of this
              project will critically depend on a comprehensive characterization of the
              materials as well as the fabrication of high-quality polycrystalline materials
              and single crystals.  Fabrication and basic characterization of the materials
              will be performed in the laboratory of the Principal Investigator at Rutgers
              University, while other more complex characterization will be performed through
              functioning inter-institutional collaborations.  This research will be
              conducted with students. They will acquire advanced training in a forefront
              area of condensed matter physics and materials science and thus prepare them to
              enter the scientific/technological workforce. 

