Title       : Biotic Survey of the Gaoligongshan, a Biodiversity Hotspot in Western Yunnan,
               China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0103795

Award Number: 0103795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2403296            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Fritsch pfritsch@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A five-year survey will be conducted of the biodiversity of the Gaoligongshan
              region of western Yunnan Province, People's Republic of China. The
              Gaoligongshan region, which extends from the eastern Himalayas to southern
              Yunnan Province, is recognized by global conservation agencies as one of the
              "hottest" of biodiversity hotspots worldwide. At the heart of this region lies
              the Gaoligongshan, a spectacular high ridge of mountains running some 600 km
              from north to south near the border between southwestern China and northeastern
              Myanmar (Burma). Unlike much of the surrounding area, the forests of the
              Gaoligongshan have remained largely intact because of their remote location.
              The survey will be very broad taxonomically and include the following groups:
              bryophytes and vascular plants, diatoms, arthropods, and vertebrates. The
              foundation for this project consists of a three-way collaboration between the
              California Academy of Sciences (CAS), the Kunming Institute of Botany, and the
              Kunming Institute of Zoology. To provide sufficient scientific expertise for
              our endeavor, the three primary institutions will collaborate with a number of
              other institutions that maintain vigorous research programs on the Chinese
              biota: the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, the Institute of Zoology in Beijing,
              Hunan Normal University, the Missouri Botanical Garden, Harvard University, and
              the United States National Herbarium. A large number of experts have been
              recruited worldwide to aid in the identification of specimens belonging to the
              most species-rich taxonomic groups (plants and arthropods). The CAS will
              collaborate directly with the Yunnan Cultural Relics and Archaeology Institute
              in a survey of quaternary cave deposits. This will complement the neontological
              survey by providing a picture of how the Gaoligongshan's vertebrate fauna has
              changed since the mid-Holocene with the advent of intensive agriculture.
	The
              project includes a major training component for Chinese graduate students,
              postgraduates, and employees at nature reserves. The information generated from
              this project will provide the basic knowledge necessary for sound management
              and conservation decisions affecting the Gaoligongshan ecosystem. The
              collections resulting from the project will be used by members of the project
              team in various scientific endeavors, from the publication of monographs to
              molecular phylogenetic studies. The data also will be used as the basis for
              more specific studies of evolutionary patterns and processes, such as tests of
              biogeographic models of the northern hemisphere, biodiversity and environmental
              patterns through time and space, and the utility of the hotspot concept in
              predicting the diversity of poorly inventoried groups. 

