Title       : Basidiomycetes of Neotropical Pine Forests: Connections Between a Possible
               Refugium in Belize and Endemic Pine Forests in the Dominican Republic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0103621

Award Number: 0103621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Baroni baronitj@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Orson K. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Jean Lodge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leif Ryvarden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joaquin Cifuentes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An international team of mycologists (experts on fungal diversity), led by Dr.
              Timothy Baroni of SUNY-Cortland, is surveying the fleshy fungi (mushrooms,
              boletes, polypores, puffballs, crust fungi) associated with neotropical pine
              forests.  The investigation will concentrate on the beneficial symbionts
              of
pine roots, which are mostly boletes and mushrooms known as ectomycorrhizal
              fungi.  Some previous work in the Dominican Republic with the endemic pine
              forests (Pinus occidentalis) has revealed many undescribed species of fleshy
              fungi and at least some of these species are clearly related to ectotrophic
              mushrooms (root symbionts) from western and northwestern North America. Because
              tree hosts and fungal symbionts are tightly associated, it is difficult to
              explain the presence of these widely separated populations of fungal species
              from northwestern North America and the Dominican Republic.  One plausible
              explanation is to consider a historical migratory route for pines and their
              fungal symbionts along a corridor extending from the Rocky Mountains through
              the Sierrra Madre Occidental into the geologically ancient (for this part of
              the world) Mountain Pine Ridge and Cockscomb Mountain zones of Belize in
              Central America.  This migratory route established a southern most source, a
              refugium, for these island hopping symbionts which could have been carried to
              Hispaniola from Belize and/or neighboring countries in Central America due in
              part perhaps to late season hurricane activity.  Late season hurricanes in this
              region tend to produce easterly moving storms.  These storms could have and
              still may carry seeds and fungal spores to Hispaniola and other islands in the
              Caribbean.  Because the pine in the Dominican Republic is endemic and the only
              native pine to this island, and appears to be related to Central American
              pines, the hypothesized transport event likely occurred in the distant past.
              
	Inventory collecting in the possible fungal refugium in the Mountain Pine
              Ridge and Cockscomb Mountain zones in Belize is central to the study.  This
              area is significantly older geologically than much of the rest of Central
              America(100-400 MY vs. 3-5 MY).  It is also believed that these mountains
              remained
above water as "islands" when sea levels rose in the past. Therefore,
              because of the possible long-term isolation, this region has the potential to
              harbor a significant number of new species of fungi, especially since this area
              has never been thoroughly surveyed.  Data on undescribed amphibians from the
              area tends to support this view. The fungal symbionts of Belizian pines should
              be similar to or show close relationships with species from western and
              northwestern North America, and also be similar to some of the species from the
              Dominican Republic.  The Dominican Republic will also be the focus of further
              mycological survey work and study.  It appears to be a nexus of migratory paths
              for fungi, showing species from eastern North America, the Lesser Antilles and
              from South America as well as those recently found from western and
              northwestern North America.   The survey is likely to cover 1000 to 1500
              species from a broad spectrum of basidiomycetes (12 orders, 36 families, over
              300 genera).  Based on previous results, the team expects to discover
              approximately 20% to perhaps 30% new taxa.  In addition to species descriptions
              and range distributions, published in the specialist literature, summaries of
              the results and materials (including selected color photographs for
              identification by amateurs and "mushroom hunters") will be made available to
              individuals in the ecotourism industry in Belize and the Dominican Republic.

