Title       : NER: Novel Nanocomposites Using Controlled Dynamics Of Interfacial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0103246

Award Number: 0103246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

0103246
Somasundaran
This proposal was submitted in response to the
              solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF  00-119).

Research in
              nanotechnology has to date concentrated mainly on the equilibrium properties
              and behavior of nano-systems, with the dynamics of the system rarely studied.
              This study is based on the conviction that elucidation of the basic mechanisms
              of dynamics will help in developing materials of the future which will have an
              inherent smartness built into them. For example,
adsorbed polyacrylic acid
              structures will undergo coiled to stretched/dangling conformational changes
              upon changing the pH. This can produce a marked response in the dispersed state
              of suspensions. This project will focus on the dynamic behavior of novel
              nano-structures and their
active groups as a function of electrical, chemical,
              magnetic, thermal and optical fields.

Some of the topics to be evaluated are
              1) how the conformation of polymers changes and how rapidly they do so under
              changing pH, thermal, electrical, optical, magnetic and acoustic fields, 2) how
              the response of the active groups can be manipulated to develop novel
              structures,  3) how the properties of the nano-composites change as a function
              of their structure if a sinusoidal field is applied during the preparatory
              stage,  and 4) what happens if variations and perturbations in
the field take
              place after the preparation.  

The general methodology involved is to add a
              probe to a target molecule, which would respond to external perturbation
              vectors. This response would induce conformational changes in the adsorbed
              target molecule which will be followed in real time. For changes in pH we have
              carboxylic acid groups as probes, for magnetic field we will use aqueous
              ferro-fluids (hematite nanoparticles stabilized by surface active agents) and
              for optical perturbation we will use "azo" groups. These will be adsorbed on
              surfaces of silica (for AFM), gold (for SPR), and alumina (for ESR and
              fluorescence) functionalised for the binding of the modified
              macromolecules.

The first stage of the research project involves synthesis
              of macromolecules incorporated with these probes. In the second stage, the
              dynamics will be studied using AFM, ESR, SPR and fluorescence spectroscopic
              techniques, while the molecules are being perturbed. It is the final goal to
              use the information gathered in the second stage to build novel nanomaterials
              with controllable properties.

