Title       : Fundamental Experimental Properties of Mesoscopic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0103223

Award Number: 0103223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Webb rawebb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on investigations of the quantum mechanical phase
              coherence properties of mesoscopic devices.  At low temperatures, most
              mesoscopic circuits only exhibit coherence times between 0.05 to 10 ns and it
              is believed that much longer times will be required to make functional quantum
              devices.  This work will systematically explore the phase coherent transport
              and magnetic properties of mesoscopic systems on time scales much shorter and
              much longer than the phase coherence time.  Studies of the effect of 0 to 26
              GHz measurement currents on decoherence in metals (with and without magnetic
              impurities) and semiconductors will be made.  Measurements of the thermodynamic
              electron temperature in a variety of mesoscopic samples will be made using
              SQUID based noise thermometer techniques in order to check the recent
              theoretical prediction that thermodynamics may break down in small devices. 
              The goal of all this work is to understand how the high frequency, material,
              and geometrical properties effect the quantum coherence properties of small
              systems.  The graduate students involved with this program will learn how to
              fabricate a variety of quantum devices using modern fabrication techniques,
              measure these devices using state-of-the-art techniques, and will comprehend a
              wide body of solid state theory.  All these skills are necessary in order to
              become successful in an industrial, government, or university career.
%%%
The
              low temperature properties of all electrical circuits can be significantly
              changed when the dimensions of the elements are reduced below a few microns. 
              Quantum effects such as electron interference and charge quantization are
              responsible for many of the large conductance fluctuations observed in these
              devices and have kindled hope that a revolutionary new class of fast coherent
              quantum devices can be built to help fuel the continuing progress in the
              microelectronics industry.  Many of the proposed new devices require long
              electron coherence times in order to maximize the signal, yet most nano-scale
              circuits only exhibit coherence times between 0.05 to 10 nanoseconds.  This
              proposed research is focused on understanding the underlying physics that
              controls the phase coherence time in small electrical circuits with the
              expectation that we will be able to discover ways to increase this time.  We
              will systematically explore the phase coherent transport properties of small
              quantum systems on time scales much shorter and much longer than the phase
              coherence time in an attempt to understand if we can manipulate the quantum
              state without causing decoherence.  The graduate students involved with this
              program will receive the training necessary to become a future generation of
              microelectronic scientists.  They will learn how to fabricate a variety of
              quantum devices using modern fabrication techniques and measure these devices
              using state-of-the-art techniques.  All these skills are necessary in order to
              become successful in an industrial, government, or university career. 

