Title       : The Differential Geometry of Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0103884

Award Number: 0103884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Bryant bryant@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for DMS - 0103884 (Bryant, Duke)

Robert Bryant plans to apply the
              theory of differential systems,
the method of equivalence, and methods from
              the calculus of variations
to study a collection of problems in differential
              geometry and
mathematical physics. In the first problem, motivated by
              mathematical
physics, Bryant intends to study the geometry of connections
              compatible
with either a Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian metric that
              admit
parallel spinor fields and that differ from the Levi-Civita
              connection
by a closed 3-form. In the second problem, Bryant wants to
              continue
his investigations into the nature of singular special Lagrangian
              subvarieties
and special Lagrangian foliations of Calabi-Yau manifolds. In the
              third
problem, which concerns the study of the space of almost complex
              structures on
6-manifolds, Bryant proposes to investigate several natural
              functionals on the space
of such almost complex structures and the geometry of
              the extrema
of these functionals. Fourth, Bryant plans to continue his
              study
of the space of homologically volume minimizing cycles in compact Lie
              groups,
with the goal of finding a complete classification of the volume
              minimizing
cycles in each homology class in a compact, simple, simply
              connected Lie group.
Finally, Bryant plans to continue his investigations into
              Finsler geometry,
particularly the problem of classifying the spaces of
              constant
flag curvature (the natural generalization to Finsler geometry
of
              constant sectional curvature in the Riemannian case).


Optimization is a
              central problem in mathematics, in which one tries
to select the 'best'
              configuration in a space of possible configurations
of a model for a physical
              system.  An example is the problem of navigating
on a body of water in which
              one must take water currents into account
in planning the 'best' path from
              origin to destination, where 'best' is
taken to mean 'shortest time of
              traverse'.  A path that is optimal for
a short period (a 'geodesic') might not
              remain optimal if pursued far enough.
This is known as instability. (For
              example, in a river where the current is
faster in midstream it turns out that
              downstream geodesics are stable, but
that upstream geodesics are not.) The
              geometric quantity that measures this
notion of stability is known as
              'curvature', since it was first identified
in studies of the curvature of the
              Earth.  Bryant's work studies curvature
and 'over-determined' systems of
              differential equations, and is relevant
to optimization problems in motion
              planning, control theory, robotics,
and string theory models in high energy
              physics.  Some of the specific
problems he works on are aimed at applications
              to mathematical physics
(e.g., connections with parallel spinor fields) or
              control theory (e.g.,
Finsler geometry, which is the subject that studies
              problems such as
the navigation problem mentioned above), while others are
              aimed at more
foundational questions about the nature of minimizers (e.g.,
              volume
minimizing cycles in Lie groups) or the limits and/or possibilities
              inherent
in the current methods and techniques for minimization
              problems
(e.g., special Lagrangian geometry and almost complex
              6-manifolds).


