Title       : Semiparametric Models for Correlated Data: The Quadratic Inference Function
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a0103513

Award Number: 0103513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annie Qu qu@stat.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on a new statistical method for the analysis of correlated
              data, the quadratic inference function (QIF) approach (Qu, Lindsay & Li 2000).
              The QIF is built on a semiparametric framework defined by a set of mean zero
              estimating functions, but differs from the standard estimating function
              approach in that there are more equations than the number of unknown
              parameters. The QIF has advantages compared to the estimating function
              approach, such as not requiring the specification of the likelihood function.
              It also overcomes limitations of the estimating function approach such as a
              lack of objective functions and likelihood functions for testing. One of the
              main goals of the proposed project is to explore the QIF for robustness with
              respect to the consistency of estimators when mean zero assumptions are not
              satisfied. A second goal focuses on the missing data problem, which occurs
              often in longitudinal data. Testing whether missing data are ignorable is still
              a challenging problem in general. The goodness-of-fit test for the QIF appears
              to be a valid test for nonignorable missing data. The third goal is to test
              order restricted alternative hypotheses for correlated data using the QIF.
              Current existing testing tools are not satisfactory and are mainly based on the
              likelihood function for parametric models, and therefore are not applicable for
              correlated data where the likelihood function is difficult to formulate. The
              QIF is related to the empirical likelihood (Owen, 1988) which is popular for
              nonparametric models. The proposed project also illustrates the Edgeworth
              expansion of QIF and explores how to apply the bootstrap strategy to improve
              testing accuracy for small samples of correlated data.

This research will
              have a significant impact and many applications in biostatistics, econometrics,
              and the environmental and social sciences where correlated data arise often. In
              particular, the QIF method substantially improves the estimation of regression
              parameters in generalized estimating equation settings (Liang & Zeger, 1986).
              Considering a real world example of air pollution for health impact assessment,
              even a slight difference in the regression parameter estimates can have a major
              impact on our health and environmental policies. Further, it is also the first
              effort to connect the generalized method of moments (Hansen, 1982) in
              econometrics to estimating functions in the statistics field. It attempts to
              answer a question frequently asked by econometricians: how to choose the most
              informative moment conditions with the lowest dimension possible. The research
              will also serve an educational purpose through developing a new course on
              longitudinal data and training of graduate students.
