Title       : Markov Random Fields, Finitary Codings, Phase Transitions and Ergodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0103841

Award Number: 0103841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Steif   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0103841
Steif
	The principal investigator will carry out research in
              probabability theory; more specifically in statistical physics, Markov random
              fields and ergodic theory, and especially on problems which belong to the
              interface of these disciplines. A common theme for these problems is the notion
              of a phase transition which comes up in various guises. The first set of
              problems to be investigated concerns elucidating the relationship among the
              notion of finitary mappings, a concept which is relatively old, the much newer
              and important notion of exact simulation and finally the existence of a phase
              transition. It is already known that there are intimate connections between
              these. A second set of problems concerns better understanding the relationship
              between the phase diagram for various statistical mechanical systems (such as
              the Ising or the classical Heisenberg models) and the underlying graph on which
              they live. These questions lead to the study of phenomena which do not arise on
              the classical Euclidean lattices. A third set of problems concerns determining
              the sets of capacity 0 for certain concrete Markov processes arising in
              particle systems (e.g., the stochastic Ising model). Finally, a fourth set of
              problems concerns understanding the class of stationary processes which arise
              from positive contractions in Hilbert space, a class of stationary processes
              which have very different behavior than processes traditionally studied. Even
              for these systems, the concept of phase transition arises. 
	Many systems in
              the world evolve stochastically and probability theory is utilized in order to
              better understand and predict the behavior of such systems. For example,
              statistical physics is the study of how particles behave globally and more
              generally how various general cooperative systems evolve. Understanding such
              systems is part of the motivation for this project. Another goal of this
              project is to determine how certain abrupt changes occur within a system (a
              so-called phase transition such as when water boils) and to investigate the
              underlying conditions which lead to such phenomena. There are various
              distributions which arise here which are important to investigate but for which
              one is not able to make explicit calculations. In such cases, a key tool is
              computers which, via simulations, allows us to approximate these distributions.
              In many cases, one can sample exactly from these distributions and one more
              goal of this project is to understand when this is possible.

