Title       : Artificial Molecular Machines and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0103559

Award Number: 0103559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999999             (Estimated)
Investigator: J Fraser Stoddart stoddart@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Ming Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey I. Zink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the influence of light, electricity, or chemical reagents, certain
              interlocked molecules, known as catenanes and rotaxanes-which comprise
              appropriately matched ring and dumbbell-shaped components-will perform motions
              (e.g., rotary and linear) at a molecular level reminiscent of the moving parts
              of macroscopic machines. Such molecular motors hold promise as the intelligent"
              building blocks for the construction of devices and machines. A team of
              chemists and engineers from two different institutions (UCLA and nearby
              CALTECH) will address the fundamental scientific issues surrounding the
              relationships between controllable molecular machines, nanoscate devices, and
              the predictable movements of machine components at a macroscopic level.

The
              aims of this collaborative project-which focuses on the NSE RESEARCH THEME of
              Nanoscale Devices and System Architecture-are to (I) develop the
              template-directed synthesis (self-assembly) of interlocked molecules
              (switchable catenanes and rotaxanes) and interpenetrating supermolecules
              (addressable pseudorotaxanes) as a forerunner to (2) attaching them covalently
              to frameworks (e.g., silica, alumina) whose (3) synthesis (self-organization)
              must be established prior to (4) demonstrating the abilities of these
              machine-like (super)molecules to express different kinds of coherent movements
              (mainly linear but also possibly rotary ones) characteristic of macroscopic
              machines when (5) they are activated by chemicals (acids/bases or
              oxidizing/reducing agents) or electrons or light (redox and electron transfer
              processes) as a prelude to (6) transducing and amplifying the coherent
              molecular level movements into macroscopic motions.

The specific objectives
              of the team are to demonstrate transduction of force and motion from the
              relative mechanical movements of the components present in catenanes, rotaxanes
              and pseudorotaxanes through the development-on the nanoscale level-of actuating
              materials and devices reminiscent of (1) engines, (2) levers, (3) muscles, and
              (4) valves.

In thc first instance, we envisage constructing supramolecular
              two-stroke engines based on two-station pseudorotaxanes with the ring component
              lodged covalently in appropriately-sized silica pores, leaving the
              semi-dumbbell-shaped component to act as the piston. In the second example, we
              propose to design mechanical levers to amplify nanometer motions generated by
              suitable molecular or supramolecular machines. In the third instance, we
              propose to graft the ring and thread components of pseudorotaxanes onto
              separate carbon nanotubes using an aromatic polymer which we have demonstrated
              wraps itself helically around carbon nanotubes in order to realize artificial
              muscles and actuators. And, in the final example, we intend to develop
              molecular valves at the necks of suitably-sized silica pores, lined with
              pseudorotaxanes that can be induced to associate and dissociate (rings from
              threads) such that guest molecules located within the pores are, respectively,
              trapped or free to escape.

The anticipated outcome of the proposed program
              of research includes (I) the synthesis of new molecular motors capable of
              operating as machines, (2) the synthesis of integrated power supplies for the
              machines, (3) a bottom-up and top-down integration of frameworks for the
              machines, (4) new fundamental understanding of forces, friction, etc., on the
              nanoscale, and (5) a group of students with both broad perspectives and
              individual expertise in nanoscicnce.

With chemists and engineers working
              side-by-side, this highly integrated project seeks to transform molecular
              machines from being scientific curiosities into functioning nanosystems with
              technological potential, to enrich the education of both graduate and
              undergraduate students, and to promote the public awareness of nano-science and
              technology through community outreach.

