Title       : NER: Detection of Specific Biomolecule Adsorption in Ionically Self-Assembled
               Monolayers via Second Harmonic Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0103037

Award Number: 0103037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Van Cott kvancott@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Heflin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nanotechnology has had a profound impact on biosensor development.  The
              understanding and exploitation of specific biomolecular interactions has led to
              new applications in medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring, and genomic
              science.   The objective of this research is to use second harmonic generation
              (SHG) to detect specific adsorption of unlabeled biological molecules (e.g.,
              proteins, DNA) at a surface, and thus develop a new biosensor platform that
              will have significant advantages over conventional sensor platforms.  SHG is
              the creation of light at twice the frequency of the light with which the
              material is being irradiated, and occurs only in materials that are
              noncentrosymmetric - that is,  materials comprised of molecules arranged in a
              non-random fashion.  It has been shown previously that ionically self assembled
              monolayers (ISAMs) of polyelectrolytes can be used to make nanometer-thick,
              noncentrosymmetric monolayers that exhibit a large SHG signal.  The ISAM
              technique involves the alternant adsorption of oppositely-charged
              polyelectrolyte layers via electrostatic attraction.  During the course of
              those investigations, it was found that adsorption of a 'capping' layer of a
              polyelectrolyte of opposite charge onto an SHG-active monolayer results in a
              dramatic decrease in the measured SHG signal. This indicates a change in the
              net orientation of  the molecules in the pre-adsorbed film towards a more
              centrosymmetric configuration.  This project will extend this concept to the
              development of a sensor that detects specific adsorption of biomolecules.
              Nanoscale ISAM films will be designed and fabricated in which specific
              adsorption of an unlabeled target biomolecule will induce a substantial change
              in the net orientation of molecules in the film. Important parameters  will be
              determined that control how the sensor is constructed, the sensitivity, the
              dynamic range, the effect of non-specific adsorption of sample contaminants and
              results will be evaluated in order to compare with other biosensor
              systems.



