Title       : NER: Construction of Bioactive Nanoparticles and Investigation of the
               Relationship Between Particle Size and Enzyme Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0103232

Award Number: 0103232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Wang wangp@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Enzymes are the catalysts that effect chemical transformations in biological
              world.  The wide application of enzyme-based technologies is viewed as an
              important strategy to develop green industries that are energy-efficient and
              environment-benign.  Immobilized enzymes, which are usually prepared by
              attaching enzymes to solid materials, are preferred in industries due to the
              ease of reuse and extended lifetime.  Among other properties, the size of the
              solid materials is critical in determining the effective content and
              availability of attached enzymes.  Accordingly, nano-sized particles provide
              the upper limits of the performance of immobilized enzymes.  
Currently,
              however, not much knowledge regarding the preparation and behaviors of
              bioactive nanoparticles is available.  The feasibility of a unique process for
              the construction of enzyme-bearing nanoparticles will be examined in this
              research.  The assumption is that enzyme molecules grafted with hydrophobic
              polymer chains will function as surfactants, and can selectively assemble at
              oil-water interfaces if applied to a microemulsion polymerization system.  This
              mechanism will lead the enzyme to be covalently attached to the external
              surface of the resulted nanoparticles.  
In addition to the development of
              high performance nano biocatalysts, intent is also to shed light on mechanisms
              governing their catalytic behaviors.  Like free enzyme molecules, nanoparticles
              exhibit Brownian motion.  That means the attached enzymes are not immobilized,
              but with restrained mobility.  This consideration points to an interesting
              transitional region bridging those of free and immobilized enzymes.  Current
              theories appear to be difficult to cover such a transitional region.  For
              example, the collision theory fails to provide a reliable prediction on the
              impact of particle size on enzyme activity.  This project will probe the
              validity of classical theories for such size-activity relationships, thus
              inspire future theoretical studies regarding nano biocatalysts.  Results from
              this study will also help to understand a much broader range of fundamental
              issues in other areas, such as the behaviors of aggregated proteins in
              biological systems, nano-size drug delivery devices, and biomedical diagnostic
              and drug-targeting systems.



