Title       : NIRT: Photonic Crystal Laser Technology Based on Nanostructured Active Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0103134

Award Number: 0103134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis G. Deppe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray T. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Axel Scherer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry J. Vahala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Grant Willson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The goal of this project is to develop laser and
              optoelectronic device technologies that achieve photon and electron confinement
              to generate 0-dimensional states, based on advances in nanolithography and dry
              etching to fabricate nanocrystals containing self-organized quantum dots. A
              decrease of a semiconductor laser's volume to its minimum size, while
              maintaining high Q, along with a decrease in the electronic confinement
              potential, may result in revolutionary advances in device operation.  These
              include high-speed operation below and at threshold, and high efficiency in the
              spontaneous regime below threshold. In the ultimate limits of small active
              volume and sufficiently high Q the system can enter the quantum reversible
              regime necessary to create quantum-entangled states. Both these quantum limits
              of the photons and electron-hole pairs are possible using III-V nanostructured
              active material and nanostructured photonic crystals. The materials to be
              employed in these studies will be GaAs/AlGaAs/InGaAs strained layer
              heterostructures grown by molecular beam epitaxy, which will be fabricated into
              photonic crystal lasers and microcavities. The III-V heterostructures will be
              grown at the University of Texas/Austin Microelectronics Research Center, and
              photonic crystal fabrication will take place at the California Institute of
              Technology(CIT) and at UT-Austin. The III-V nanostructures will be optimized
              for high-speed operation based on studies to be carried out at CIT.
              Manufacturable processes for the nanolithography will be developed at
              UT-Austin. Graduate research assistants working towards Ph.D. degrees represent
              a major component of this research. The expected impact of the research is the
              development of a new technology for low power, high speed optoelectronic
              interconnects suitable for wavelength division multiplexing and low power
              transceivers for optical interconnects, and new devices useful for exchange of
              quantum information. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic materials science and
              engineering research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
              technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. The project will develop strong
              technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in students
              through unique educational experiences made possible by a collaborative
              forefront research environment. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM,
              ECS/PFET, and EEC Divisions.
*** 

