Title       : Asymptotic Enumeration in Combinatorial Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0103635

Award Number: 0103635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382496             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin A. Pemantle pemantle@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0103635
Pemantle
	The principal investigator will work in several areas of
              combinatorial probability.  In the area of asymptotic enumeration, he will
              obtain approximations to coefficients of multivariate meromorphic generating
              functions that are asymptotically valid as the multi-index goes to infinity in
              any possible way.  The ultimate goal is to automate this procedure, at least
              for the class of (multivariate) rational generating functions with nonnegative
              coefficients. Previous results indicate this may be feasible, or at least may
              be carried out to some extent.  These results are to be applied to several
              combinatorial problems in probability theory, including asymptotics for random
              tilings for the so-called Aztec Diamond configurations and other related tiling
              ensembles conjectured to produce polynomial phase boundaries.  In the area of
              random processes with reinforcement, he will investigate the rate at which
              processes of stochastic approximation type converge to their ultimate limiting
              behavior.  In particular, the slow convergence of vertex-reinforced random
              walks and uniformly reinforced social network models to their limits is to be
              explained by giving quantitative bounds on the probabilities of deviating from
              this behavior at finite times.  It is hoped that this will both explain
              simulation data and give a theoretical basis for the use of these models. 
              Among the other miscellaneous problems are several problems in economic game
              theory and one concerning asymptotics of solutions to functional
              equations.

	Recent progress in computer algebra has made many types of
              computation automated which once were done only by skilled practitioners. 
              Nowadays, a few messy equations are no barrier at all to a complete theoretical
              and practical understanding of a problem.  The most tangible result of the
              asymptotic enumeration project will be the transformation of a formerly
              difficult type of computation into a straightforward, though messy, series of
              steps.  Applications reach far beyond the motivating examples of random
              tilings, and include queuing theory, signal processing and combinatorial
              enumeration.  Reinforcement processes arise most commonly in three application
              areas:  formal models of learning, population biology, and economic behavior.
              In each of these areas, the results of the project will shed light on when and
              why the theoretically predicted limiting behaviors are not observed in the
              timeframes of real applications.

