Title       : NIRT: Multiscale Simulation of the Synthesis, Assembly and Properties of
               Nanostructured Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0103399

Award Number: 0103399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1950000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Cummings   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare M. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Kieffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon C. Glotzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Neurock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF-00-119).  The resulting grant is co-funded by the
              Divisions of Materials Research and Chemical and Thermal Systems.  The proposed
              research will be carried out at the Universities of Tennessee, Michigan and
              Virginia.  Also participating are NIST, Hybrid Plastics and Tal
              Materials.

Polyhedral oilgomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) molecules are unique
              nanometer-sized structures.  POSS molecules have a polyhedral core which can be
              multifunctional and serve as platforms that can be synthetically modified to
              contain groups for polymerization, adhesion, light sensitization, binding
              catalyst species, and improved solubility.  The ability to independently
              functionalize each corner of a POSS cube with different organic or inorganic
              groups confers a nearly infinite array of possible hybrid nanostructures made
              of assemblies of POSS molecules.  Depending on the functionalization of the
              POSS cages, the resulting systems can be solid or liquid, or on crosslinking
              turned into a network.  They are a truly nanostructured building block, which,
              through self-and guided-assembly, can be transformed into a remarkable array of
              products, and due to recent breakthroughs in rapid synthesis technology, are
              only just now becoming available to industry on a commercial scale.

While
              much is known experimentally about the chemical synthesis of POSS systems, very
              little theoretical understanding exists at the molecular level or beyond.  In
              particular, the way in which individual POSS molecules can be assembled and
              manipulated at the nanoscale to form meso-and macro-scale systems has not been
              studied.  In this grant a multiscale computational framework will be developed
              to simulate the synthesis and self-and guided-assembly of POSS systems.

In
              order to address POSS systems at many levels, beginning at the quantum
              mechanical through to the mesoscale and macroscopic, the principal
              investigators (PI's) have the requisite expertise ranging from electronic
              structure calculations to molecular simulation.   This expertise will be
              applied to three initial problems: (1) structure of cross-linked POSS networks;
              (2) nanostructured phase prediction; and, (3) templated nanostructured thin
              films.  Feasible multiscale modeling routes to describing these systems have
              been developed, based on the expertise and codes available among the PI's. 
              Modifications will be made as the modeling effort evolves.  The simulation
              codes developed will be in the public domain, documented in user manuals and
              technical reports, and distributed to the user community.  These techniques
              will enable the prediction, essentially from first principles, of the physical
              and structural properties of hybrid inorganic/organic nanostructured systems.
              
%%%
***

