Title       : Approximate and Exact Inference Via Computer-Intensive Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0103926

Award Number: 0103926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Romano romano@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue the development of inferential methods that do
              not rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model assumptions. Standard inferential
              methods rest upon strong assumptions, especially in the analysis of time
              series, random fields, or whenever complex dependencies must be taken into
              account. In contrast, resampling, subsampling, and other computer-intensive
              methods offer viable approaches to obtaining valid distributional
              approximations while assuming very little about the stochastic mechanism
              generating the data. In part 1 of this proposal, the investigator will address
              several important problems so that these bootstrap and subsampling methods can
              serve as good approximate methods in statistical practice. The main issues we
              wish to tackle include the following: further relaxing of conditions (such as
              slower mixing rate for long memory data and allowing for nonstationarity); more
              theory for irregularly spaced data; studying delicate problems where the rate
              of convergence depends on unknown parameters, such as in the notoriously
              difficult problem of autoregressive type processes with unit roots; improve the
              accuracy of distribution estimation by techniques such as Richardson
              extrapolation, and by optimal choice of block size; and pursue the development
              of goodness-of-fit tests in the dependent data case. These methods are
              especially useful in modelling of economic time series, due to the inherent
              difficulties caused by nonlinearity and nonstationarity. In part 2 of the
              proposal, the investigator will pursue the development of methods that have
              exact finite sample validity, such as the construction of conservative
              confidence regions, without the expense of losing efficiency, at least in large
              samples. Typical nonparametric methods are based on approximations or limit
              theorems, so that finite sample behavior is always an issue, and is often
              typically addressed by small scale simulations. In contrast, the goal here is
              to construct nonparametric procedures with guaranteed finite sample behavior
              and good efficiency.

The statistical analysis of data is vital in many
              diverse scientific disciplines: physics, engineering, acoustics, geostatistics,
              medicine, econometrics, seismology, law, ecology, and others. The scope of
              modern statistical analysis is continually expanding, as is the need for
              inferential methods that are valid without imposing strong model assumptions. 
              The investigator will continue the pursuit of the development of statistical
              methods that can be applied safely in practice, keeping in mind the many
              applications toward which such methods can fruitfully be applied.  The
              philosophical approach of the investigator is to develop practical methods that
              have a robustness of validity so that they may be applied in increasingly
              complex situations. The impact of this work is potentially quite large because
              strong inferential statements can be made without imposing strong assumptions.
