Title       : Cracking in Brittle Films on Ductile Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0103385

Award Number: 0103385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivar E. Reimanis ireimani@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103385
Reimanis

Our current understanding of surface cracking phenomena is
              too limited to adequately predict conditions for fracture in sophisticated,
              inhomogeneous structures.  Recent advances in mechanics modeling of graded
              structures, as well as advances in the micro- and nano-scale control over the
              fabrication of specific film structures have opened new doors for developing a
              better understanding of the connection between crack growth and performance in
              brittle films.  Work proposed here will examine how surface cracking depends on
              1) surface architectural characteristics, including the gradation architecture,
              and the associated residual stress distributions, 2) the elastic and plastic
              properties of the substrate, 3) the strength of the film/substrate interface,
              and 4) microstructural features of the film.  Surfaces will be prepared by
              depositing films of chromium nitride (CrN and Cr2N), which have been
              extensively studied at Colorado School of Mines, as well as CrxCy, TixN, and
              TixC.   Cartridge brass (Cu-30wt. % Zn), and Ni alloys will be utilized as
              model substrate systems, while steel substrates will provide a connection to
              technological systems, offering comparison to data in the literature. 
              Conventional layered and novel architectures will be fabricated, and their
              mechanical behavior will be characterized using fundamental fracture
              experiments.   A comprehensive set of experiments will elucidate the generic
              behavior among the different films, and this behavior will be compared to
              existing theoretical models for the purpose of extracting mechanics effects
              from material behavior effects.  The inherent complexity in these systems
              dictates the need for numerical methods to model the mechanical response. 
              Thus, finite element analysis will be employed to evaluate residual stress
              states and crack tip stress fields.  
%%%
Brittle films serve a wide variety
              of purposes: corrosion, radiation and thermal protection, and wear resistance. 
              In applications such as high temperature superconductors and for many
              microelectronic components, the film is the device, engineered to conduct
              current or respond to photons, electrons or ions.  The performance of a film
              depends in large part on its structural integrity.  In the case of high
              temperature superconductor tape, a surface crack dramatically reduces the
              current density; in the case of turbine engine components, cracking may result
              in enhanced oxidation; in the case of tools and dies, surface cracking
              decreases the wear resistance.  In some applications, such as turbine engines
              for land based power generation, a limited amount of cracking may actually be
              desired in order to increase the film compliance.  Clearly, it is
              technologically extremely important to understand how cracking occurs in
              engineered surfaces.  The proposed work is designed to advance understanding in
              the fracture behavior of hard, brittle films with complex structures so that it
              may ultimately be applied to design new, high performance surfaces.



