Title       : Survey of Invertebrates at Sea Floor Deployments of Wood in the North Pacific
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0103690

Award Number: 0103690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet R. Voight voight@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Survey of Invertebrates at Sea Floor Deployments of Wood in the North Pacific
              Ocean

Perhaps because of the small, well-defined habitats in which they
              occur, animals at sea floor hydrothermal vents are increasingly well known, but
              our knowledge of animals that live elsewhere on the vast sea floor continues to
              be limited.  Do species known from vents and their relatives occur in
              comparable, non-vent habitats in which oxygen is limited?  One little-known
              seafloor habitat, that provided by wood sunken to the sea floor, shares with
              hydrothermal vents temporal transience, random distributions, ecosystems based
              on bacterial production.  Both hydrothermal vents and sunken wood provide hard
              substrates on the otherwise sediment-laden sea floor.  The earliest deep-sea
              discovery cruises first reported the very high diversity and unusual animals
              associated with wood falls trawled from the sea floor, but the composition of
              the wood fall fauna remain poorly known.  Experimental deployments of wood and
              a control substrate, basalt, will sample this little-known fauna to determine
              its composition and relationship with the vent fauna.  

Individual lengths
              of wood and basalt cubes in a mesh bag will compose deployment units.  Four of
              these units will be tied to a frame constructed from PVC tubing.  Two frames
              with units will be deployed in the North Pacific Ocean from a surface ship
              using the CTD wire with a transponder at Axial Volcano at 1500 m depth and two
              deployed on the abyssal plain at 2500 m depth.  After one year, half of the
              deployments at each site will be recovered by a Remotely Operated Vehicle to
              ascend to the surface ship in a lidded box.  The other half will be recovered
              after two years.  Because these sites differ in substrate, depth and proximity
              to hydrothermal venting, the recovered units will likely carry maximal species
              diversity. 

Specimens recovered on-board ship will be deposited in The Field
              Museum collections where existing collections from North Pacific hydrothermal
              vents will facilitate direct comparisons.  Improving the availability of
              deep-sea specimens will increase our knowledge of wood fall specialists in the
              North Pacific Ocean, and of their habitat specificity, especially relative to
              hydrothermal vents.  

