Title       : RUI: Phase Stability and Chromophore Reorientation in Photorefractive Polymer
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0103817

Award Number: 0103817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133857             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. McGee dmcgee@drew.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drew University
	      36 Madison Avenue
	      Madison, NJ  079401434    201/377-3000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This RUI project addresses photo-refractive macromolecular materials research
              with emphasis on the synthesis and characterization of new chromophores with
              appropriate non-linear optical response, and seeks to identify the relationship
              between phase stability and chromophore reorientation in low-Tg (glass
              transition temperature) photorefractive polymers.  Photorefractive polymers
              blended with nonlinear optical dye molecules exhibit relatively large
              refractive index modulations due to spatial reorientation of the dye.  An
              interdisciplinary team of Drew University students and faculty from the
              Chemistry and Physics departments will fabricate photorefractive polymers
              spanning a range of materials behavior by synthesizing dye molecules of
              relatively similar optical properties but considerably different interactions
              with the host polymer. The phase stability of each composite will be observed
              through measurements of the time dependent optical absorption coefficient. The
              refractive index modulation will be determined by diffraction efficiency
              measurements, and the relative orientational mobility of the dyes will be
              inferred through frequency dependent transmission ellipsometry. This data will
              be used to delineate boundaries of the phase-stability/orientational-mobility
              tradeoff, and to improve understanding of dye-polymer interactions and the
              design of blends suitable for applications.
%%% 
An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. All of the
              materials fabrication and optical characterization will occur at Drew
              University in chemistry and laser laboratories. These laboratories have been
              developed in part through an NSF-ILI grant "Materials science and nonlinear
              optics in physics and chemistry laboratories" and represent an ongoing effort
              to integrate the fabrication and characterization of nonlinear optical
              materials with Drew undergraduate instructional labs. The experiments are
              tabletop in scale and expose students to the photonic and electronic technology
              valued by employers and graduate schools. Students will also have the
              opportunity to study the holographic image storage properties of the materials
              they fabricate through a collaboration between the principal investigator and
              Dr. G. Wood of the Army Research Lab. The research is intellectually accessible
              to undergraduates, giving them a sense of ownership in their work. This RUI
              award will support six summer research students over three years, and will
              provide equipment support for Honors and Independent Study projects during the
              academic year. Results will be disseminated in peer-reviewed research
              literature with student co-authors and presented at professional meetings.
              
*** 

