Title       : Crystal Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0103036

Award Number: 0103036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O'Keeffe mokeeffe@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to systematically evaluate and describe the structures that
              arise from packings (including low density ones)  of simple geometrical objects
              such as spheres, polyhedra and cylinders. These will be evaluated for their
              utility as the basis for designed crystal structures. A complementary study
              will be the systematic evaluation of the topology of known periodic (crystal)
              structures to determine how they are related to the geometric packings. A
              product of this work will be a database of known structures that can be used to
              identify the topologies of new materials. Also, methods for the determinations
              of crystal structures of materials for which crystal size is too small for
              single crystal X-ray diffration will be developed. Techniques for combining
              electron diffraction with X-ray powder diffraction, and with libraries of
              possible topologies for structure analysis will also be developed. Experimental
              work will be focused on the synthesis of novel 3- and 4-connected oxide and
              oxyhalide  frameworks using unusual combinations of elements such as boron
              either alone or in combination with heavier metals. 
%%%
A program to develop
              the experimental and  theoretical basis for designing and synthesizing new
              classes of   inorganic materials with novel properties has significant
              potential for high impact in important areas of high national interest,
              including areas such as new optical, semiconducting, and structural materials
              of high interest to industry. A unique aspect to this research is the active
              interplay of the theoretical and experimental components of solid state
              chemical  research to optimize the search for important new materilas.
 

