Title       : Manifolds and C*-Algebraic Index Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0103647

Award Number: 0103647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81549              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Rosenberg jmr@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0103647
Johathan M. Rosenberg

 
Professor Jonathan Rosenberg will study
              the topology and 
geometry of manifolds and manifold-like spaces, as well as
              
C*-algebraic index theory.  By this we mean a combination 
of C*-algebra
              theory, index theory of elliptic operators,
K-theory, geometry, and topology. 
              One main focus of the 
proposal will be the use of invariants coming from
              C*-algebras (especially Kasparov's KK-theory) to study the geometry and
              
topology of manifolds.  For example, KK-classes coming from the classical
              elliptic operators (the Euler characteristic
operator, the signature operator,
              and the Dolbeault operator)
will be intensively studied.  Attention will also
              be paid to the equivariant case, where a finite group acts on the manifold in
              question.  These studies will deepen the link between 
topological and
              analytic approaches to manifold theory.  
In addition, Professor Rosenberg
              will study the classification 
of manifolds via their Yamabe invariants, and
              the 
classification of metrics of positive scalar curvature, 
problems which
              involve a quite subtle blend
of differential topology, differential
              geometry,
and analysis.  He will also study the applications
of K-theory to
              the study of C*-algebras, and various 
related problems on algebraic K-theory,
              especially on 
algebras of operators or on algebras coming from 
quantization
              of geometrical systems.

The context of this project is the use of new
              methods 
in analysis, based on noncommutative operator algebras, 
for
              attacking problems in geometry and topology.  On the 
one hand, these methods
              are useful as a new source
of tools for studying geometry, especially in high
              dimensions.  
And on the other hand, the methods are motivated (and more 
or
              less forced) by the quantization of classical physical 
systems.  The study of
              the scalar curvature properties of 
manifolds is also motivated by problems in
              gravitation.  
Professor Rosenberg will continue to train graduate
students
              in analysis, geometry, and topology, and will 
also work toward integration of
              mathematical software 
into the undergraduate mathematics curriculum.

