Title       : Problems in Fluid Dynamics and Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0103813

Award Number: 0103813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Renardy renardym@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research is proposed on the following topics:
1. Breakup of liquid jets: This
              research will mathematically analyze
   the capillary breakup of jets of
              Newtonian and viscoelastic liquids. The effect
   of polymer additives in
              suppressing breakup is well known and exploited both
   in nature (spider
              webs) and in technology (control of drops sizes in spraying
   of liquids).
              The research will concentrate on the asymptotics of breakup and
   compare
              various constitutive theories.
2. Stability of viscoelastic flows: Elastic
              instabilities have been
   investigated extensively over the past ten years.
              Such instabilities often
   pose limits for polymer processing conditions. In
              the numerical investigation
   of instabilities in complex flows, continuous
              spectra which are poorly resolved
   pose a significant challenge. The
              research is aimed at using analytical 
   techniques to determine the location
              of these continuous spectra.
3. Shape control in elasticity: An elastic medium
              is controlled by
   actuators which can supply a stress of a given type. The
              research will 
   investigate the question whether such controls can achieve a
              given shape of
   the medium.
4. Numerical simulation of two-fluid flows: The
              research will continue
   work on simulation of flows of two liquids using a
              volume of fluid code. The
   following three problems will be investigated:
 
               a) Formation of ``staircase" structures on impacting drops due to
     
              capillary waves.
   b) Tipstreaming in drop breakup under shear when
              surfactants are
      present.
   c) Effect of normal stresses on breakup of
              viscoelastic drops under
      shear.

The proposed research addresses
              fundamental issues which arise in the processing and
use of polymeric liquids,
              the control of deformations of elastic solids and the
formation of emulsions
              by shear mixing. The proposed topics include a comparison of
the qualitative
              behavior various models of polymeric fluids in jet breakup, the
stability of
              polymeric flows, the question which shapes of an elastic medium can
be
              achieved by a given type of control, and the development of numerical methods
              for
two-fluid flows.


