Title       : Random Matrices and Statistical Mechanics of Charged Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0103808

Award Number: 0103808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Kiessling miki@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	We work on two outstanding open problems in the statistical mechanics of
              charged particle systems. The first one is equivalent to the universality
              conjecture of the local eigenvalue statistics of random matrices, an
              equilibrium problem. The second one is the construction of relativistic Vlasov
              kinetic theory from a microscopic model, a nonequilibrium problem. As to the
              first problem, we use a new, entirely analytic strategy to extend the known
              universality for the unitary matrices also to the other types of random
              matrices: real symmetric, complex normal, and quaternionic self-dual. The
              strategy applies to the bulk and to the edge of the spectrum. We also apply our
              method to the study of the Laughlin wave function of superconductivity, which
              is of a related structure. As for the second problem, we use the recently laid
              microscopic dynamical foundations of relativistic many-particle theory to
              establish the first derivation of relativistic Vlasov kinetic theory in form of
              a weak law of large numbers. We also study its fluctuations around the limit in
              form of a central limit theorem. 
	The universality conjecture is currently
              one of the top priority problems of random matrix theory, a subfield of
              probability and mathematical physics. Its applications range from nuclear
              physics, nanotechnology and superconductivity on the physics and technology
              side to deep number theoretical implications on the mathematical side - which
              in turn have applications in cryptography and related fields. The conjecture
              has been proven so far for the simplest type of matrices, but a proof for more
              general matrices has so far been elusive. The relativistic Vlasov theory of
              charged particle systems forms the dynamical basis for a large part of high
              temperature plasma physics, with applications ranging from thermonuclear fusion
              research to space plasma research, e.g. about the solar wind and magnetic
              storms. Its microscopic atomic underpinnings, which have so far eluded
              researchers, will make it possible for the first time to systematically study
              the accuracy of Vlasov theory and in particular to compute its leading
              corrections. 
