Title       : nirt: Synthesis of and Structure-Function Relationships in Heterostructures of
               Quasi-2D Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0103409

Award Number: 0103409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Johnson davej@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Kevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. David Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research applies a novel synthetic approach based upon modulated elemental
              reactants to kinetically trap oriented thin films of novel compounds,
              heterostructures, and superlattices based upon quasi-two-dimensional transition
              metal dichalcogenide compounds their 3d transition metal intercalates and
              phosphochalcogenide compounds.  These materials provide unprecedented
              variability in the type of heterostructures that can be formed since the
              constituent materials range from wide and narrow gap semiconductors to
              antiferromagnetic insulators to semimetals to metals, some ferromagnetic,
              antiferromagnetic, or superconducting.  X-ray diffraction, cross sectional TEM,
              SEM, AFM and STM will be used to characterize the structure and defects in
              these new materials.  The targeted materials are expected to exhibit distinct
              and interesting magnetic and transport properties.  Specific goals include: (1)
              grow and characterize metal-semimetal and metal-semiconductor superlattices;
              (2) produce unusual magnetic structures by preparing superlattices containing
              components with different magnetic structures and; (3) induce an insulator to
              metal transition in the correlated insulating MPX3 compounds by alloying and/or
              layering to produce quasi-2D correlated metallic states that we expect to have
              interesting conducting properties. Students will be trained in cutting-edge
              research techniques during this research and exposed to the challenges and
              rewards of industrial research through Oregon's Ph.D. internship program
              
%%%
This work uses a recently developed synthetic approach to prepare thin
              films of novel compounds, heterostructures, and superlattices based upon
              quasi-two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide compounds, their 3d
              transition metal intercalates and phosphochalcogenide compounds.  These
              materials provide unprecedented variability in the type of heterostructures
              that can be formed since the constituent materials range from wide and narrow
              gap semiconductors to antiferromagnetic insulators to semimetals to metals,
              some ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, or superconducting.  X-ray diffraction
              will be used to follow the evolution of the initial reactants to crystalline
              superlattices, to determine the superlattice modulation and to solve crystal
              structures of these new materials.  Cross sectional TEM will be used to explore
              the nature and density of the stacking defects, and SEM, AFM and STM will be
              used to characterize their lateral structure.  The targeted materials include
              metal-semimetal and metal-semiconductor superlattices, unusual magnetic
              superlattices, and correlated-electron conductors.  These materials are
              expected to exhibit distinct, interesting and technologically relevant magnetic
              and transport properties that can be systematically controlled by varying the
              structure of the superlattice periods.  Students in this program receive a
              broad and rigorous training in materials science, chemistry and physics and
              will have opportunities to spend part of their graduate careers participating
              in Oregon's Ph.D. internship program which is designed to expose students to
              the challenges and rewards of industrial research and development.


