Title       : NIRT/GOALI: DNA-Based Nanomechanical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0103002

Award Number: 0103002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nadrian C. Seeman ned.seeman@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joey W. Storer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Winfree  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Goddard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nagarajan Vaidehi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0103002
N. Seeman, et al., New York University

This proposal
              was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE)
              solicitation, NSF-00119, in the category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research
              Teams (NIRT).  This is a collaborative activity between New York University,
              California Institute of Technology and Dow Chemical Co. using GOALI model.  The
              goal is to synthesize and demonstrate operational nanoscale machines or
              devices. The level of control offered by DNA systems can be exploited to make
              intricate DNA nanostructures, including self-assembling DNA that forms
              two-dimensional and three-dimensional arrays.  Modeling and simulation is a
              critical part of this project, in order construct and test the DNA
              nanostructures. 

It is proposed to combine the activities of New York
              University, California Institute of Technology and Dow Chemical laboratories to
              achieve a demonstration of DNA based nanomechanical devices useful for
              performing fast calculations, for sensors that detect specific molecules in the
              environment, or to improve the properties or performance of a material. 
              Practical design and manufacture of nanoscale machines and devices requires
              overcoming numerous challenges in synthesis, processing, characterization,
              design, optimization, and fabrication.  The approach will be first to prototype
              the designs computationally, optimizing the particular base-pair sequences,
              making sure that the particular lengths and spacings will lead to proper
              clearances, and testing the operation of the device, including the dynamics. 
              The project will focus on nanomechanical devices of three types. 
o The B-Z
              based nanomotor.  A DNA based nanomotor predicated on the B to Z
              DNA
transitions under different salt conditions.  
o A DNA sequence-specific
              mechanical device 
o A DNA based switch based on principles similar to the DNA
              sequence-
specific mechanical device.

