Title       : Nonparametric Estimation and Inference Methods for the Analysis of Longitudinal
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0103832

Award Number: 0103832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Q. Naiman daniel.naiman@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin O. Wu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to develop a series of statistical methods for the
              analysis of longitudinal data. The investigator studies the theoretical and
              practical properties of these methods through a series of asymptotic and
              simulation studies. This type of data involves either equally or unequally
              spaced repeated measurements over time from a collection of independent
              subjects. Because of the possible intra-subject correlations, two major tasks
              involved in a typical longitudinal analysis are: (1) to model and estimate the
              mean time-varying covariate effects on the response variables of interest; and
              (2) to quantify the possible correlations and individual effects in a
              statistical estimation and inference process. The investigator provides a range
              of nonparametric tools for accomplishing the above tasks through the
              investigation of four research topics: (a) developing and comparing the large
              sample properties of several local smoothing methods for the estimation of
              coefficient curves in varying coefficient models; (b) developing a class of
              local and global inference and model diagnostic procedures to assess the
              validity of parametric and semi-parametric regression models; (c) evaluating
              the theoretical and practical properties of the "leave-one-subject-out"
              cross-validation and other procedures for the selection of smoothing
              parameters; and (d) investigating the theoretical and practical properties of
              global approximation through a class of nonparametric mixed-effects models. In
              addition to the methodological publications, results of this project also
              include algorithms that allow for easy implementations of the developed
              methods. The theoretical results of this project provide useful insights for
              guiding the development of new statistical procedures in longitudinal analysis.
              The investigator and his collaborators demonstrate the usefulness and the
              potential impacts of their methods by applying them to a number of biomedical
              and epidemiological studies.  

The rapid development of computing technology
              has enabled scientists in various fields of social and natural sciences easy
              access to large datasets involving variables repeatedly observed over time.
              This type of data, known as longitudinal data, is common in biomedicine,
              epidemiology, economics, and sociology, among others. Statistical research
              plays the crucial role of providing theoretically sound and practically
              feasible tools for extracting useful information from the data. In biomedical
              and epidemiological studies, such useful information may include, for example,
              the effects of treatments on disease progression over time, the potential
              association between a mother's habit of cigarette smoking and the fetal growth
              pattern during pregnancy, and other findings that are of biomedical and public
              health interests. Despite considerable progress made by many talented
              researchers, there is still a large demand for more reliable and efficient
              modeling and diagnostic techniques, particularly in the area of initial data
              exploration, that are capable to handle repeated measurements. Systematic
              theoretical development is also needed for building a solid foundation to judge
              the adequacy of some existing methods and providing insights that lead to
              future methodological development. In the current project, the investigator
              evaluates the theoretical properties of a class of flexible and useful
              statistical models known as the varying coefficient models and, by extending
              his theoretical results, develops a class of new modeling approaches that are
              potentially superior to the existing ones in many longitudinal settings.
              Because the statistical theory, models and algorithms can be applied to
              situations where there does not exist a pre-specified parametric model, they
              provide valuable tools that are capable to derive statistical inferences
              entirely based on the data. These tools allow scientists, policy makers and
              researchers to draw adequate conclusions from their data without depending on
              pre-specified assumptions that maybe too restrictive to their settings. In a
              collaborative effort with other statistical and biomedical researchers, the
              investigator and his colleagues demonstrate the application potential of their
              methods by applying them to a number of biomedical and epidemiological studies
              and discuss the biological implications of their findings. 
