Title       : Research on Stochastic Optimization and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0103669

Award Number: 0103669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hui Wang huiwang@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research on Stochastic Optimization and Applications

Hui Wang

Project
              Abstract

Many stochastic optimization problems assume that the decision
              
maker has the total freedom to intervene the system. That is, 
the control
              policies can be adjusted continuously and 
instantaneously, or the state
              processes can be stopped arbitrarily 
within some time interval.  However,
              this assumption is often 
violated in practice. The first part of the project
              is concerned
with some new formulations for stochastic optimization problems
              
in order to accommodate these practical constraints. These models 
share a
              common feature: random intervention times determined by 
exogenous signal
              processes. In the context of optimal control, 
the decision maker is allowed
              to adjust the level of control 
only at times when an exogenous process gives
              him a green light; 
for example, when an Poisson process makes a jump. In the
              area of 
optimal stopping, the state process is allowed to be stopped only
              
at times when it receives certain signals from an exogenous process.  
Both
              formulations admit explicit solutions and can be applied to 
model practical
              constraints on control policies or stopping times. 
The second part of the
              project is concerned with a class of diffusion 
processes with jumps. The
              major effort is put on their applications 
to economics and finance.  The
              reason for the introduction of such 
processes is that the classical diffusion
              model for stock prices 
cannot explain many empirical puzzles. For example, an
              abnormality 
called volatility smile is often observed in option pricing, and
              the 
return distributions of financial assets exhibit a leptokurtic feature.
              
We intend to explain these phenomena, using the jump processes to model
              
stock prices in a financial market or the values of economic projects 
in
              investment problems. The discontinuous behavior in the underlying 
processes
              requires new techniques to obtain explicit solutions to 
certain pricing and
              wealth optimization problems.  The research project 
includes pricing commonly
              traded exotic options, analysis of utility
maximization, and evaluation of
              investment projects.

Stochastic optimization is one of the main topics in
              modern applied 
mathematics, with many applications in disciplines like
              engineering, 
biology, economics and finance, etc. The purpose of this
              research 
project is to systematically develop mathematical theories that are
              
more faithful to real life problems, so that the conclusions drawn 
from
              them can be used with more confidence. For example, a better 
understanding
              for the uncertainty of stock prices can help agents 
reduce the risk in
              financial practice. However, in developing more 
realistic models, one must be
              aware of the subtle balance between 
complexity and mathematical tractability.
              A realistic yet too 
complicated model can be mathematically untractable. The
              goal of 
the project, therefore, is to develop analytically or numerically
              
solvable models that embrace the essence of the practical problems. 
To this
              end, some new formulations are considered for general 
stochastic optimization
              problems in order to accommodate some 
practical constraints; for example, the
              controller can intervene 
the system only at times when an exogenous process
              sends out a 
certain signal.  Also considered are some new models for
              
economics and finance that incorporate the drastic changes of 
stock prices
              over short periods of time. These new models can be 
used to explain many
              empirical puzzles that the classical models 
fail to do, and to help agents
              develop better portfolios to reduce risk.


