Title       : Modeling, Simulation and Analysis of Epitaxial Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0103825

Award Number: 0103825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Schulze schulze@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0103825

PI: 			Schulze, Timothy
Institution:
              		University of Tennessee, Knoxville
Program: 		Applied Math
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Modeling, Simulation and Analysis of Epitaxial
              Film Growth

This proposal concerns the growth of epitaxial films.  The
              simulation technique and coarse-grained model discussed in this proposal are
              based on kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC) simulations, which are an established method
              of simulating crystal growth on an atom-by-atom basis. While believed to be
              faithful to the micro-scale physics, KMC simulations are extremely slow and
              there is a recognized need for models appropriate for larger length and time
              scales.  The first of the two approaches discussed in this proposal is a new
              simulation technique referred to as an Atomistic Difference Scheme. In this
              method, one assumes that the distribution of atoms on the surface of the film
              is in near equilibrium and can be computed by time-stepping difference
              equations derived directly from the KMC transition probabilities. The
              topography of the crystal, on the other hand, is assumed to evolve on a slower
              time-scale and is computed on a discrete basis that conserves mass.  The second
              approach seeks a homogenized, continuum version of this micro-scale model.  The
              continuum model takes the form of partial differential equations that describe
              the system's evolution on macroscopic length and time scales.  A final
              component of this investigation considers the application of these two methods
              to a continuous processing configuration where substrate (a tape) is
              continuously passed through a deposition zone. The continuously moving
              contact-line and its stability are of particular interest.

Epitaxial films
              are of vital technological importance in the semi-conductor industry.  As
              applications for high-temperature super-conductors (HTSC) develop, epitaxial
              films hold still further promise, with extensive efforts under way to produce
              HTSC wires and tapes that have enormous current-carrying capacities.  At the
              same time, the film growth process is a burgeoning source of inspiration for
              applied mathematicians, requiring a wide range of mathematical techniques and
              simulation tools to explore the behavior of these systems over an enormous
              range of length scales.  In particular, the research undertaken in this
              proposal seeks to enhance our ability understand and control the nano-scale
              structure of materials, placing a special emphasis on linking atomic-scale
              models with traditional modeling approaches.


Date: June 22, 2001

