Title       : Cataloguing Diversity of Ciliated Protists Through the Synergy of Morphological
               and Genetic Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0103599

Award Number: 0103599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Slava S. Epstein s.epstein@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1650,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0103599
Slava Epstein

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Slava Epstein at
              Northeastern University to conduct a high-resolution identification and
              inventory of the free-living ciliates along Northeast Atlantic coast.  The
              target organisms comprise the Phylum Ciliophora and are among the most
              important microorganisms in the ocean.  Genetically, this phylum is likely to
              be more diverse than the whole animal kingdom, yet the species diversity of
              ciliates cannot be presently assessed even with an order of magnitude accuracy.
               This is a reflection of the fact that traditional morphological methods of
              ciliate (and other protists) identification and cataloguing are not sufficient
              to describe their biodiversity.  This study will integrate traditional
              morphology and comparative genomics into one synergistic approach.  This will
              enable creation of an innovative catalogue of marine ciliates in the form of
              collection of specimens, their DNA, specific gene sequences, as well as an
              Internet-based searchable database. This database will include rich verbal and
              pictorial morphological information, including still-, 3-D-, and video images,
              data on genetic diversity, all cross-referenced to the earlier data.   No
              database of this kind is available today. 

The marriage between traditional
              morphological and modern molecular tools in studying biological diversity is an
              important development in the area of protozoology.  In the most immediate
              sense, it will greatly facilitate identification and classification of the
              ciliates that are targeted by research in systematics, population biology,
              ecology, physiology, biochemistry, and evolution.  More generally, this
              comprehensive catalogue of the ciliates will become an integral part of the
              process of documenting the overall diversity of life on our planet. 

