Title       : NIRT: Artificially Engineered Nanoscale Ferroelectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0103354

Award Number: 0103354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell G. Schlom dus2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin M. Rabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkatraman Gopalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103354
Schlom

The technical objective of our NIRT is to understand the
              fundamental science underlying the structural, dielectric, and optical response
              of artificially-engineered nanoscale ferroelectrics, which can be drastically
              different from that of conventional homogeneous ferroelectrics.  Using
              "first-principles effective Hamiltonian" approaches (based on lattice Wannier
              functions) and Landau-Ginzburg-type phenomenological methods, we will predict
              the effect of one-dimensional composition and strain gradients, and mechanical
              and electrical boundary conditions on the appearance and stability of the
              spontaneous polarization in these systems and on the modifications of
              ferroelectric domain structures.  These predictions will be compared against
              observations on corresponding nanostructures (made by reactive MBE) of
              perovskite ferroelectrics in which composition and strain are varied in one
              direction.  The resulting films will be characterized via a combination of TEM,
              x-ray diffraction (including synchrotron studies), Raman spectroscopy, second
              harmonic generation, dielectric property measurements as a function of electric
              field and temperature, and piezoelectric and pyroelectric techniques and
              compared with corresponding theoretical predictions in order to refine our
              understanding of nanoscale ferroelectrics.  Composition and strain gradients in
              ferroelectric films will be investigated as a means to incorporate new
              functionalities:  enhanced dielectric and pyroelectric responses, as well as a
              variety of novel optical properties.
%%%
For over 30 years molecular beam
              epitaxy (MBE) has been used to build up layered semiconductor nanostructures
              atom-by-atom to investigate and improve our understanding of semiconductor
              physics and create new devices.  These devices (which include laser diodes,
              high-performance transistors, and magnetic field sensors) have advanced
              healthcare, national security, communications, entertainment, and
              transportation-resulting in significant improvements in the quality of life for
              all Americans.  Recent progress in research has demonstrated that this same
              atom-by-atom synthesis technique can be used to build up nanostructures of
              oxides, including ferroelectrics, with comparable nanometer-scale layering
              control.  Since ferroelectric materials exhibit a wide variety of electrical,
              optical, and electromechanical properties, they are extensively used in
              healthcare (e.g., medical ultrasound), national defense (e.g., night vision and
              sonar systems), and communications (e.g., miniature capacitors for cell phones
              and computers).  The ability to customize the layering of ferroelectric
              materials at the atomic-layer level opens exciting possibilities in terms of
              creating new functional materials that we believe can be designed (with
              sufficient understanding) to have exceptional properties.  The improved
              understanding gained via this research will be applied to the development of
              improved (enhanced performance and smaller size) capacitors, night vision
              devices, and optical components.  This NIRT program will also train and educate
              future scientists in a highly interdisciplinary research environment in a
              technologically-significant area of national importance. 

This proposal was
              submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering"
              (NSF 00-119). The award is jointly supported through outside sources and the
              NSF Ceramics and Electronic Materials programs of the Division of Materials
              Research in MPS with the assistance of the initiative.


