Title       : NIRT: Coherence and Correlation in Electronic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0103003

Award Number: 0103003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold U. Baranger baranger@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weitao Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shailesh Chandrasekharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1682,1767,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0103003
Baranger

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF-00-119).  The resulting grant is
              co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry and Physics.  The
              proposed research will investigate quantum interference (coherence) and
              electron-electron interactions (correlations) in both model and realistic
              systems over a wide range of spatial scales, from nanometers to microns.

The
              interplay of correlations and coherence is one of the deepest topics in current
              chemistry and physics.  Nanostructures provide a novel controlled environment
              for studying these effects: both interactions and interference can be
              manipulated by changing the size and shape of the nanostructure, thereby
              directly gaining information on their interplay.  The principal investigators
              (PI's) will calculate the results of such manipulation in several prototypical
              cases spanning size scales from one nanometer to one micron.

Furthermore, a
              number of long-range technologies being investigated involve electron-electron
              interactions and quantum interference in their operation - single electronics,
              spintronics, molecular electroncs, and quantum computing, for instance.  The
              PI's plan to investigate coherence and correlation in these possible device
              structures.  Thus, the project will contribute to the knowledge base needed to
              evaluate the practical relevance of these nascent nanotechnologies.

More
              precisely, four scale sizes will be studied: correlations at the scale of the
              electron wavelength, simple single and multiple quantum dots, metallic
              "nanomolecules," and finally, networks of carbon nanotubes.  Three
              computational techniques will be used - quantum Monte Carlo (QMC), full density
              functional theory (DFT), and a simplified density functional technique suitable
              for nanotubes.  These electronic structure techniques will be combined with the
              semianalytic techniques of random matrix theory and semiclassical theory
              developed recently in nanophysics.  Each of the computational techniques
              requires substantial innovation.  In the case of QMC, the "fermion sign
              problem" will be atacked by using the recently developed cluster-type
              algorithms.  For the metallic nanomolecules, teh full DFT code must be modified
              to properly include spin-orbit effects critical in spintronics.  And for the
              simplified DFT method, the recently developed linear-scaling and
              self-consistent tight-binding methods must be combined and optimized for carbon
              nanotubes.  The computations will be done on a parallel beowulf-class cluster
              of processors.

The specific issues which the PI's intend to elucidate
              include: (1) the combination of Coulomb blockade and single-particle
              quantization effects in quantum dots and nanoparticles and their relevance for
              single-electronic devices; (2) correlation effects at the "soft edge" of
              quantum dots; (3) the role of disorder and pairing correlations in transport
              through nanoparticles; (4) the spin states, magnetic moment, and anisotropy
              energy of metallic nanomolecules and, deduced from these, their spintronic
              properties; (5) the robustness of entangled states in multiple quantum dots of
              interest for quantum computing; and, (6) the interactive behavior of a large
              collection of carbon nanotube quantum dots - an "artificial
              macromolecule."
%%% 
This proposal was submitted in response to the
              solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF-00-119).  The resulting
              grant is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry and
              Physics.  The proposed research will investigate quantum interference
              (coherence) and electron-electron interactions (correlations) in both model and
              realistic systems over a wide range of spatial scales, from nanometers to
              microns.

The interplay of correlations and coherence is one of the deepest
              topics in current chemistry and physics.  Nanostructures provide a novel
              controlled environment for studying these effects: both interactions and
              interference can be manipulated by changing the size and shape of the
              nanostructure, thereby directly gaining information on their interplay.  The
              principal investigators (PI's) will calculate the results of such manipulation
              in several prototypical cases spanning size scales from one nanometer to one
              micron.

Furthermore, a number of long-range technologies being investigated
              involve electron-electron interactions and quantum interference in their
              operation - single electronics, spintronics, molecular electroncs, and quantum
              computing, for instance.  The PI's plan to investigate coherence and
              correlation in these possible device structures.  Thus, the project will
              contribute to the knowledge base needed to evaluate the practical relevance of
              these nascent nanotechnologies.
***

