Title       : Quantum Phases in Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0103639

Award Number: 0103639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramamurti Shankar r.shankar@.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research on quantum phase transitions in
              electronic systems.  The PI will extend his previous work to include
              simultaneously, the effects of interactions between electrons and disorder due
              to impurities. The main idea is to begin with the Hall problem, where the
              effects of interactions are well understood and to add on disorder.  Evidence
              that certain magnetic phenomena in a disordered system may be described by an
              effective pure interaction will be explored.  The PI will explore the
              possibility that a metallic state, disallowed in the noninteracting case, can
              occur in systems with interactions and disorder. Another focus of this award is
              on the effective communication of physical concepts and research tools of
              theoretical condensed matter physics to the community, students, and the lay
              public. 
%%%
This award supports theoretical research on quantum phase
              transitions -- transformations that occur at zero temperature through the
              variation of an interaction or field.  These transitions can have a profound
              effect on materials properties at nonzero temperatures. The PI intends to focus
              on a notoriously hard problem -- the reliable theoretical description of a
              disordered and interacting electronic system.  The PI will begin from the
              fractional quantum Hall state in a clean system where the correlations that
              result from the interactions between electrons are relatively well understood. 
              His strategy will be to introduce disorder and eventually remove the magnetic
              field in the hope of elucidating the nature of the quantum mechanical ground
              state of a disordered interacting system in two dimensions. The award will
              support graduate and postdoctoral training in condensed matter theory and other
              educational activities, including speaking and writing for a lay audience on
              condensed matter physics.
***

