Title       : NGS: Wisconsin DOVE: Distributed Optimizing Virtual Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0103670

Award Number: 0103670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rastislav Bodik   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mikko H. Lipasti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0103670
Rastislav Bodik
University of Wisconsin

NGS: Wisconsin DOVE:
              Distributed Optimizing Virtual Environment

Wisconsin DOVE proposes to
              improve the performance of modern distributed and parallel applications as well
              as increase the productivity of application developers and system maintainers. 
              Building on recent advances in distributed control, dynamic program
              optimization, and hardware-supported performance monitoring, our project will
              build a Distributed Optimizing Virtual Environment (DOVE) whose power will stem
              from two primary innovations.

The VM-in-OS paradigm.  Dove will implant into
              the operating system an optimizing virtual machine (VM), whose ability to
              analyze a running program and correlate the analysis with hardware-based
              performance monitoring will achieve vertical integration, spanning the
              application, the kernel, and the hardware.  The VM-enabled operating system
              will be intimately aware of both the application above and the hardware and
              network below, and hence it will be able to schedule resources more
              intelligently and adaptively.

A clan of optimizing virtual machines.  
              Expecting that future distributed applications will be assembled from
              distributed components written in Java (or a similar mobile language), we
              propose to organize the VMs underlying the individual distributed components
              into a clan, in which the VMs exchange profiling and program-analysis
              information about their clients.  By supporting "gossip" among the distributed
              VMs in a clan, we will be able to compute a run-time communication and
              dependence profile of the distributed application and, in response, perform a
              dynamic repartitioning of the application.

