Title       : Topics in Design of Scientific Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0103727

Award Number: 0103727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290004             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Hedayat hedayat@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
DMS 0103727
S. Hedayat


The investigator together with his
              co-researchers study and employ a combination of mathematical, statistical, and
              computational tools which are useful in discovering new orthogonal arrays
              useful for multifatorial experiments.  Proper and relevant small
              Chebyshev-systems and maximum principles will be developed for identifying and
              constructing optimal designs for non-linear models. When needed genetic
              algorithms will be developed for the purpose of explicitly constructing optimal
              and near optimal designs useful for linear and non-linear models.

This
              proposal develops new methods and theory for the purpose of collecting
              informative and cost effective data.  Two broad cases are considered.  Those
              cases where data are controlled by many factors, and those cases where
              medicinal chemists are seeking for natural products with chemotherapeutic and
              chemopreventive properties among thousands of agents.  In both cases the goal
              is to collect the minimum amount of data with maximum info/cost value.  The
              proposed research has important applications in collecting and analyzing raw
              optical density data used by medicinal chemists.  This research provides a
              mechanism for integrating, coordinating and expanding interdisciplinary
              interaction between statisticians and researchers in the areas of
              pharmaceutical and medical sciences.  The emerging uses of natural products in
              preventing and treating disease add urgency to a portion of the proposed
              research. The outcomes of this proposal will also assist scientists working on
              research projects sponsored by NIH Office of Dietary  Supplements (DOS) and
              National Centers for Complementary and Alternative Medicines (NCCAM).
 

