Title       : Scanning Probe Microscopy Studies of Polycrystalline and Nanocrystalline
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0103945

Award Number: 0103945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reuben T. Collins rtcollin@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Kuech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses materials issues in polycrystalline, semiconductor
              materials, with emphasis on the dominating influence which interfaces and grain
              boundaries have on film properties. Project goals are: to develop a new,
              comprehensive approach to polycrystalline film characterization based on
              exploring chemical, electronic, and optical properties of individual
              crystallites within a film, and to apply this approach to understanding and
              improving polycrystalline CdTe and GaAs for electronics and photonics
              applications such as displays and high efficiency solar cells. The approach
              utilizes scanning probe techniques including low temperature NSOM PL and AFM
              measurements of surface potential on polycrystalline films. This information
              will be correlated with that from other techniques such as scanning Auger
              spectroscopy, XPS, STM and transport measurements. CdTe has been chosen because
              existing approaches allow films with good minority carrier properties to be
              prepared making it a potential model system to study in terms of finding
              general methods for improving polycrystalline materials. High quality
              polycrystalline films of GaAs have been more problematic. Studies of GaAs and
              related III-V materials will be directed at characterizing the effects on
              electronic and optical performance of novel approaches for improving minority
              carrier properties. Success with this system would have important technological
              implications given the broad technological base which exists for III-V
              materials. Numerical modeling of NSOM excitation in the presence of surfaces
              and grain boundaries is included. As the study proceeds, information from these
              investigations will be fed back into the film growth processes to test results
              and, ultimately, to improve film quality.
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. These studies will improve fundamental understanding of factors
              limiting the efficiency of displays and solar cells. An important feature of
              the program is the integration of research and education through the training
              of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The
              project is designed to develop strong technical, communication, and
              organizational/management skills in students through unique educational
              experiences made possible by a forefront research environment. There will be
              active involvement of undergraduates in the program and formal emphasis on
              developing effective oral and written communication skills. A new
              microelectronic processing course will provide students with expertise in
              materials preparation and processing. Collaboration of CSM students with
              students at the University of Wisconsin will be an additional, valuable,
              learning opportunity.
*** 

