Title       : Experimental Investigation of Competing Orders, Quantum Criticality and
               Spin/Charge Transport in Cuprate Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0103045

Award Number: 0103045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nai-Chang Yeh ncyeh@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is for an experimental research project that
              will address some of the most fundamental physics issues associated with
              high-temperature superconducting cuprates. The primary objectives are: [1] To
              investigate the competing orders and possible existence of a quantum critical
              point in different families of hole-doped (p-type) cuprate superconductors as a
              function of the doping level and temperature by means of low-temperature
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS). [2] To compare the
              pairing potential, pairing symmetry, and competing orders in the electron-doped
              (n-type) cuprate superconductors with those in the p-type cuprates. [3] To
              elucidate the characteristics of spin and charge transport in the p-type
              cuprate superconductors by studying the effects of spin-polarized and simple
              quasiparticle injection in perovskite ferromagnet-insulator-superconductor
              (F-I-S) and in normal metal-insulator-superconductor (N-I-S) heterostructures.
              The superior spatial resolution of STM/STS is expected to provide unique
              information for the microscopic properties of cuprate superconductors, and the
              investigation of spin/charge transport in these superconductors can yield
              insights into the roles of spin- and charge-degrees of freedom in their pairing
              state.  In addition to the potentially significant impact of these studies on
              revealing the fundamental physics of cuprate superconductivity, the wide range
              of forefront experimental techniques employed in conducting this project will
              provide sound technical and scientific training for the participating students
              and postdoctoral researchers.  Furthermore, novel microelectronic devices based
              on the tunable superconducting properties of F-I-S heterostructures under
              variable spin-polarized quasiparticle currents may be devised for a range of
              applications.
%%%
This individual investigator award will fund an
              experimental research project that attempts to address some of the most
              fundamental physics issues and potential applications associated with
              high-temperature superconducting cuprates. There are two primary experimental
              approaches. One involves the use a low-temperature scanning tunneling
              microscope (STM) to study the microscopic physical properties of cuprates with
              atomic-scale spatial resolution, thereby proving direct information for the
              quantum nature of these unconventional superconductors. The other experimental
              approach involves studying how various superconducting properties of the
              cuprates are modified under the injection of electrical currents in novel
              devices comprising of thin-film layers of ferromagnet-insulator-superconductor
              (F-I-S) and normal metal-insulator-superconductor (N-I-S) heterostructures. In
              addition to potentially significant impact of these studies on revealing the
              fundamental physics of cuprate superconductivity, the wide range of frontier
              experimental techniques employed in conducting this project will provide sound
              technical and scientific training for the participating students and
              postdoctoral researchers.  Furthermore, the tunable superconducting properties
              of the F-I-S heterostructures under variable injection currents are promising
              candidates for various microelectronic device applications.
***

