Title       : Bayesian Analysis and Frequentist Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0103265

Award Number: 0103265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James O. Berger berger@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James O Berger

Four areas in Bayesian analysis and its interfaces with
              frequentist statistical reasoning will be pursued.  The first is model
              selection, in particular the greatly needed development of automatic Bayesian
              methodology for choosing between models.  Other problems in model selection
              that will be considered include the question of optimal choice of a model when
              prediction is the goal, and study and comparison of large sample approximations
              in Bayesian model selection.  The second area of research is objective Bayesian
              analysis, which will culminate in the preparation of a research monograph on
              the subject (with associated software for practical implementation).  Included
              in the research that must be performed to reach this goal is the development of
              objective prior distributions for covariance matrices and the practically very
              important class of hierarchical models.  The third area is nonparametric
              Bayesian analysis, especially involving use of wavelets.  The final area of
              research that will be addressed is conditional frequentist testing, and its
              unification with Bayesian testing.

The advances in model selection and
              nonparametric Bayesian methodology will be utilized in the study of Cepheid
              variable star oscillations, which are key to establishing astronomical
              distances.  The work on objective Bayesian inference will impact the setting of
              confidence limits in physics.  The development of conditional frequentist tests
              will be undertaken in a variety of biostatistical settings, especially
              involving clinical trials.  In addition to these interdisciplinary impacts, the
              research will benefit education and human development through intensive
              training of graduate students and the incorporation of the developed
              methodology in statistics courses at Duke University and elsewhere.


