Title       : NIRT: Self-Aligned and Self-Limited Quantum Dot Nanoswitches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0103248

Award Number: 0103248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger pberger@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Lake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Fay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilesanmi Adesida  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses the fabrication of quantum
              scale devices through the combined oxidation and etching of Si/SiGe/Si
              nanostructured pillars. The project aims to  demonstrate the validity of
              nanoscale computing by developing a process technology to fashion quantum dots
              of a predictable size, shape and placement, suitable for mass production and
              simple electrical contact. The project includes specific strategies and
              processes to control the size and composition of the nanostructured pillars and
              the resulting quantum dots and oxide insulators to be formed. The research
              spans issues of materials science, circuits, and device fabrication and
              characterization; the structures to be fabricated are closely integrated with
              quantum level devices necessary for cellular automata circuits. Methods of high
              speed testing to characterize the devices as well as theoretical modeling to
              optimally design the structures are included.  The project is highly
              collaborative between Ohio State, Illinois, Notre Dame, UC Riverside, the Naval
              Research Laboratory and Air Force Research Laboratory. 
%%% 
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with
              high technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project brings together
              electrical engineers, material scientists, physicists, computer scientists,
              experimentalists, and theoreticians for the purpose of realizing advanced
              nanostructured quantum dot devices. The project is designed to develop strong
              technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in students
              through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront research
              environment. There will be active involvement of undergraduates in the program
              with an emphasis on developing effective oral and written communication skills.
              Cross-disciplinary research and site visits to each other will enhance the
              educational process. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM and ECS/EPDT
              Divisions/Programs.
*** 

