Title       : Group Actions on Manifolds with Positive Sectional Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0103993

Award Number: 0103993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishnan Shankar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract for DMS - 0103993

A general problem in Riemannian geometry is to
              find and describe manifolds
that admit a complete Riemannian metric of
              positive sectional curvature.
If there is no positive lower bound on the
              curvature, then the manifold is
known to be diffeomorphic to Euclidean space,
              by the Cheeger-Gromoll-Meyer
Soul theorem. In the class of closed, positively
              curved manifolds, there
are few restrictions, most of which are classical,
              such as the
Bonnet-Myers and Synge theorems. For closed, simply connected
              manifolds,
there is essentially just Gromov's theorem bounding the total Betti
              number
in a given dimension. Given that there are few known obstructions, it
              is
frustrating that the set of known examples, although infinite,
              is
relatively small. My research is concerned with understanding the
              geometry
and topology of the known examples. More specifically, the goals are:
              1)
to attempt to find new examples of positively curved manifolds by
              studying
more general metrics on biquotients (in collaboration with
              J.-H.
Eschenburg), 2) to compute the isometry groups for the known
              cohomogeneity
one manifolds of positive curvature and 3) to see whether
              the
7-dimensional Berger space is diffeomorphic to a 3-sphere bundle over
              the
4-sphere (in collaboration with N. Kitchloo).

Riemannian geometry arose
              from trying to understand curvature. 
Intuitively, we know that tabletops are
              flat while basketballs and saddles
are curved.  Geometers are able to quantify
              curvature precisely and it
provides a numerical invariant that helps
              distinguish objects.  For
instance, the surface of a doughnut and the surface
              of a coffee cup have
the same nature i.e., they are both surfaces with one
              hole, but they are
shaped differently. On the other hand, the surface of a
              ball (usually
called a sphere) is different in shape and nature from the
              surface of a
doughnut (usually called a torus). How can we be sure that this
              is always
the case? One may wonder if it is possible to deform the sphere
              suitably
so that we might end up with the torus. A sphere has positive
              curvature
everywhere while it can be shown that no matter what shape a torus
              takes,
it will always have zero curvature somewhere. This tells us that the
              two
objects are somehow fundamentally different from each other. 
              Differential
geometry is also the language used to express the general theory
              of
relativity, our best theoretical description of gravity and its effects
              on
the universe. In general relativity, a vacuous space-time universe
              would
be inherently flat. This idealized state is warped by the presence
              of
masses or energy, Thus, gravity is the curvature in space-time, and
              by
understanding the geometry of Lorentzian space-time, one may some
              day
understand the shape of the universe. My work involves the study
              of
positively curved objects in higher dimensions. This is part of trying
              to
understand how the structure imposed by curvature (geometry) is
              essential
to understanding the nature (topology) of an object and vice
              versa.

