Title       : Aspects of Geometry and Topology Related to High Energy Theoretical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0103877

Award Number: 0103877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66999              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Morgan jm@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0103877
John W. Morgan

The work proposed to be carried out under this
              grant concerns mathematical formulation and proof of some of the mathematical
              dualities arising from high energy physics. The first duality 
to be studied
              concerns the F-theory/heterotic string duality. 
The mathematical formulation
              of the duality is that for a 
certain range of parameters the moduli spaces of
              classical 
vacua for various compactifications of F-theory and of 
heterotic
              string theory should be isomorphic.  We conjecture 
that the appropriate
              mathematical statement is that the 
moduli spaces of heterotic vacua are
              non-normal infinite-sheeted coverings of the F-theory moduli space associated
              with  
maximal parabolic subgroups of the fundamental group of 
the F-theory
              moduli space. These maximal parabolic subgroups 
are the fundamental groups of
              neighborhoods of certain 
divisors at infinity. This study involves a detailed
              analysis 
of the moduli space of semi-stable principal bundles over 
elliptic
              curves as well as the notions of differential 
cohomology. The second duality
              is the famous quantum field 
theory duality between SU(2) Yang-Mills theory
              and the 
abelian Seiberg-Witten theory. These dual descriptions 
are simply
              the high and low energy limits of a twisted 
version of supersymmetric
              Yang-Mills theory. One part of 
a mathematical understanding of this duality
              involves 
giving precise mathematical formulations of the high and 
low
              energy limits of the twisted supersymmetric theory 
and showing how certain
              correlation functions in this 
twisted theory  converge in the sense of
              perturbation 
theory to the usual Donaldson polynomial invariants in the
              
high energy limit and to the Seiberg-Witten invariants in 
the low energy
              limit. This part of the story is surely 
amenable to rigorous mathematical
              formulation. The 
more ambitious goal is to find some mathematical 
formalism
              which allows for a mathematically rigorous 
interpelation between these two
              limits -- a mathematical 
substitute for the mathematically undefined quantum
              
field theory -- which would allow one to compare the 
high and low energy
              limits.      

The connection between mathematics and high energy
              
theoretical physics has always been a close one. In the 
last few years it
              has taken on new aspects. With the 
study of global issues in quantum field
              theory and string 
theory has come a new level of interaction between geometry
              
and topology and these areas of theoretical physics. Belief 
in the
              existence of these (to date non-rigorous) physics 
theories leads physicists
              to make predictions, i.e., 
conjectures in mathematics.  In a strange way
              these 
conjectures play the role that physical predictions used 
to play. Now
              the physicists take confirmation that they are 
on the right track when these
              mathematical predictions can 
be verified by rigorous mathematics, which,
              since it is 
rigorous, can not make use of the quantum field theory
              
paradigms that we used to make the prediction in the 
first place. The
              interest in mathematics of this interplay 
is that the sorts of mathematical
              statements that are 
predicted in this way have turned out to be quite novel
              
producing conjectures unlike anything that had been seen 
before. Much of
              the progress the last ten or fifteen years 
in large areas of geometry and
              topology traces back to this 
source. One of the most fruitful sources of
              mathematical 
conjectures has been various dualities in physics. These 
occur
              when there is more than one classical mathematical 
limit of a quantum field
              theory or string theory. The 
mathematical objects that arise in the
              description of 
the classical limits then are related because they are
              
limits of a single quantum field theory or string theory. 
The mathematical
              problem is always the same -- define 
rigorously what the relationship is and
              then establish it mathematically. The work proposed here is exactly along
              
these lines for two such dualities. 

