Title       : Analytic and Geometric Properties of Random Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0103939

Award Number: 0103939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davar Khoshnevisan davar@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yimin Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with the development of a systematic approach to the
              study of analytic and geometric properties of random fields.  Special emphasis
              is placed on Gaussian and stable random fields such as the Brownian sheet,
              stable sheets and additive Levy processes.  The investigators wish to continue
              their study of precise quantitative connections between the aforementioned
              random fields and the theory of capacities, as well as potential theory for
              general Markov type random sets.  They believe that these connections will
              yield detailed analytic and geometric information about the random fields in
              question.  Amongst other things, two long-standing open problems are
              emphasized: one on the potential theory of the Brownian sheet, and the other in
              the theory of random coverings.  The investigators also plan to develop and
              advance canonical techniques for fractal and multifractal analysis of a large
              class of multiparameter Levy processes, as well as the Brownian sheet.  They
              expect these techniques will, in turn, be useful in studying complex random
              fields and processes.

The Gaussian and stable random fields considered in
              this project play a prominent role in many areas of pure and applied
              mathematics, statistics, mathematical physics, medical imaging, ecology,
              geology, geophysics, oceanography, hydrology, as well as mathematical finance. 
              This research is concerned with developing and introducing various analytic and
              geometric tools that will lead to a better understanding of geometric problems
              for random fields, as well as help promote their future applicability.

