Title       : NIRT: Semiconductor Nanowires: Building Blocks for Nanoscale Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0103068

Award Number: 0103068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1450000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Redwing jmr31@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ari Mizel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa S. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne E. Mohney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses nanoscale effects on
              synthesis and properties of semiconductor nanowires. A versatile,
              template-based approach to the synthesis of metal/semiconductor/metal nanowires
              will be developed, utilizing nanoporous membranes as substrates for nanowire
              assembly using semiconductor vapor-liquid-solid growth and metal
              electrodeposition. This approach provides the ability to synthesize single
              crystal semiconductor structures sandwiched between contact metal segments in a
              single nanowire with controlled diameters and lengths. After removal from the
              membrane, a field assisted assembly method will be used to attract and align
              the nanowires suspended in solution on to pre-patterned contact pads on a
              substrate. An electric field is used to polarize the nanowires and induce
              alignment via dielectrophoresis. Field assembly will be used to align and
              position large numbers of nanowires on large area contact pads for electrical
              characterization. Fabrication studies will focus on two materials, Si and GaAs,
              enabling a study of nanoscale effects in indirect and direct gap
              semiconductors. Structures with dimensions ranging from hundreds of nanometers
              to tens of angstroms will be produced and characterized to study the impact of
              length scale on the physical properties of nanowires. The development of
              vapor-liquid-solid growth methods in nanoporous membranes will encompass a
              study of vapor phase transport, reaction kinetics, nucleation and crystal
              growth in nanoscale cylindrical geometries. The fabrication of
              metal/semiconductor junctions within individual nanowires will be used to
              engineer nanocontacts in these structures and probe phase equilibria,
              interfacial reaction kinetics, Fermi level pinning and ohmic and Schottky
              contact characteristics in small dimensional structures. The ability to rapidly
              position and measure large numbers of individual nanowires will be used to
              carry out detailed measurements of electrical transport. Theoretical studies of
              band structure and carrier scattering in restricted geometries will be carried
              out in conjunction with the experimental work to provide insight into the
              experimental findings. An interdisciplinary team with specific expertise in
              semiconductor crystal growth, metal/semiconductor contacts, nanowire
              self-assembly and characterization and the theory of nanostructure electronic
              properties will carry out the research. The team includes faculty members from
              Materials Science and Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Physics. The
              interwoven structure of the research and the close physical proximity of the
              investigators will enable co-advising of graduate students and the development
              of individual thesis projects that encompass a range of topics in nanoscale
              synthesis, assembly, characterization and theory. The project will also include
              the preparation of educational modules, developed in conjunction with a high
              school physics instructor, that are designed to introduce concepts in
              nanotechnology to a general audience. The modules will be used by team members
              in their current K-12 education and outreach activities and in additional
              on-campus programs that target minority and female recruitment in science and
              engineering.
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science with high technological relevance. An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              The project is designed to develop strong technical, communication, and
              organizational/management skills in students through unique educational
              experiences made possible by a forefront research environment. There will be
              active involvement of undergraduates in the program and formal emphasis on
              developing effective oral and written communication skills. The project is
              co-supported by the DMR/EM, CTS/CRP, and CTS/FPH Divisions/Programs.
*** 

