Title       : NER: Microarray Devices of Aligned Carbon Nanotubes for Biological/Biomedical
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0103012

Award Number: 0103012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tsu-Wei Chou chou@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Z. F. Ren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Novotny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.   The goal of the
              research is to explore the potential application of carbon nanotubes for
              greatly enhancing the efficiency of existing microarray devices in
              biological/biomedical research. The proposed work will synthesize arrays of
              well-aligned carbon nanotubes that can be used to transfer biomolecules from
              the tips of the nanotubes for creating microarrays at a level of packing
              density not achievable by current techniques. Carbon nanotubes are uniquely
              suited for this application owing to their extremely high elastic modulus and
              strength as well as exceptional capability in sustaining large nonlinear
              elastic deformation.

This is a preliminary feasibility study of a novel idea
              in nanoscience and engineering with focuses on nanoscale devices and systems
              architecture, and modeling  and simulation at the nanoscale. The effort is
              likely to catalyze rapid advances in biological/biomedical research.

The
              objectives of this exploratory research are to (a) better understand the growth
              of aligned carbon nanotubes for achieving optimal control of their length,
              diameter, and packing density 
in microarrays, (b) better understand the
              structures and performance of individual nanotubes 
as well as microarrays
              through microscopic and mechanical characterizations, (c) initiate
              computational mechanics effort at both the continuum and atomistic levels for
              modeling the 
nano-structure, chirality, and mechanical behavior of nanotubes,
              (d) develop the tools and criteria for assessing the performance of this novel
              microarray device for biological/biomedical research, and (e) evaluate the
              feasibility of the nanotube-based microarray devices.

It is expected that
              this project will advance microarray technology to enable more rapid  study by
              biological and biomedical investigators in areas of genetic research.
              Ultimately,this technology may result in advancements in the study and
              treatment of human disease. Fundamentalinvestigations on synthesis,
              characterization, and property modeling of carbon nanotubes will benefit the
              technology of nanotube synthesis and engineering. Better understanding of
              nanotube growth mechanisms will enable improved synthesis and control of the
              nanotube structure. Development of structure/property models for mechanical
              behavior of carbon nanotubes, along with synthesis/structure relationships,
              will ultimately provide a tool for engineering their mechanical properties.

