Title       : NER: A Novel Concept of Electrophoretic Separation of Long DNA Molecules with
               High Resolution at the Nanoscale Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0103470

Award Number: 0103470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir A. Samuilov vsamuilov@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dilip Gersappe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
CTS-0103470

NER: A Novel Concept for Electrophoretic  Separation
              of Long DNA Molecules with High Resolution at Nanoscale Dimensions.


              Vladimir A. Samuilov  and Dilip Gersappe
State University of New York Stony
              Brook


The recent advances in molecular biology rely on improved techniques
              for the separation of long (multi-kilobasepairs  and megabasepairs)  DNA
              molecules. Current methods employ electrophoresis of DNA molecules in different
              sieving matrixes, such as junction points in a gel and the entanglements in
              polymer solutions.  Separation of DNA by size, in particular, is at the heart
              of genome mapping and sequencing and is likely to play an increasing role in
              diagnosis. There have been important advances in fast-developing and innovative
              technology like elechophoresis on microchips.  In the implementation of
              micro-fabricated systems for electrophoresis based on silicon technology, the
              interaction of DNA molecules with the surfaces of the devices should be taken
              into account in analyzing the mechanisms of the separation. This research
              introduces a novel approach to the liquid-solid interface as the separation
              medium and to the mechanism of electrophoresis itself at nanoscale dimensions.
              Also, a new concept of loading of the DNA sample onto a microchip is
              considered. 

Specifically the study considers the electrical transport
              properties of long DNA molecules at a flat liquid-semiconductor interface.
              One-dimensional positioning of DNA molecules on a silicon surface is
              accomplished by a simple physical alignment process using capillary forces
              applied by the receding front of an evaporating drop containing DNA molecules. 
              A diblock-copolymer system, self-assembled with L-B technique, is used to
              produce patterns at the nanometer length scale, which are used as a template
              for introducing metal nanopatterns on semiconductor surfaces to serve as DNA
              separation media.  Success in this effort will make possible more rapid and
              more precise DNA analyses for a variety of applications and provide an
              important new tool for genetic analyses.


