Title       : On-Chip Molecular Scale Patterning and Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0103297

Award Number: 0103297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Ober cober@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nitash P. Balsara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich B. Wiesner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey W. Coates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering' (NSF 00-119). This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
              (NIRT) will produce and characterize photonic structures containing ordered
              elements on length scales ranging from the molecular (< 1 nm) to the
              macroscopic (mm) by the patterning of self-organizing block copolymers.
              Self-Assembled Polymer microphotonics has the potential for the ready
              production of precision optical devices or elements using low cost materials
              and simple processing steps. The team will study 1, 2, and 3 dimensionally
              periodic photonic materials with finely tuned optical properties. Such
              materials will have probable impact on technologies for communications devices,
              sensors, integrated devices and related electro-optic technologies. The team
              will design and create the required polymers, cany out the proposed processing
              and characterize and measure the resulting nanostructures and anticipated
              electro-optical devices. The patterning of block copolymers offers remarkable
              possibilities for size control on much smaller length scales than currently
              possible and with intricate geometries and functions not realizable with
              convcntional lithography alone. In addition to advances in microphotonics, the
              success of this project has the potential to completely revolutionize the way
              all routine lithographic nanopatterning is carried out and to open up new
              strategies for integrating soft materials onto a silicon device platform. Team
              members consist of four Cornell faculty, Christopher Ober, (team leader), Geoff
              Coates, Sol Gruner and Uli Wiesner plus Edwin Thomas of MIT and Nitash Balsara
              of UC Berkeley. Both Balsara and Thomas are internationally recognized experts
              in the study and control of block copolymer microstructure. Thomas is also a
              pioneer in the field of block copolymer microphotonics. Coates, Ober and
              Wiesner are known for their ability to synthesize unique polymers and Gruner
              for characterization expertise. Our partners (Rohm & Haas and Wright Materials
              Labs) are established centers for research in lithography and the optical
              behavior of materials, respectively and will provide valuable expertise to this
              NIRT.
