Title       : Design and Analysis of Fractional Factorial Split-Plot Experiments in Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0103886

Award Number: 0103886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek Bingham dbingham@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is a theoretical and practical study of split-plot
              designs in industrial applications.  While split-plot designs maintain many of
              the fundamental features of industrial experimental design such as effect
              sparsity, effect hierarchy and effect heredity, the more complicated
              randomization structure impacts both the design and the analysis of the
              experiment. Regular and non-regular fractional factorial split-plot designs are
              studied.  In both cases, the fundamental problems considered are (i) defining
              optimality criteria for split-plot designs in industrial applications; (ii)
              constructing optimal split-plot designs; and (iii) analysis of split-plot
              designs.  Novel approaches for constructing optimal regular and non-regular
              fractional factorial split-plot designs will be proposed. To analyze
              non-regular fractional factorial split-plot designs, new Bayesian variable
              selection procedures are entertained.  Lastly, the connection between
              split-plot designs and other designs (i.e., compound orthogonal arrays and
              robust parameter designs) will be addressed.

The design and analysis of
              experiments have been successfully used in efforts to improve products and
              processes.  They have made important contributions to scientific discovery and
              innovation and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future.  Most recent
              advancements relate to experiments where the trials are performed as completely
              randomized designs. However, many industrial processes take place in multiple. 
              This experiment structure induces correlation between observations and a
              "split-plot" design results. The aim of the proposed research is a theoretical
              and practical study of the design and analysis of fractional factorial
              split-plot experiments in industrial applications.  The proposed work will
              develop new techniques for constructing and analyzing such experiments. The
              potential gains realized by performing an experiment as a split-plot design
              include more efficient and cost effective designs and increased power to detect
              some significant effects of interest. 
 

 

