Title       : Research in Stochastic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0103253

Award Number: 0103253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Marcus mbmarcus@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay S. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Professors Marcus and Rosen have been studying the relationship between the
              local times of strongly symmetric Markov processes and Gaussian processes for
              many years. They have obtained many interesting results about local times which
              they have published in more than a dozen papers and a monograph. Until recently
              their work was based on an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin, which is difficult to
              prove and to apply. In the last two years this has all changed. Together with
              Professors Eisenbaum, Kaspi and Shi, they have obtained new, simple
              isomorphisms relating local times and Gaussian processes and have greatly
              simplified and clarified their early work. They have also obtained many new
              results; the most significant is a simplified version of Ray's theorem on the
              local times of diffusions. They will continue this work to generalize the scope
              of Ray's theorem to consider local times of processes which are not continuous.
              They will apply their new results and techniques to consider other properties
              of Markov processes that can be studied through their local times. They also
              plan to extend their results to more general classes of continuous additive
              functionals of strongly symmetric Markov processes by comparing them to
              Gaussian chaos processes. Professor Marcus will continue his studies of sample
              path properties of infinitely divisible moving average processes. These process
              are fundamental in applied mathematics. They appear to have remarkable
              smoothness properties and to behave better than similarly defined Gaussian
              processes. This surprising observation will be investigated. Professor Rosen
              plans to study the time needed for a simple random walk to visit each point on
              a finite graph. The case of the two dimensional lattice torus is particularly
              challenging. He intends to study this discrete problem by relating it to a
              continuous one concerning Brownian motion on the two dimensional torus. This in
              turn will lead to the analysis of `late points', those points whose approach by
              the Brownian path takes an unusually large amount of time. Professor Rosen also
              plans to study points of infinite multiplicity on the path of planar Brownian
              motion.
	This research deals with fundamental properties of stochastic
              processes and has potential applications in all areas that deal with random
              phenomena. Generally speaking phenomena that evolve in time do so in a random
              fashion. Examples are the Dow Jones average, data on global warming or
              communication with satellites. Of particular importance is the amount of time
              that a process takes a specific value. This is studied in terms of the local
              time of the process. In this proposal the local times of Markov processes will
              be investigated by means of associated Gaussian processes. Until very recently
              these two important classes of stochastic processes, Markov processes and
              Gaussian processes, were considered to be essentially unrelated. Professors
              Marcus and Rosen have shown that they are intimately related and are searching
              for a unified theory for these important processes. 
