Title       : Differentiable Statistical Functionals and Bayes Asymptotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0103821

Award Number: 0103821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Dudley rmd@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigator and co-workers are studying differentiability of functionals
              of empirical measures and distribution functions.  In one dimension,
              p-variation norms work well for Frechet differentiability. Extensions to
              several dimensions are being pursued.  In Bayes asymptotics, normal
              approximations with small relative errors are being found even for small
              probabilities of intermediate deviations.

In Bayes asymptotics, one of the
              goals is to choose the best of several statistical models, possibly for
              multiple data sets.  For example, multiple clinical trials may be done of a
              treatment for a disease.  Three models are that the treatment is helpful, is
              harmful, or makes no difference.  Further models incorporate the possibility
              that the treatment may have substantially different effects in different study
              populations.  The procedure is to begin with a noninformative prior probability
              distribution on each model, then adjust it based on the likelihoods from each
              data set.  Improved approximations of the updated probabilities are being
              investigated. For differentiable statistical functionals, a data set gives an
              approximation to a probability distribution.  If a nonlinear transformation is
              applied both to the true distribution function and to its approximation, one
              looks for a linear transformation that approximates the nonlinear one as well
              as possible in the neighborhood of the true distribution.  One is also looking
              for effective ways of bounding the discrepancy between the true and approximate
              distributions and their transformations. 

