Title       : Stellar and Solar Magnetic Activity Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0103883

Award Number: 0103883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397393             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Wesley Lockwood gwl@lowell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lowell Observatory
	      1400 W. Mars Hill Road
	      Flagstaff, AZ  86001    928/774-3358

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will provide a better understanding of activity in cool stars
              on three essential timescales: activity-cycle (of order years), rotational
              (months), and short-term (days). The main effort is to continue the
              Solar-Stellar Spectrograph (SSS) project currently underway at Lowell
              Observatory. The SSS spectrograph is well suited for this task. It covers
              several important chromospheric diagnostic lines, including Ca II H and K and H
              alpha, as well as most of the optical spectrum from wavelengths 5000 to 9000
              angstroms. It is a dedicated instrument, associated with Lowell Observatory's
              1.1-meter John Hall telescope, which receives starlight from the telescope
              focal plane via a fiber-optic feed, but is also equipped with a solar
              "telescope" -- a raw fiber that sees the Sun as an unresolved disk. Sunlight
              and starlight are therefore recorded via the same optics and detectors -- a
              unique advantage. The spectra thus recorded can be studied in several ways.
              Time series observations of the emergent flux in spectral lines responsive to
              solar and stellar activity reveals the phase, amplitude, and morphology of
              activity cycles present. The SSS target list includes all stars brighter than
              visual magnitude 7.1 lying near the Sun's location on the main sequence
              (roughly spectral types F5 through K7, with emphasis between F8 and G8), as
              well as the Sun itself. Examination of seasonal variability reveals the degree
              of rotational modulation -- the change in emission level arising not from the
              activity cycle, but from the passage of active regions across the visible
              hemispheres. This provides insights regarding the degree of chromospheric
              activity that accompanies cycles of various amplitudes and morphologies. The
              spectrum-to-spectrum variability examined across a broad ensemble of related
              spectral lines, reveals changes in solar and stellar activity on both short and
              long timescales. This is a new method of interpreting solar and stellar
              activity, developed for this project that will be fully exploited in the
              proposed grant cycle.
