Title       : A Taxonomic Inventory of Marine Invertebrate-associated Microbes from the
               Microbial Culture Collection of Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0103668

Award Number: 0103668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose V. Lopez lopez@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie B. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0103668
Jose Lopez
Peter McCarthy
Julie Olsen

A grant has been awarded
              to Drs. Jose Lopez, Peter McCarthy, and Julie Olson at Harbor Branch
              Oceanographic Institution (HBOI) to perform a taxonomic survey and inventory of
              deeper water marine microorganisms contained in HBOI's microbial culture
              collection.  The approximately 9000 microorganisms within the collection were
              isolated from deep-water marine invertebrates (primarily sponges). This project
              will survey about half of the collection using a combination of descriptive and
              molecular genetic techniques, provide access to this information via the
              Internet, creation of a Harbor Branch Marine Microbe Database (HBMMD) and
              professional scientific publications, and apply the knowledge gained to
              examinations of the genetic diversity within preserved specimens of the host
              invertebrates. It is thought that the microbial communities associated with
              marine invertebrates will differ with the species of host invertebrate,
              geographic location, and water depth.

Little is known about the biological
              and genetic diversity of marine microorganisms.  Due to the inherent
              difficulties associated with gaining access to deep-water environments, even
              less is known about deeper water marine microbes. There is an urgent need to
              study the diversity of marine ecosystems, which are under increasing threats
              caused by tourism, recreational use, nutrient overload, and general ocean
              warming.  Understanding the balance of biodiversity in marine ecosystems which
              are still relatively healthy will enhance our ability to manage and conserve
              them, suggest possible goals in the restoration of similar but less healthy
              marine systems, and help to foster a greater global appreciation of microbial
              ecosystems.            

