Title       : Dynamics in Time Dependent Continuous and Discrete Equations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0103381

Award Number: 0103381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenxian Shen ws@math.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103381 

Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics in Time
              Dependent Continuous and Discrete Equations and Applications
              

Abstract
DMS-0103381
Wenxian Shen


This project investigates three
              aspects of the dynamics of time dependent (specifically time quasi-periodic and
              almost periodic) continuous and discrete equations: (i) traveling waves in
              time-dependent evolution equations; (ii) asymptotic behavior of time-dependent
              population models, and (iii) oscillatory dynamics for quasi- or almost periodic
              oscillators and wave equations.  In the first area, problems related to
              traveling wave solutions in time dependent continuous and discrete equations of
              bistable and Kolmogorov-Petrovskii-Piskunov types are studied.  The second
              research topic is focused primarily on uniform persistence, coexistence and
              convergence in time dependent multi-species competition models.  The third area
              concerns a general study of oscillatory dynamics in quasi- or almost periodic
              oscillators and wave equations through investigation of the existence and
              structure of attractors in general quasi-periodically forced first-order
              "oscillators" as well as some second order oscillators.  The results of the
              project will enhance understanding of dynamics in time-dependent continuous and
              discrete equations and will have application to numerous physical and
              biological problems.

It is very important to understand the asymptotic
              behavior of solutions of nonautonomous differential equations, especially in
              situations where the nonautonomous part depends on time in a roughly, but not
              exactly, periodic way.  Such equations are widely used as models for processes
              in biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering.  A deep understanding of such
              almost-periodic or quasi-periodic equations will have a great impact on the
              development of theory as well as on applications.  The objective of the
              proposed research is to investigate various aspects, of interest in
              applications, of the solutions to such equations.  The results of the project
              will have significant impact for the analysis of a wide range of mathematical
              models that are based on these equations.

