Title       : Mathematical Aspects of Frontal Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0103856

Award Number: 0103856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir A. Volpert v-volpert@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0103856
PI: 			Volpert, Vladimir 
Institution:
              		Northwestern University
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Mathematical Aspects of Frontal
              Polymerization

The research project is devoted to theoretical investigations
              of frontal polymerization (FP) processes, in which a localized reaction zone
              propagates into a monomer converting it into a polymer. The project addresses
              both modeling of specific FP processes and the study of more general
              mathematical problems motivated by these modeling efforts. Specific modeling
              topics 
include the study of initiation of FP waves, their linear and
              nonlinear stability and fluid dynamical behavior. Asymptotic approaches are
              used to determine the structure of the polymerization wave and the composition
              of the product, as well as such experimentally measurable characteristics of
              the wave as its propagation velocity as a function of the kinetic and
              thermophysical parameters of the problem and the initial conditions. Topics of
              a more general mathematical nature are concerned with threshold phenomena in
              reaction diffusion systems, existence of time-periodic traveling waves of
              monotone parabolic systems, new kinds of integro-differential equations
              describing polymerization kinetics, and new forms of solutions of reaction
              diffusion systems, the so-called quasi-traveling wave solutions, the
              characteristics of which, including the propagation speed, vary slowly in
              time.

The importance of the proposed studies of frontal polymerization is
              twofold. First, it is a method to produce polymers which have become an
              integral part of human life. It bears strong similarities with another
              technological process occurring in a frontal regime, namely, self-propagating
              high-temperature synthesis which uses combustion waves to synthesize desired
              inorganic materials. Unlike the frontal polymerization process, the
              self-propagating high-temperature synthesis process is well-studied and is
              known to enjoy certain advantages over conventional technology, in which the
              mixture is placed in a furnace. These include (i) shorter synthesis times, (ii)
              less expense, since the internal chemical energy of the reactants is used
              rather than the external energy of the furnace, (iii) the use of simpler
              equipment, and (iv) purer products, since the high-temperature wave burns off
              volatile impurities. Similar benefits can be expected in polymer synthesis.
              Specifically, energy costs and waste solvent production can be reduced and
              unique materials obtained. However, before any advantages can be achieved and
              the frontal polymerization process becomes a competitive technology, a better
              understanding of the factors that affect frontal polymerization is necessary.
              Second, studies of specific models of frontal polymerization pose questions of
              a more general mathematical nature that are related to the behavior of
              solutions of general reaction/diffusion/convection systems. The study of these
              more general problems contributes to the understanding of specific frontal
              polymerization problems.

Date: June 18, 2001

