Title       : NER: Chemically Modified Nanotube Tips for Selective Imaging with Scanning
               Tunneling Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a0103476

Award Number: 0103476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97715              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Buhlmann buhlmann@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0103476
Buhlmann
This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering " (NSF 00-119)
One of the great challenges
              of nanotechnology is the development of techniques for imaging of nanoobjects.
              This research develops the methodology to observe surfaces at the molecular and
              atomic level with chemical selectivity. It is based on the use of scanning
              tunneling microscope (STM) tips that chemically interact with the sample
              surfaces of interest. STM has revolutionized surface analysis because it
              allowsimaging with atomic resolution even in air and liquids, where many other
              analysis methods fail. However, the limited ability for chemical recognition,
              i. e., for discrimination between different types of atoms or functional
              groups, is a weakness ofconventional scanning tunneling microscopy. This
              problem can be solved by allowing an STM tip to interact chemically with a
              sample.
Recently, it has been shown that the modification of gold tips with
              self-assembled monolayers or polypyrrole can be used to selectively recognize
              functional groups that  form hydrogen bonds. Preliminary results have shown
              that this method is also able to distinguish between functional groups that
              have different spatial orientations and to differentiate different metal atoms.
              The working principle of STMwith chemically modified tips resembles that of
              chemically modified electrodes in electroanalytical chemistry. While in the
              former case electrons are transferred between the STM tip and sample, the
              electron transfer in the latter caseoccurs between the sensor electrode and a
              molecule in the sample solution. In both cases, an overlap of the electronic
              wave functions of the electron-donating and accepting side is required for the
              electron transfer.In the latter case, the chemical modification of electrodes
              is used to control selected redox reactions. In the STM case, an analogous
              enhancement of electron  transfer by chemical tip modification results in
              selective recognition of selected functional groups or atoms in a surface
              image.
To observe individual functional groups or atoms on a sample, a
              chemically modified tip must interact chemically only with one functional group
              of the sample at a time. Unfortunately, electrochemically etchedand chemically
              modified metal tips that are sharp at the molecular level cannot be produced
              with high reproducibility. Consequently, chemical interactions between the
              sample and several interaction sites on chemically modified tip used so far 
              often occur simultaneously, impairing the resolution. To obtain very high
              resolution, this project explores the use of chemically modified carbon
              nanotubes as STM tips. Carbon nanotubesare  ideally suited for chemically
              modified STM tips. Carbon nanotubes have a cylindrical shape with diameters
              that are typically between 0.8 and 15 nm. These extraordinarily small diameters
              provide  for very slender and atomically sharp tips. Also, the rigid
              arrangement of the covalently linked carbon atoms that form a carbon nanotube
              results in great stiffness under conditions that are typical for STM
              imaging.
In this project, carbon nanotubes will be chemically modified in
              various ways and used to image well-understood test samples. The ability of
              chemically modified carbon nanotube tips to distinguish between different
              functional groups and atomsof the test samples will be investigated, and the
              experimental parameters determining the resolution will be studied.
The unique
              ability of STM to characterize samples at atmospheric pressure in liquids and
              gases, combined with the capability for chemical selec-tivity, should make this
              technique a very generaltool for nanosciences. Potential real-life applications
              are, for example, the characterization of nanodevices, self-assembled
              structures, catalytic surfaces, or electroanalytical sensor surfaces, as well
              asthe in-situ observation of chemical reactions and biological
              processes.
***


