Title       : Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT): Superhard Nanostructured
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0103169

Award Number: 0103169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1525000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Girshick slg@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. McMurry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Barry Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Heberlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Gerberich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1407,1415,1467,1468,1480,1674,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project will be conducted
              by a team that includes researchers on fracture micromechanics,
              characterization of structure and interfaces, plasma technology, aerosol
              technology, and microfabrication, together with collaborators at Los Alamos and
              Sandia National Laboratories.  Evidence from a number of studies suggests that
              it should be possible to produce nano-crystalline composites that are superhard
              possessing hardness rivaling diamond and that also possess other properties
              that make them superior to diamond for applications requiring friction and wear
              resistance.  A novel approach is proposed for synthesizing such materials,
              based on plasma synthesis and deposition of nanoparticles.   The synthesis tool
              will be hypersonic plasma particle deposition, in which nanoparticles nucleate
              in thermal plasma and are then accelerated, in a hypersonic expansion, causing
              them to deposit by high-velocity impact.  Nanocomposite films will be deposited
              with grain sizes in the range 5 to 10 nm, comprised of various combinations of
              the elements boron, carbon, nitrogen, silicon and titanium.  In separate
              experiments, aerodynamic lenses will be used to focus the nanoparticles to
              collimated beams.  These beams will be used in conjunction with
              microfabrication techniques to demonstrate fabrication of
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) devices from nanoparticles.

These
              synthesis studies will be supported by fundamental studies of
              structure-property relations.  The structure, crystallinity, chemical
              composition and deformation behavior of the synthesized material will be
              characterized at length scales ranging from the atomic level to individual
              nanosized grains, to interfacial regions, to the entire film.  In addition to
              these experimental studies, numerical simulations of nanoparticle deformation
              at the atomistic scale will be performed in the context of both the processing
              and the subsequent mechanical performance.  The highly interdisciplinary,
              highly interactive environment between two academic departments, several
              laboratories, and collaborators from Los Alamos and Sandia National Labs will
              provide graduate and undergraduate students with a breadth of experience in
              nanomanufacturing and nano-materials characterization.  In additions, K-8
              students involved in the NSF-supported ScienceWorks Program will be provided
              the opportunity to experience this novel research area.

