Title       : Dynamical Systems Approaches to Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0103915

Award Number: 0103915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarence E. Wayne cew@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103915
Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems
              Approaches to Partial Differential Equations
              

Abstract

DMS-0103915
Wayne


This project explores the long-time
              behavior of partial differential equations using tools from the theory of
              dynamical systems.  The equations to be studied include both dissipative and
              Hamiltonian systems.  As an example of the former, Professor Wayne will study
              the long-time behavior of the Navier-Stokes equations in the neighborhood of
              vortex solutions.  He will construct finite dimensional invariant manifolds in
              the phase space of these equations and use them to study both the long-time
              asymptotics of solutions of the equations and the existence of vortex solutions
              for which no explicit formulas exist.  In related work he will derive and
              rigorously justify approximate equations for the motion of waves on the surface
              of a fluid, studying in particular the interaction of colliding waves.  In
              addition, by using ideas first developed to study finite dimensional, nearly
              integrable, Hamiltonian systems, he will investigate the validity of commonly
              used beam and plate models for motion of elastic materials in thin domains. 
              Finally, in collaboration with a mathematical biologist at Brown University,
              Professor Wayne will study the existence and stability of pulses in models of
              neural tissue. 

The systems under study arise in many applications,
              including materials science, fluid mechanics, and biology.  Even though it is
              impossible to solve the equations that govern their motion explicitly,
              applications require at least a qualitative understanding of the behavior of
              their solutions.  For instance, the equations that describe vibrations of
              elastic materials are so complicated that their solution remains very time
              consuming, even with modern computational tools.  Consequently, engineers have
              derived many approximate models for the behavior of such systems, particularly
              in situations where one dimension of the system is much smaller than others, as
              is the case for beams and plates.  Very little is known rigorously, however,
              about how well these models actually mimic the true behavior of the beam or
              plate.  This research aims both to provide accurate estimates of the errors
              that occur in using such models and to develop an algorithm that permits one to
              systematically improve the models.  In a similar vein, Professor Wayne will
              also investigate models for waves on the ocean.  Recently it has been realized
              that the wake of high-speed ferries can produce solitary waves of sufficient
              magnitude to cause significant damage at the shore.  The mechanism by which
              these waves are created in the wake is not yet understood.  Understanding the
              relationship between the solitary waves of the model problem and the solutions
              of the actual water wave problem may shed light on the creation and propagation
              of this type of wake.   

