Title       : NER: Investigation of Electronic Transport in Carbon Nanotubes Using an
               Ultrafast Photoconduction Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0103227

Award Number: 0103227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Janes janes@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xianfan Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Supriyo Datta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Reifenberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 
This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.  Carbon nanotubes
              are of interest as electronic conductors because of their unique properties,
              notably their behavior as 1-D conductors and their ballistic nature over
              several microns at room temperature.  A general picture of electronic
              conduction in nanotubes is being developed by researchers in the field. 
              Although the transient response of current flow is expected to be quite rapid
              (picosecond range), present experimental data for conduction properties of
              nanotubes is primarily obtained at low frequencies or in static measurements. 
              In order to shed light on the fundamental current transport processes in
              nanotubes, an experimental and theoretical effort is proposed to develop
              characterization techniques which would allow the measurement of the transient
              current responses through nanotube conductors.  This work will address two
              issues: i) the integration of nanotube conductors with appropriate high speed
              photoconductor materials and ii) the development of characterization techniques
              for nanoscale conductors based on pump/probe measurements using high speed
              pulsed laser systems.  It is expected that the proposed work will shed light on
              the conduction processes of these interesting electronic materials and provide
              important capabilities for integration of these materials with other electronic
              materials, including semiconductor device structures.


