Title       : Topology & Dynamics of Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0103889

Award Number: 0103889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214214             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Goldman wmg@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0103889
William M. Goldman

This project continues the PI's investigation
              of locally 
homogeneous geometric structures on manifolds, their moduli
              
spaces and their symmetries. The holonomy correspondence 
relates moduli of
              geometric structures to the representation 
theory of the fundamental group. 
              The primary geometric 
structures of this investigation include conformally
              flat 
Lorentz and Riemannian structures, real projective and affine
              structures, and real and complex hyperbolic structures. 
Dynamical questions
              concerning both the action of the 
fundamental group, various flows (including
              and generalizing
the geodesic, horocycle and frame flows) and the
              automorphisms 
of the moduli space will be studied. The close interaction
              
between the dynamics of the mapping class group and the 
global topology of
              the moduli space is especially notable.  
The moduli spaces often possess
              symplectic structures which 
lead to important and mysterious algebraic
              constructions, 
such as the Lie algebra based on curves in a smooth
              surface.

These objects play an increasingly important role both 
in
              mathematics and physics.  Lorentzian manifolds arise as 
cosmological models
              in relativity. Moduli spaces have become 
central in quantum physics, and
              mapping class group actions 
and Teichmuller space have become prominent in
              2-dimensional 
quantum gravity.  This study lies in the interface between
              geometry/topology, dynamical systems, analysis and algebra. 
Despite their
              complicated nature, the examples studied are
extremely explicit.  Thus one can
              profitably investigate 
them experimentally. Our current computer technology
              is 
appropriate for such projects. With Dr. Richard Schwartz 
and the support
              of the University of Maryland Mathematics 
Department, the Experimental
              Geometry Lab has been operating 
for over a year. This lab has included
              software projects 
performed by postgraduates, graduate students, and
              especially undergraduates.

