Title       : Nonparametric and Robust Multivariate Analysis via Quantile Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0103698

Award Number: 0103698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Serfling serfling@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops concepts, perspectives, and tools leading toward a
              conceptually well-founded theory and methodology of nonparametric and robust
              data analysis in arbitrary dimension. The general framework being developed
              includes extensions of the traditional tools of one-dimensional analysis as
              well as tools unique to the higher-dimensional context.  A theory of "median
              oriented quantile functions" having probabilistic interpretations similar to
              univariate quantiles is being pursued.  A central approach is based on
              statistical depth functions.  A major secondary objective is to bring the
              depth-based approach to a definitive degree of completion.  Topics receiving
              special focus include multivariate quantile functions, depth functions,
              vector-valued L-statistics, matrix-valued scale statistics, generalized
              quantile processes, and generalized L-statistics. Linearization techniques via
              functional representations are used. Overall, the project advances
              nonparametric and robust multivariate analysis using quantile methods and
              addresses a range of specific applications.

As the scope of application of
              multivariate statistical modeling has widened, the treatment of multivariate
              probability distributions and data has become increasingly important and
              central.  A great deal of univariate statistical analysis is carried out in
              terms of percentiles, which lend themselves easily to interpretation.  The use
              of percentiles has become fundamental.  This project extends such methodology
              to higher dimension, to support a coherent and meaningful "percentiles"
              approach to the analysis and interpretation of multivariate data.  Users of
              multivariate statistics in diverse fields of application thus acquire a tool
              that is of fundamental importance and conceptually well understood.

