Title       : RUI: Development of Frame Extensions and their Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0103762

Award Number: 0103762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shidong Li shidong@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0103762
Li

A program of research related to the application of pseudoframes
              for 
subspaces (PFFS) and relevant interpolation techniques is proposed.
              
Theme 1 of the program studies the contribution of PFFSs to artifact
              
reduction in data/image compression.  Key observations lie in the fact that
              
there are symmetric and compactly supported biorthogonal wavelets, but 
not
              within an MRA (of compactly supported wavelets). It shows the "lack 
of room"
              within the MRA subspace structure. PFFS is a tool to explore the 
insight
              story of such a phenomenon.  Theme 2 focuses on a new 
construction approach
              of interpolatory multiresolution analysis (I-MRA).  
The key observation is
              that an interpolatory sequence can be defined by 
sampled reproducing kernel
              function of a subspace V of an MRA.   It is 
expected that such an
              interpolatory sequence can easily form a basis or 
frame of V, giving rise to
              an interpolatory "interface" to the MRA, and a 
construction methodology of
              I-MRA.  Theme 3 studies applications of 
PFFSs in the Sinc-type methods for
              interpolations and quadratures.  The 
motivation is to explore the advantage
              of fast decaying properties of 
PFFSs in the Sinc-type applications.  In theme
              4, the P.I. expects to apply 
similar interpolation techniques as described in
              theme 2 to study multi-
band samplings using frames and/or PFFSs as
              fundamental tools. The 
technique of PFFSs with their flexibility is expected
              to play a role.

Each research topic is highly motivated by its applications
              in data/image 
compression, sampling and interpolation for efficient numerical
              
implementations.  PFFS is a tool to study a subspace V while "standing"
              
outside of it.  In doing so, one is given the freedom and additional "room"
              
to perform tasks in V by using advanced tools not available in V.  In
              
signal/image processing, such advanced properties of PFFS are extremely
              
useful because it is known that biorthogonal wavelets of finite length with
              
symmetry are desirable for reducing ``blocking'' and ``ringing'' effects, and
              
yet such biorthogonal wavelets do not reside in its dual wavelet subspace.
              
We believe that PFFS shall not only provide a class of biorthogonal 
wavelet
              examples, the additional information (known from the 
construction)
              contributed by PFFS will provide practical insight about 
"blocking" and
              "ringing" artifacts, and thereby delivers new solutions and 
enhanced
              signal/image compression rate and communication speed.   
Other applications
              of PFFSs in irregular sampling (for multi-band 
functions) as well as in the
              Sinc-type methods (for interpolation and 
quadratures) are all based on
              applying flexible properties of PFFSs.  The 
expectations include enhanced
              practical efficiency and improved rate of 
convergence.   The project on
              interpolatory multiresolution analysis has 
practical applications in data
              acquisition/sampling while simultaneously 
performing the wavelet transform. 
              One of the key ingredients of the study 
is to build an interpolatory
              "interface" to a given MRA and still keep the 
underlying desirable wavelet
              properties.

