Title       : NER: Nanoparticle Deposition and Implantation: Exploratory Research into a New
               Method for Making and Modifying Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0103118

Award Number: 0103118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Myrick myrick@mail.chem.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna A. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian R. Genge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1676,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0103118
Myrick
This proposal was received in response to the solicitation
              "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).

This project will explore
              a novel technique for film formation and implantation that is applicable to
              vacuum processing of polymers and low-vapor-pressure organic materials.  This
              approach uses accelerated nanoparticles to create films from materials that
              ordinarily require non-vacuum processing (such as spin-casting) and are thus
              incompatible with most integrated circuit/semiconductor processing methods. 
              

Nanoparticles will be injected into a vacuum chamber by a particle beam
              interface that employs a supersonic free jet expansion and an electron impact
              ionization system to charge and accelerate the particles.  We will explore
              whether this interface can be used to deposit nanoparticles with sufficient
              kinetic energy to instanteously melt the materials on impact.  It is hoped that
              the use of nanoparticles may keep the energy density of the material below the
              point at which the primary chemical nature of the particle is irreversibly
              altered. 

Nanoparticles deposited by settling and acceleration onto surfaces
              will be studied with surface spectroscopies, probe microscopy and
              temperature-programmed desorption mass spectroscopy.  These studies will inform
              us about the nature of the materials deposited, whether the nanoparticles have
              been damaged by deposition/melting, and about the morphologies of the deposits.
               

Molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to develop understanding
              that may lead to control of deposition.  These simulations will be based on the
              classical method of molecular dynamics simulations by mixing sophisticated
              many-body potentials with simple pairwise potentials. 
***
