Title       : PU(2) monopoles and gauge theoretic invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0103677

Award Number: 0103677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Leness lenesst@solix.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thomas G. Leness

The goals of this proposal, to be done in collaboration
              
with P. Feehan, are to prove Witten's conjecture relating 
the Donaldson and
              Seiberg-Witten invariants of smooth 
four-manifolds, to understand the
              relation between
the conditions of Seiberg-Witten simple type and
              
Kronheimer-Mrowka simple type, and to search for possible 
topological
              constraints on these invariants.  This work 
will be carried out by exploring
              the moduli space of PU(2) 
monopoles which contains a moduli space of
              anti-self-dual 
connections and the moduli spaces of Seiberg-Witten
              
monopoles for certain Spin C structures.  This implies 
that the Donaldson
              invariant can be expressed as a sum, 
over these spinc structures, of an
              expression given by 
pairing certain cohomology classes with the link of the
              
moduli space of Seiberg-Witten monopoles in the Uhlenbeck compactification of
              the moduli space of PU(2) monopoles.
The first phase of this work is to
              complete the proof 
that the pairing of these cohomology classes with the
              
link of the moduli space of Seiberg-Witten monopoles can 
be expressed in a
              universal form depending only on the 
Seiberg-Witten invariant and the
              homotopy type of the 
manifold.  This work will also yield a proof of the
              
Kotschick-Morgan conjecture on wall-crossing formulas 
for Donaldson
              invariants.  The second phase of this work 
is to calculate this universal
              form in sufficient detail 
to allow the computation of the explicit relation
              between 
the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten invariants.  We intend to 
do this
              calculation by using known surgery formulas for
both invariants (e.g. blow-up
              formulas), examples where 
both invariants are known, and some internal
              symmetries 
of the sum mentioned above.  It is possible that this 
relation
              between the Donaldson and Seiberg-Witten
invariants is over-determined and
              thus will reveal 
constraints on these invariants given by the topological
              
type of the four-manifold, as was done in earlier work 
with Kronheimer and
              Mrowka.

An n-dimensional manifold is a topological space that 
locally
              looks like n-dimensional Euclidean space.  
Manifolds are important objects to
              study because they 
are ubiquitous: the solution set of k equations in
n
              variables will usually be an (n-k)-dimensional manifold.  
The main tools for
              distinguishing between four-dimensional 
manifolds are the Seiberg-Witten and
              Donaldson invariants.  
Thus, understanding the relation between these
              invariants
is crucial to an understanding of four-dimensional
topology.  In
              addition, the conjectures relating these 
invariants arise from Witten's work
              using quantum field 
theory.  These methods of quantum field theory are not
              
mathematically rigorous, so our mathematically rigorous 
proof of Witten's
              conjecture can be viewed as an extremely
inexpensive form of experimental
              physics.

