Title       : NER: Feasibility Studies on ZnO Nanostructures And Their Device Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0103096

Award Number: 0103096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yicheng Lu ylu@ece.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1676,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0103096
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Lu, Yicheng
INSTITUTION NAME: 
              Rutgers University New Brunswick
TITLE: NER: Feasibility Studies on ZnO
              Nanostructures And Their Device Applications

This proposal addresses the
              exploratory research on zinc oxide (ZnO) based nanoscale structures
and
              feasibility study of their device applications. ZnO is a multifunctional
              material possessing unique
electrical, optical, acoustical, and mechanical
              properties. Semiconductor ZnO has a wide and direct
energy bandgap (~3.3eV).
              ZnO can be grown at low temperatures, in contrast with the other wide
bandgap
              materials, such as GaN and SiC. Its ternary compounds, formed by alloying ZnO
              with CdO and
MgO, permit bandgap tuning from ~2.8 eV to ~4 eV. Doped ZnO
              ternaries can be made magnetic or
ferroelectric, extending its applications
              beyond the traditional semiconductor confines. In this exploratory
research,
              we will study growth mechanisms and conduct substrate engineering for selective
              growth of
ZnO nanotips and nanotip arrays on various substrates, including
              R-plane sapphire, Si, silicon-on-sapphire
(SOS), and GaN-on-sapphire.
              Feasibility studies of ZnO nanotip applications will focus on
              field-emission,
two-dimensional photonic bandgap (PBG), and fine
              instrumentation such as atomic force
microscopy and scanning tunneling optical
              microscopy. We will also explore the feasibility to form CdO
quantum dots in
              ZnO using the activated alloy phase segregation mechanism, which may be proved
              as a
viable alternative to the Stranski-Krastanov mechanism. These quantum
              dots have potential applications
in UV lasers and integrated UV optoelectronic
              chips. The proposed work will extend the research on
nanoscale structures and
              devices into the field of wide bandgap semiconductor nanoscale science
              and
engineering. The research and development of nanoscale structures in ZnO
              and its ternaries will lead to a
fundamentally new class of devices, which
              integrate multi-phenomena and posses unprecedented
              multi-functional
characteristics.

