Title       : Foundations of Dimension Reduction and Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0103983

Award Number: 0103983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph D. Cook   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanford Weisberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Regression analysis is the general area of study of how a response variable
              changes as one or more predictors are varied over their possible values.
              Regression is one of the most widely applied areas in statistical analysis, and
              is used for monitoring the performance of assembly lines, for determining the
              success or failure of social innovations, to predict the future outcomes based
              on passed data. Regression analysis has a long history, dating back at least
              200 years. A myriad of methods for specific types of problems (e. g., problems
              in which the response is a survival time, or a binary variable) have been
              developed.  The work proposed in this project looks at regression in a very
              general way. It is founded on asking two questions. First, how much can be
              learned about dependence through using graphs? And the second question: how far
              can one push regression methodology without making any limiting assumptions
              about the nature of the problem at hand?

Over the last decade, substantial
              progress has been made on the first of these questions, summarized in two
              books, a theoretical summary of the area in Cook (1998a) and an applied
              approach to regression through graphics in Cook and Weisberg (1999a). Both
              theoretical and applied issues must be understood to develop methodology for
              regression based on graphics. The second question is important because all the
              existing methodology for regression through graphics is based on a few
              assumptions, generally concerning the distribution of the predictors. The
              methodology to be developed in this project will overcome the limitations that
              are imposed by making assumptions at the outset. In particular, the assumption
              that predictors must be at least approximately linearly related is not
              required. In addition, the method can be extended to qualitative predictors
              like factors.

