Title       : Multivariate Nonparametric Methods Using Mass Concentration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0103606

Award Number: 0103606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Polonik wpolonik@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nonparametric statistical methods are used in practice so far mainly for low
              dimensional data.  A major reason for this is the so-called ``curse of
              dimensionality'', meaning that the statistical performance of methods get worse
              with increasing dimension.  On the other hand, the steep increase in complexity
              when passing from dimension one to higher dimensions might not be caught
              adequately by parametric models.  Hence, there is a need for non- and
              semiparametic methods that on the one hand do not suffer too much from the
              curse of dimensionality, and on the other hand are computationally feasible. 
              The goal of this project is to develop such types of nonparametric statistical
              methods.  Central for this project is the observation that many important
              statistical problems can be formulated in terms of ``mass concentration'',
              thereby providing a unifying view to diverse problems with potential
              applications in various scientific fields.  The intuitive idea of mass
              concentration becomes explicitly expressed in the statistical methods developed
              in this project.  This makes the proposed methods transparent and intuitively
              accessible which supports interpretation of the outcomes.

Included in the
              project is problem of ``investigating multivariate modality''.  Different
              approaches will be considered.  One approach is based on a local fitting
              procedure, and another is based on some concavity property of a certain
              concentration function.  Another problem included in this project that admits a
              natural formulation in terms of mass concentration is ``measuring volatility or
              risk in financial time series'' which is a central problem of stochastic
              finance.  Regions with high volatility can be interpreted as regions where the
              volatility function is highly concentrated.  Investigating more than one
              explanatory variable simultaneously leads to a nontrivial multivariate problem.
               Surprisingly, these quite diverse problems can be treated by closely related
              methods.  This underlines the usefulness of our methodology whose propagation
              is another inherent goal of this project.

