Title       : Smooth Only Torsion-free G_3 Holonomy, Normal Holonomy and Isoparametric
               Hypersurfaces in Spheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0103838

Award Number: 0103838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Quo-Shin Chi chi@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
                  Abstract of NSF Proposal #0103838
  
Dr. Chi proposes to
              find smooth torsion-free G_3 connections that are not
analytic by exploring a
              certain system of partial differential equations 
induced from such
              connections. The affirmative solution to this work will
open a new avenue of
              research about these connections, for which all the 
known examples by far
              have been analytic. He also proposes to investigate
the classification problem
              of isoparametric hypersurfaces with four
principal curvatures in spheres by
              investigating the normal holonomy Lie 
algebra of a focal submanifold of the
              hypersurface, which contains the
information about the 2nd fundamental form of
              the focal submanifold, which
is, by his study, crucial for the classification.
               
 

If one sets off from the North Pole and travels with a compass along a
              
loop, one will discover that at the end of the trip back at the North
              Pole
the compass needle has turned a degree. This says mathematically that
              parallel
translation (induced by a linear connection) of vectors along loops
              can
detect whether the space is flat, which is fundamental to Einstein's
              
Theory of Relativity. In Hermann Weyl's terms, the existence of inertia
              
systems in the universe warrants that its linear connection is
torsion-free.
              The project on torsion-free G_3 connections is a study of the 
rather
              anomalous nature of these connections among all exotic holonomies 
whose
              development has been participated by the PI. The notion of
isoparametric
              hypersurfaces was first proposed in connection with wave 
fronts in Euclidean
              space and recently the more general Dupin hypersurfaces 
were tied with
              integrable hamiltonian systems of hydrodynamic type. Shortly 
after their
              introduction the isoparametric hypersurfaces were all classified 
in Euclidean
              and hyperbolic spaces of all dimensions. The complete 
classification of such
              hypersurfaces in spheres of arbitrary dimensions has 
defied people's efforts
              for nearly six decades, despite many outstanding
results achieved in the past
              three decades. The PI's second project is to 
utilize the normal holonomy and
              the new approach of him, T. Cecil and G. 
Jensen toward the classification in
              the case of four principal 
curvatures. 

