Title       : Topology of Nonisolated Singularities and Scale-based Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0103862

Award Number: 0103862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84507              (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Damon jndamon@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0103862
James N. Damon

Professor Damon's research will apply
              infinitesimal and 
stratification methods from singularity theory to
              investigate
the topology and deformation properties of a general class of
              
highly nonisolated singular spaces.  These spaces arise as 
nonlinear
              sections of certain natural universal varieties.   
For instance, geometric
              and deformation properties of mappings 
under various equivalences can be
              captured by such universal 
varieties.  The structure of the tangent vector
              fields will be 
used to deduce algebraic formulae for certain fundamental
              
topological invariants.  These will be given in terms of 
certain natural
              algebraic and geometric multiplicities, 
measuring the singular behavior of
              mappings relative to 
associated geometric structures such as foliations 
              Second, 
he will refine these ideas for questions in computer imaging 
by
              developing geometric structures associated to objects and 
features in images
              in terms of such highly singular spaces.  
The presence of discreteness,
              noise, and distortions in images 
require a "scale-based geometry" which is
              applicable to nondifferentiable functions, measures, and even distributions. 
              
Such a geometry will apply to "almost all" objects in a given 
type, and
              will yield stable geometric structures in scale space.  
This will allow the
              geometric analysis of images using functions 
and measures discriminating
              various features in images.

The first part of Professor Damon's research
              will determine 
for specific types of systems of nonlinear equations, the
              
qualitative properties of the set of solutions.  These can be 
obtained from
              certain universal systems of equations.  He 
proposes to use certain
              infinitesimal symmetries of the 
equations to deduce properties of the set of
              solutions 
in terms of algebraic invariants which reflect both properties 
of
              the universal equations and how the specific equations 
relate to the
              universal ones.  Second, the research will be 
applied to problems in computer
              imaging.  To objects and 
features in images, one may associate geometric
              structures 
capturing their properties for various imaging purposes.  
Such
              structures are defined using systems of equations as 
above.  The presence of
              discreteness, noise and distortions 
in images interferes with identifying
              geometric features.  
The research will refine the methods described above via
              
"scale-based" versions which introduce robust geometric 
structures
              overcoming these difficulties, which can then be
used for a variety of
              computer imaging problems.


  


