Title       : NSE/NIRT: Quantum Effects in Single Molecule Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0103290

Award Number: 0103290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1940000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Kent andy.kent@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nar S. Dalal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen O. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Christou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Hendrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,1682,1767,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is an interdisciplinary Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
              (NIRT) that will investigate the quantum properties of nanometer-sized
              single-molecule magnets (SMMs).  The miniaturization of magnetic devices to
              this size using conventional fabrication techniques is a major scientific
              challenge.  For this reason, there is a growing interest in a bottom-up or
              molecule-based approach whereby magnetic nanostructures are synthesized
              chemically using solution methods at room temperature.  These materials enable
              fundamental studies of the properties intrinsic to magnetic nanostructures that
              have previously been inaccessible.  For instance, nanoscale magnets (including
              SMMs) are susceptible to quantum tunneling of their magnetic moment (QTM),
              which could seriously impair their usefulness in magnetic recording but, at the
              same time, could provide a medium for quantum computation.  This collaboration
              will address some of the important open fundamental questions in nanomagnetism
              and QTM via a concerted program in SMM synthesis and advanced characterization.
               Magnetic interactions within SMM crystals will be varied chemically through
              modification to the molecule site symmetry, intramolecular exchange
              interactions, interactions between nuclear and electronic spins, and
              intermolecular dipolar interactions.  Parallel to these synthetic efforts, SMMs
              will be characterized using quantum level specific Electron Paramagnetic
              Resonance (EPR) and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopies and high
              sensitivity micro-Hall effect magnetometry.  This program will provide the
              highest quality interdisciplinary research training to a diverse group of
              graduate students and post-doctoral scientists, which will include training in
              new chemical synthesis methods and advanced magnetic measurement techniques.
              
%%%
This project is an interdisciplinary Nanoscale Interdisciplinary
              Research Team (NIRT) that will investigate the quantum properties of
              nanometer-sized single-molecule magnets (SMMs).  The miniaturization of
              magnetic devices to this size is critical to advances in magnetic information
              storage, which is an important industry in the United States. Conventional
              techniques used to fabricate magnetic nanostructures have seriously
              limitations.  For this reason, there is a growing interest in a bottom-up or
              molecule-based approach whereby magnetic nanostructures are synthesized
              chemically.  These materials enable fundamental studies of the properties
              intrinsic to magnetic nanostructures that have previously been inaccessible. 
              For instance, nanoscale magnets (including SMMs) are susceptible to quantum
              tunneling of their magnetic moment (QTM), which could seriously impair their
              usefulness in magnetic information storage, but, at the same time, could
              provide a medium for a new and potentially much faster type of information
              processing known as quantum computing.  This collaboration will address some of
              the important open fundamental questions in nanomagnetism and explore new
              avenues for the implementation of SMMs in future devices.  This will be
              accomplished via a concerted program in SMM synthesis and advanced
              characterization.  This program will provide the highest quality
              interdisciplinary research training to a diverse group of undergraduate
              students, graduate students and post-doctoral scientists.  Students will be
              trained in cutting edge chemical synthesis and magnetic measurement techniques.
               Their training will also include interactions with leading industrial
              researchers in the magnetic recording industry.


