Title       : Stochastic Models for Queueing and Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0103814

Award Number: 0103814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Shreve ss9n@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

STOCHASTIC MODELS FOR QUEUEING AND FINANCE
NSF Proposal:
              DMS-0103814
Principal Investigator: Steven E. Shreve

ABSTRACT

Work is
              proposed in two areas.  The first is the analysis of queueing
systems with
              deadlines under heavy traffic conditions.  Consider a
queueing system with
              renewal process arrival streams.  Suppose that
upon arrival, each customer is
              assigned a lead time, the amount of time
until the customer's deadline for
              service elapses.  One can model the lead
times of the customers in queue at a
              station as a counting measure on the
real line, the location of the point
              masses corresponding to customer lead
times.  Research will address the
              convergence of these measure-valued
processes under heavy-traffic scaling. 
              Research will also be directed to
mathematical models for finance.  On such
              model is for an option on a
traded account.  For the simplest of these, an
              account trading one
underlying geometric Brownian motion and a
              constant-interest-rate money
market, there is a strikingly simple optimal
              rule: hold the geometric
Brownian motion long when the account value is
              negative and short when
the account value is positive.  For an option on two
              geometric Brownian
motions, there is a conjectured optimal rule, which is
              supported by
numerical analysis.  The proof appears to require the development
              of new
mathematics.  A second mathematical finance problem concerns
              the
development of a unifying model for risk-neutral pricing of
              credit
derivatives.

This research has two parts.  The subject of the first
              part, queueing
systems with deadlines, arise in communication networks,
              especially
networks used to transmit digitized video or audio signals.  Data
              which
are too long delayed can cause unacceptable disruption  of the
              signal.
The proposed research  will provide a basis for performance analysis
              of
heavily-loaded communication networks which take deadlines into
              account.
The subject of the second part, mathematical models for finance,
              builds on
the revolution in finance begun by the Black-Scholes option pricing
              
formula.  The particular work proposed here  is concerned with
              proper
pricing and usage of financial instruments whose purpose is to
              insure
against loss, either due to drastic reduction in market value (options
              on
a traded account) or default (credit derivatives).
