Title       : Probability and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0103790

Award Number: 0103790
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Alexander alexandr@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Probability models from statistical mechanics are a framework for studying how
              small-scale randomness produces global-scale phenomena, such as phase
              transitions, which are essentially nonrandom.  Alexander proposes to
              investigate the following aspects of the subject.  (1) The Ising model
              conditioned, by fixing an excess of the minority spin, so as to exhibit the
              formation of a large droplet, with emphasis on the critical size of this excess
              and the discrepancy between the actual and ideal shape of this droplet.  (2)
              Percolation models also conditioned to exhibit the formation of a large
              droplet, with emphasis on lower bounds for the local fluctuations of the
              boundary.  (3) Mixing properties and decay of correlations and connectivities
              for spin systems and percolation models, particularly in finite volumes.  (4)
              The spectral gap and rate of convergence to equilibrium, for the stochastic
              Ising model at low temperature.  (5) Potts models in which the external
              field(s) and the boundary condition are opposed to each other.  (6) The use of
              percolation ideas to create a model which mimics certain features of the
              freezing of water which contains impurities.  The project aids human resource
              development through the support of one Ph.D. student working on similar
              problems.

This work is part of an ongoing effort by mathematicians and
              physicists to understand various systems in the natural world in which
              nonrandom global-scale phenomena reflect aspects of small-scale randomness. 
              Examples include (i) magnetic properties of materials; (ii) waves traveling
              through irregular materials, such as seismic waves through the earth's crust;
              (iii) impurities in semiconductors; (iv) composite materials with special
              properties; and (v) percolation of liquid through a porous material, such as
              water or oil through underground rock. It has long been understood that many
              qualitative aspects of the relation between small-scale randomness and
              macroscopic properties, including critical phenomena, do not depend too closely
              on the particular system being studied.  One can therefore gain insight into
              real-world phenomena by studying abstract systems not intended to model
              specifically magnets, or porous rock, or any other particular part of the
              physical world.  The systems need only exhibit parallel features, such as
              clustering and critical phenomena.  The systems which Alexander will
              investigate--percolation, random cluster models, Ising and Potts models, and
              other spin systems--are examples of such abstract systems.

