Title       : Nonsmooth and Geometric Methods in Nonlinear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0103901

Award Number: 0103901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector J. Sussmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main purpose of the research is to derive new necessary conditions for a
              minimum in optimal control theory, using the approach developed by the PI in
              recent years, based on the systematic use of generalized differentials instead
              of classical differentials, of flows instead of vector fields, and of abstract
              variations instead of the standard needle variations.  This will achieve a
              unification of the various existing versions of the finite-dimensional
              Pontryagin Maximum Principle, incorporating them all into a single result,
              which, in addition, will be more general in scope and will also apply to hybrid
              problems.  Several other related lines of research will be pursued: sufficient
              conditions for an optimum for families of trajectories, using extensions ---due
              to the PI in collaboration with B. Piccoli---of V. Boltyainskii's idea of a
              "regular synthesis," ergodic properties of skew-product flows (in collaboration
              with M. Nerurkar), viscosity solutions of first-order Bellman equations
              corresponding to problems with degenerate Lagrangians, and subanalyticity of
              value functions.

This work is motivated by the need for powerful new and
              usable tools for studying curve optimization problems.  Such problems occur in
              many areas of science, ranging from the more traditional automatic control
              questions that arise naturally in engineering (e.g. control of power plants,
              aircraft, or various mechanical devices) to the more recent applications in
              biological and medical problems (e.g. the search for optimal ways to administer
              combinations of several medications).  The common aspects of all these problems
              are (a) that they involve the search for strategies for influencing (i.e.,
              "controlling") the behavior of a system so as to get it to achieve a desired
              goal in the best possible way ("optimal control") or, at least, to come as
              close as possible to that goal, and (b) that they have a definite dynamical
              structure (for example, one needs to know not only how much of each medication
              to administer, but also the specific time sequence in which this is to be
              done).  The search for solutions to optimal control problems has been made more
              difficult by the fact that the existing mathematical methods involve a
              collection of different techniques that cannot be combined into a single
              theory.  This means that most real-life problems do not fit within the
              framework of existing techniques, especially when these problems are "hybrid,"
              in the sense that they combine continuous aspects with discrete ones.  The
              ultimate goal of the PI's proposed research is to produce tools that will make
              it possible to attack large classes of such problems by means of a single,
              systematic, user-friendly approach.
