Title       : Great Plains Cereals Biotechnology Consortium (GPCBC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9977777

Award Number: 9977777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Zeigler rzeigler@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne K. Vidaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arron C. Guenzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EPS-9977777
Zeigler
This project provides for the establishment of a
              multi-state consortium for plant biotechnology research.  The Land Grant
              Universities in Kansas, Nebraska and Oklahoma, joined by the Noble Foundation,
              have united to create the Great Plains Cereals Biotechnology Consortium
              (GPCBC).   These three states produce a major portion of the world's cereals.  
              The states have joined together to form a consortium to address challenges and
              opportunities in improving cereal productivity and profitability.

The
              Consortium will focus its research on the three cereals of greatest importance
              to the Great Plains states - wheat, maize and sorghum.  The primary goal of the
              GPCBC is to understand the molecular basis of, and to manipulate, plant defense
              mechanisms against pathogens and pests. The Consortium will develop a common
              set of research goals to develop and invest in strengths across the consortium
              while avoiding duplication of resources at any member university. 
              Responsibilities will be assumed by members according to their particular
              capabilities and resources allocated accordingly.  Information flow will take
              place through symposia, exchange of faculty, post-doctoral fellows and seminar
              speakers, and eventually through shared graduate programs.  The Consortium will
              recruit a new molecular geneticist and will initially support four post
              doctoral fellows and two graduate students. 

