Title       : MRI: ACQUISITION OF INSTRUMENTATION FOR ULTRAFAST TERAHERTZ OPTOELECTRONIC
               FABRICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9977140

Award Number: 9977140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Grischkowsky grischd@ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Cheville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977140
Cheville

This grant will enable Oklahoma State University to
              purchase tools for photolithographic processing of semiconductor devices and a
              femtosecond optical source to support development of state of-the-art
              optoelectronic devices operating at terahertz (THz) frequencies.  These
              instruments will be located in an on-campus research laboratory complex, and
              integrated into upper division undergraduate laboratory courses in
              semiconductor devices, VLSI, and ultrafast optoelectronics.  Such research
              facilities tied to undergraduate courses do not currently exist at Oklahoma
              State University (OSU), and are needed to provide qualified graduates to
              Oklahoma industry, and as a source of well trained candidates for the strong
              existing graduate photonics program.

OSU is the world leader in application
              of THz optoelectronics, and the requested equipment will provide capabilities
              to extend THz measurements beyond current limitations imposed by insufficient
              dynamic range.  THz optoelectronics is based on the integration of
              sub-picosecond optical pulses with micron scale antenna and transmission line
              structures.  Applications include spectroscopy, next generation high speed
              interconnects, electromagnetic scattering studies, imaging, and semiconductor
              characterization.  Key to remaining competitive in this area is the capability
              of photolithographic circuit fabrication in order to create a closed cycle to
              rapidly design, prototype, and test new devices.  The addition of fabrication
              capability is critical for rapid development of THz optoelectronics.  Currently
              device fabrication relies on facilities located at the IBM Watson labs in New
              York.  The turnaround time on new devices can be as long as one year, seriously
              compromising the ability to make rapid advances.
***

