Title       : MII: A Program for Research in Computing and Information Sciences and
               Engineering (PRECISE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9977071

Award Number: 9977071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499255            (Estimated)
Investigator: Domingo Rodriguez domingo@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jaime Seguel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramon E. Vasquez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nestor J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9977071
Vasquez, Ramon E. 
Rodriguez, Domingo 
University of Puerto Rico at
              Mayaguez

A Program for Research in Computing and Information Sciences and
              Engineering (PRECISE)

PRECISE expects to significantly strengthen the
              current environment in Computing and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)
              through more diverse, competitive, and sustainable research. The award will
              contribute to implement the multi-campus Ph.D. model as an academic program.
              While increasing the participation of women and minorities in graduate
              education, the project will facilitate, enhance, and intensify research in CISE
              areas.
The project will reinforce and support the following research groups:
              
Scientific Computing Group,  
Software Sciences and Engineering Group,
              and
Automated Information Processing and 
Digital Systems Implementation
              Group. 

These groups conform the core of the CISE multidisciplinary research
              environment, foster the formation of new multidisciplinary groups, and partner
              with industry, government, and universities in research projects of mutual
              interest.  A Computing Research Seminar will be established as a formal forum
              for the discussion of common grounds of CISE areas, and the presentation of
              frontier research.  A Computer Research Laboratory will be developed to support
              the proposed research and training activities. 

Through this effort, the
              University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez is expected to develop further its
              computing science and engineering research capabilities involving minority
              students in greater numbers, paving the way for the conferring of more doctoral
              degrees to under-represented groups, particularly Hispanic and women in
              Computer Science and Engineering. It is hoped that through these efforts, the
              nation might find a successful model that will help in building a better
              racially and ethnically balanced technological enterprise for the benefit of
              its present and future generations.

