Title       : IRCEB: The Genetics of Host Plant Specialization and Speciation for Rhagoletis
               Flies: QTL Mapping of Fruit Recognition and Diapause Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9977011

Award Number: 9977011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1618646            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Feder Feder.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the most pervasive questions in evolutionary biology is; how does
              speciation takes place. To address this question, Drs. Feder, Roelofs and
              Berlocher will be examining the genetic architecture for both the behavioral
              components and the life history responses to seasonality in a complex of very
              similar host races in the genus Rhagoletis, tephritid fruit flies.  Species in
              this genus have long been an excellent model for the study of speciation and
              this work builds on this solid basis.  In a well-orchestrated project, these
              investigators will bring the tools of molecular genetics and chemical ecology
              to bear on this problem.  Using two interfertile host races which vary in the
              traits of interest, the locations for genes responsible for behavioral
              components of host plant selection, including the responses to plant produced
              volatile chemicals,  will be mapped.  Genes for determining when the inactive,
              over wintering phase of the life cycle ends will be mapped as well.  These
              traits are known to be of important in maintaining the separateness of the host
              races in nature.

Results of this work will provide important insights
              regarding the mechanism of speciation.  In addition, the project will support
              research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students.  Finally,
              tephritid fruit flies are important agricultural pests so that the basic
              understanding regarding speciation in this group, while of general scientific
              interest, may also have relevance for pest control.   



