Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-Environmental Dynamics and History of the
               Biological Invasion of Pasture Grasses: The Case of Kikuyu Grass in Southern
               Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9977828

Award Number: 9977828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Zimmerer zimmerer@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Owing to a large number of local studies from around the world plant invasions
              have come to be characterized as a significant component of human-caused global
              environmental change.  This assertion rests on the not-yet-demonstrated
              hypothesis that dynamics causing localized plant invasion operate independent
              of scale and therefore also explain invasions regionally and globally.  Limited
              appreciation of the intricacies of human-environment interactions renders
              invasions a spatially undifferentiated process.  Verifying such a hypothesis is
              highly problematic, because it questions principles of scale and hierarchy
              governing complex social and ecological processes operating over large areas. 
              Addressing this issue has important theoretical and practical implications, as
              the question of relating phenomena across scales has been described by Levin 
              as "the central problem in biology and in all of sciences".  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will examine the ecological, biogeographical, and
              social processes associated with the establishment in southern Peru of kikuyu
              grass (Pennisetum clandestinum Hochst. ex Chiov.), an invasive species
              originally brought from Africa in the 1920s.  Special attention will be given
              to scalar and spatial variations in the socio-environmental dynamics of land
              use in the region.  An integrated set of research approaches will be used,
              including agricultural sector analyses, transect analyses of village
              activities, questionnaires and oral histories, ethno-cartographic construction
              of maps by villagers, time-lapse photo interpretation, and archival research. 
              This project will provide valuable new insights into the role of scale and
              space in the land-use dynamics associated with the invasion of exotic species,
              a topic of great practical utility as well as have theoretical significance. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

