Title       : Development of Spin Polarized Electron Scattering Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9977812

Award Number: 9977812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Robertson brobertson@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Dowben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer I. Brand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie A. Langell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shireen Adenwalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robertson
EPS-9977812
In an effort to become a center of excellence in this
              technology, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) intends to further develop
              its current strength in spin polarized electron sources and detectors through a
              program of developing new instrumentation for the characterization of magnetic
              materials and oxides.  Using its strong collaborations with scientists and
              engineers already interested in developing and using this instrumentation for
              electron spectroscopies, the three program goals include: 1) building new
              electron sources that produce polarized electrons; 2) building efficient new
              electron detectors that detect incident electrons and determine spin
              polarization; and, 3) building robust, easy to use, compact electron energy
              analyzers.  Research groups at UNL and within the rest of the U.S. stand to
              benefit from the advances made in this project which will for the first time,
              enable comprehensive correlation of surface and internal magnetic,
              compositional and structural information.   Development of this instrumentation
              for spin polarized electron scattering has strong support from non-federal
              sources, including industry, Japan and the Nebraska Research Initiative.  In
              order to attract further support from industry as well as stimulate economic
              activity in Nebraska, it is necessary to work through the EPSCoR-infrastructure
              program to develop practical prototype instruments such as this activity will
              allow. 



