Title       : SuomiNet: A Real-Time National GPS Network for Atmospheric Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a9977639

Award Number: 9977639
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1715001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph H. Ware ware@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1303,1325,4444,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under this award for Major Research Instrumentation, the Principal Investigators
              will develop "SuomiNet", a university-based, real-time, national Global
              Positioning System (GPS) network for atmospheric research and education.  The
              proposed network, named to honor meteorological satellite pioneer Verner Suomi,
              will exploit the recently-shown ability of ground-based GPS receivers to make
              thousands of accurate upper and lower atmospheric measurements per day. 
              SuomiNet's goal is to use the demonstrated power of GPS for academic research
              and education, by making large amounts of spatially and temporally dense
              atmospheric data from broad and diverse regions widely available in real-time. 
              SuomiNet will use well established Internet Data Distribution (IDD) software
              and protocols to coordinate network sensors and distribute data in real-time. 
              

SuomiNet data are relevant to several national and international programs
              including the U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) and the Global Energy and
              Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX).  Phase delays induced in GPS signals by the
              ionosphere and neutral atmosphere can be measured with high precision
              simultaneously along a dozen or so GPS ray paths in the field of view.  These
              delays can be converted into integrated water vapor (if surface pressure data
              or estimates are available) and total electron content (TEC), along each GPS
              ray path.  The resulting continuous, accurate, all-weather, real-time GPS
              moisture data will help advance university research in mesoscale modeling and
              data assimilation, severe weather, precipitation, cloud dynamics, regional
              climate and hydrology.  These topics are central to the USWRP and GEWEX.  In
              addition, TEC and ionospheric scintillation data derived from GPS signal phase
              and amplitude will help universities address fundamental research topics
              including: (a) the processes that govern the spatial distribution of
              ionization, (b) the evolution of ionospheric irregularities and scintillation,
              (c) thermospheric dynamics and its coupling to the ionosphere, and (d)
              validation, testing and continued development of research models and numerical
              methods. 

From an educational perspective, SuomiNet will place
              state-of-the-art GPS equipment, data and processing methods in the hands of a
              large number of university departments, faculty, and students.  It is here, in
              the university setting, where the tremendous potential of GPS in atmospheric
              research  and education can be most effectively realized.  

