Title       : Acquisition of Microwave Instrumentation for the UPRM Radiation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9977178

Award Number: 9977178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael A. Rodriguez rafaelr@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose G. Colom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977178
Rodriguez

The wireless communications resolution is changing the way
              people work around the world. The next generation wireless communication
              systems will require larger bandwidths and higher operating frequencies, to
              support the higher data rates required by multimedia and interactive
              applications, such as teleconferencing, and video transmission. This higher
              bandwidth requirement, and the need to shift to higher operating frequencies in
              the microwave and millimeter-wave range make it necessary to research new types
              of broadband antennas and arrays, and broadband, power efficient circuits and
              systems. Also, to further improve on the system performance of wireless
              systems, additional research in smart, adaptive antenna arrays is necessary.
              Furthermore, there have been an increased interest in the remote sensing of the
              earth, to monitor and better understand different phenomena, such as E1 Nino
              Effect, tropical rainfall, and hurricanes, among others. Micro-wave and
              millimeter-wave radars and radiometers are used for this purpose. At the same
              time, this interest in the remote sensing of the earth and the wireless
              revolution has produced a large
demand for engineers and scientists with
              knowledge in r.f., microwave, and millimeter-wave electronics.

The main goal
              of this project is to develop a unique, state of the art research facility in
              Puerto Rico. This facility will be the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez
              (UPRM) Radiation Laboratory. The mission of the Radiation Laboratory is to
              perform research and development on microwave and millimeter-wave antennas,
              circuits and systems, for applications in wireless communications and remote
              sensing. Such a facility does not exist in Puerto Rico and its vicinity at this
              moment. This acquisition of microwave and millimeter-wave instrumentation will
              not only support research and development activities at UPRM, but also will
              provide the National Astronomy and Ionospheric Center (NAIC) at Arecibo, Puerto
              Rico, with microwave subassembly and antenna testing facilities at less than
              1.5 hours driving distance. In addition, the proposed acquisition will help
              strengthen collaborative research initiatives with the University of
              Massachusetts, the Pennsylvania State University and BBN Technologies.
***

