Title       : Acquisition of a 400 MHz Solid State NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9977650

Award Number: 9977650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420570             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Weliky weliky@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977650
Weliky

A solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
              will be acquired with Major Research Instrumentation funds.   Two probes for
              the NMR will also be acquired: a general purpose triple resonance Magic Angle
              Spinning XYH probe and a high temperature (750 C) probe for studies of molten
              metal fluxes.  The new spectrometer will have substantially improved radio
              frequency technology including faster pulse rise times, faster phase shifting
              and much finer amplitude control, as well as greatly improved rotor
              synchronization.  These improvements should greatly enhance performance of
              contempo-rary multiple-pulse solid state NMR experiments.  In addition, the new
              spectrometer will have three radiofrequency channels so that a greater variety
              of experiments can be performed, particularly for atomic-level structural
              measurements on biological and inorganic materials.  The new spectrometer will
              be located in the Max T. Rogers NMR Facility, a shared University resource
              which is also open to outside academic institutions and companies.  The new
              spectrometer will  be shared by nine research groups at the university.  Solid
              state NMR spectroscopy is a dominant technique for chemical, structural, and
              dynamical characterization of non-crystalline materials.  The new spectrometer
              will be used for characterization, structural, and dynamical studies of 1)
              biologically significant peptides and proteins in membrane and frozen solution
              environments, 2) new mesostructured silica and alumina materials, 3) new
              polythiophosphate and  polyselenophosphate materials and high temperature
              fluxes, 4) cross-linked and surface-bound copolymers, 5) products of
              combinatorial syntheses, 6) electrides and alkalides, 7) biological
              polyhydroxybutyrate/podyphosphate ion channels, 8) carbon and/or glass fiber
              reinforced composite materials, and 9) wood products and preservatives. 
              

Acquisition of a new nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer with Major
              Research Instrumentation funds will greatly enhance the research infrastructure
              at Michigan State University and benefit the fifty faculty, graduate students,
              and postdoctoral fellows who use solid state NMR in their research.   In
              addition, undergraduate students at the MSU Research Experience for
              Undergraduates site will have a unusual educational opportunity in performing
              research on this instrument.

