Title       : Effective Planning Using Compact Problem Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9977981

Award Number: 9977981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223437             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Givan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
IIS-9977981
Robert L. Givan
Purdue University
$77,529 - 12
              mos


Effective Planning Using Compact Problem Representations


This is
              the first year funding of a three year continuing award. This project examines
              new techniques for solving very large planning problems in stochastic domains. 
              In many realistic domains, where the effects of actions cannot be
              deterministically given, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a natural formal
              representation.  Many important problems in both industrial applications (e.g.,
              Federal Express package routing) and cognitive modeling (e.g., problem-solving
              in uncertain domains, route finding, naive human planning) are naturally
              represented using the MDP formalism.   The operations research literature has
              provided effective methods for solving problems represented as MDPs for domains
              in which the number of possible states of the system is relatively small (less
              than 100,000 or so).  However, most industrial and artificial intelligence
              domains do not meet this restriction.  Recent AI research has shown that it is
              possible to exploit propositional structure in the state space in order to
              compactly represent and solve larger MDPs than was previously possible.  
              Traditional AI planning research has concentrated on deterministic planning
              domains, and has relied heavily on compact, logical representations for such
              domains.  This project aims to apply many of the lessons learned in
              deterministic planning to the stochastic setting by designing new compact
              representations for MDP problems while retaining the effectiveness of
              traditional MDP solution techniques.  Use of such representations would allow
              the description and effective solution of much larger MDP problems than is
              currently possible, resulting in the automated near-optimal solution of many
              practical planning and optimization tasks that currently require heuristic
              solution by hand

