Title       : Acquisition of Microscope/Image Analysis System at CSU, Northridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9977759

Award Number: 9977759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy W. Cohen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl C. Hogue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria E. Zavala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Oppenheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  91330    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1228,9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract - 9977759

           "Acquisition of Microscope/Image Analysis
              System at CSU, Northridge"

       This award will be used to purchase an
              inverted microscope, image analysis software and essential accessories to
              enable the faculty and students at California State University, Northridge
              (CSUN) to perform state of the art experimentation and most importantly, the
              analysis of results.
An inverted microscope and associated equipment is
              essential in viewing both preserved and living specimens.  In addition, nine
              high quality lenses which can be used for wide-angle and close-up viewing of
              large specimens, phase and DIC Nomarski optics, fluorescence and limited live
              action photography will be purchased.  Linked to this microscope are a pair of
              micromanipulators capable of injecting dyes and solutions, or holding glass
              electrodes essential for recording physiological responses in a variety of
              cells.  Additionally, the image analysis software will allow CSUN faculty and
              students to perform a wide range of studies, including cell counts, cell
              measurements, fluorescent analysis and three dimensional reconstructions.  This
              system is one that is quite flexible and can easily be built upon.  It is
              expected that as the current faculty expand their research interests they will
              be able to adjust this system to meet their demands.  In addition, the Biology
              Department expects to hire 2-3 Cell/Molecular Biologists in the next few years.
               The new faculty will be able to tailor this particular microscope/image
              analysis system to fit their own individual research needs.  Thus, the
              availability of the requested system will certainly increase the department's
              attractiveness to bring quality faculty to campus.   California State
              University, Northridge has an excellent history of providing an environment
              that supports the link between research and teaching.  Currently, the Biology
              department serves over 1,200 undergraduate majors and close to 100 graduate
              students (Master's level is the highest degree awarded in the CSU system). 
              Students in both the undergraduate and graduate programs will certainly benefit
              from having a state of the art image analysis system, providing assistance to
              complete their Senior Theses and Master's level experiments.  It is quite clear
              that CSUN students are actively pursuing research opportunities at CSUN.   A
              recent NSF study of 529 institutions which grant the Master's degree but not
              the Ph.D., CSUN ranked first in the number of students who went on to receive
              Ph.D. degrees in science and engineering.  Thus, the microscope, image analysis
              software and related ancillaries will be essential components to expand
              research excellence at CSUN.



