Title       : Acquisition of Instruments for Microsystems Research and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9977576

Award Number: 9977576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Podlaha podlaha@che.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wanjun Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Soper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitris E. Nikitopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number:  CTS 9977576

Principal Investigator:  E.
              Podlaha

This Major Research Instrumentation  (MRI) award supports the
              acquisition of an Energy-Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence (EDXRF) unit and a Micro
              Particle Image Velocimeter (mPIV) to assist the continuing microsystems
              research, development and educational efforts for several departments at
              Louisiana State University (LSU). The analysis and control of materials
              processing steps is essential to the development and fabrication of new devices
              and the development of novel materials. The EDXRF system will provide a
              currently unavailable method of chemical and thickness analysis to LSU, giving
              the capability of measuring composition profiles throughout high aspect ratio
              components. Many of the microsystems presently under development at LSU involve
              microfluidic devices and processes (e.g. micro-channels, pumps, heat
              exchangers, flow control devices, bioanalytical instruments, fuel injectors and
              fluidic actuators for combustor nozzles). Studies of micro-fluidic systems have
              been, thus far, possible only on the theoretical and simulation level, while
              experiments have been limited by the scarcity of measurement methods that can
              provide local information about such devices. The micro Particle Image
              Velocimeter (mPIV) system will provide the ability to measure local velocity
              fields and to visualize the flow in micrometer scale fluidic systems. This
              instrument will enable researchers to study the physics of micro-fluidic flows
              critical to the design and optimization of micro-fluidic devices that are
              fabricated at LSU. The systems acquired through this NSF grant together with
              the synchrotron resource at the J. Bennett Johnston Sr. Center for Advanced
              Microstructures and Devices at LSU will provide researchers at LSU with the
              opportunity to play a leading role in the development and evaluation of
              microsystems for practical applications. 

 

