Title       : SYMPOSIUM: Nitric Oxide in the Invertebrates: Comparative Physiology and Diverse
               Functions to be held at the SICB meeting in Atlanta, Georgia January 4-8, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9977863

Award Number: 9977863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry G. Trapido-Rosenthal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Esther M. Leise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1193,9117,9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

	Until about 15 years ago, nitric oxide was known only as an environmental
              pollutant.  In the early 1980's, researchers discovered that this small
              molecule was also active in animal nervous systems as a neurotransmitter. 
              Neurotransmitters are typically small molecules that are released by an
              activated nerve cell, or neuron, allowing it to communicate with other neurons.
               Most neurotransmitters are stored within vesicles and released for short
              periods of time when a neuron is electrically excited.  Upon release, these
              molecules diffuse across a narrow synaptic cleft and interacting with surface
              receptors on their target cells.  In contrast, nitric oxide is released in its
              normal gaseous state.  Unlike typical neurotransmitters, it is made
              enzymatically upon demand, and can diffuse through cells and tissues to
              interact with intracellular biochemical pathways.  In the last 15 years,
              numerous studies have indicated that this small molecule plays important roles
              in the functions of adult and developing organisms.  For example, nitric oxide
              is involved in the control of sexual and aggressive behavior, in the production
              of memories, in the anti-microbial effects of the immune system, and the
              perception of olfactory stimuli. 

	The actions of nitric oxide on
              vertebrates are studied by growing numbers of researchers, as evinced by the
              increasing numbers of papers on this subject at major national and
              international scientific meetings.   A somewhat smaller group of scientists
              working on invertebrates have begun to understand that this molecule plays
              similar roles throughout the animal kingdom and may be an evolutionarily
              ancient signaling molecule.  This symposium, to be held at the January 2000
              meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB), brings
              together researchers who study a broad array of invertebrate organisms.  Many
              of these scientists have made seminal discoveries about the functions of nitric
              oxide and will be presenting their work to a group of scientists for whom basic
              science and its comparative aspects are a common interest.  The symposium and
              SICB meeting are open to all interested attendees and in particular, this
              society welcomes graduate students and post-doctoral researchers.  The
              symposium speakers will cover a broad range of nitric oxide studies - from
              signaling in bacteria through computational modeling of neural functions in
              insects.  The PIs speakers range in experience from post-doctoral fellow to
              well known, established researchers, but all will present findings that are at
              the forefront of their respective fields.  Information exchanged at this
              meeting will be further disseminated as papers in an upcoming issue of the
              journal American Zoologist.  

