Title       : Establishment of a Center for Advanced Sensing Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9977778

Award Number: 9977778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Wilkins cwilkins@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Bobbitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Fritsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EPS-9977778
Wilkins
The primary goal of this project is to establish a
              self-sufficient Center
at UA-Fayetteville to pursue fundamental advances in
              sensing technology from the conceptual to the implementation stages.  The
              project will draw from existing strengths at UA-Fayetteville such as
              state-of-the-art campus facilities and faculty research and engineering
              capabilities, so that the Center can become competitive in the area of
              biotechnology and compete effectively for national research funds.  The Center
              is expected to play an important role in the state's research infrastructure
              and its relationship to Arkansas-based businesses involved in biotechnology. 
              The Center will involve a wide range of scientists and engineers with
              experience in fundamental chemical studies of sensor materials and principles,
              to fabrication and utilization of sensors in practical applications.  It also
              seeks to promote cross-disciplinary interaction between researchers and
              students.  The Center will recruit a new Chemistry and Biochemistry faculty
              member specializing in the field of combinatorial chemistry in order to advance
              the Center's capability to move in the area of microsensor development.  Center
              interaction with state industrial participants is expected to provide "real
              world" applications in advanced sensing technology.



