Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Active Control of Mixing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9977605

Award Number: 9977605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Smith roy@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Igor Mezic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bassam A. Bamieh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl D. Meinhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed Dahleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:  CTS 9977605

Principal Investigator:  R. Smith

This Major
              Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a Particle
              Image Velocimetry (PIV) and a spectrometer for use in MOCVD reactors. The PIV
              will be used to in the design of flow in microchannels and reaction chambers.
              The micron resolution measurements of the PIV system will be combined with the
              nano-resolution of an Atomic Force Microscope to study microscale transport
              associated with complicated surfaces. The PIV will also the measurement of
              velocity fields immediately above the surface with simultaneous AFM
              measurements will allow the examination of the evolution of the surface. The
              instruments will be used of study mixing and transport processes associated
              with biological fluid mechanics, such as tissue engineering and endothelial
              tissue evolution.

Spatial mixing issues in MOCVD reactors will also be
              investigated. The use of the spectrometer and CCD arrays will give estimates of
              multiple gas concentrations at multiple points within the reactor. Fiber optic
              lines will be used to pipe the light from various points within the reaction
              chamber. This will give the capability of developing and experimentally
              verifying models of gas flow and mixing dynamics. These models will be used to
              design high performance feedback controllers.


hot wire anemometry and data
              acquisition system to support the Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research in
              Turbulence project at Valparaiso University. The project will investigate
              atmospheric and engineering scale turbulent transport.  The project's main
              focus is on the education and training of students in both Colleges of
              Engineering and of Arts and Sciences in the specific areas of atmospheric
              turbulence, environmental pollution in turbulent air and water flows, and
              generalized modeling of the turbulent transport of mass and thermal energy. In
              addition, it will be used in developing an educational seminar for faculty from
              nearby institutions.

