Title       : Acquisition of a Low Temperature Fourier Transform Infrared Photoluminescence
               Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9977545

Award Number: 9977545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Al-Sameen T. Khan akhan@dsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Delaware State University
	      1200 N. Dupont Highway
	      Dover, DE  199012277    302/736-4901

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977545
Khan

The Major Research Instrumentation program will provide funds
              for the acquisition of equipment to establish a Fourier transform infrared
              (FT-IR) variable temperature (1.5K-300K) photoluminescence (PL) laboratory. 
              Fourier transform photoluminescence spectroscopy (FTPLS) will be used to study
              the optical properties of SiGeSnC group IV bulk alloys, heterostructures,
              quantum confined structures, and devices.  FTPLS will be utilized to study the
              bandgaps of the alloys, variation of the bandgap due to the concentration of
              alloy constituents and strain, defects and impurities, and optical processes in
              group IV materials and devices.  This will enhance basis understanding and
              address specific unresolved issues about the variation of the bandgap due to
              alloying and strain, that is crucial in the design of devices that utilize
              bandgap engineering to create quantum confined structures.  The FT-IR
              spectrometer component of the FTPLS system will be used to examine the
              vibrational structure of the material as well as the bandgap.  The
              instrumentation will be used for research, research training, and integrated
              research/education activities.  Graduate students will utilize the
              instrumentation for research towards their master's degree in the physics
              graduate program.   They also will be used as mentors for undergraduate
              research training.  Also, the instrumentation will be used to engage
              undergraduates in small research projects during the academic year and summer
              months, and for integrated research/education in courses that are presently
              offered in the junior and senior years of the undergraduate programs in
              physics, and physics with engineering emphasis.  Experiments utilizing the
              equipment will be integrated in the laboratory sections of undergraduate
              courses offered in the Department of Physics and Pre-Engineering. 

Major
              Research Instrumentation funds will be used to acquire Fourier transform
              photoluminescence spectroscopy instrumentation that will be used to study a
              variety of optical and vibrational properties of semiconducting alloys,
              heterostructures, quantum confined structures, and devices.  This instrument
              will have a large impact on the research infrastructure, as well on the
              research training at Delaware State University, which is a minority
              institution.

