Title       : Development of a Very High Field Solid-state NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9977682

Award Number: 9977682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley J. Opella opella@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977682
Opella

This project is to develop a very high field NMR spectrometer
              that will be dedicated to the determination of structure of proteins in
              biological supra-molecular structures, including membranes and virus particles.
               The spectrometer will operate at the highest available resonance frequencies
              and will perform the full range of high-resolution solid-state NMR experiments
              needed for the resolution, assignment and measurement of spectroscopic
              parameters of individual resonances from uniformly labeled protein samples. 
              The structures of membrane proteins, in particular, are vastly
              under-represented among known structures in the Protein Data Bank because of
              the technical difficulties they present for conventional x-ray crystallographic
              and solution NMR methods.  These proteins do not crystallize and reorient too
              slowly in solution.  The ability of NMR to determine protein structure,
              characterize dynamics and describe chemical properties and interactions depends
              on the capabilities of the electronic components and, especially, the strength
              of the applied magnetic field.  The advantages of using the strongest available
              magnet are disproportionately large because of the associated synergistic
              improvements in sensitivity, resolution and control.

The group plans to
              purchase the highest field magnet available, and to develop the associated
              instrumentation, especially the probes, for a research spectrometer optimized
              for protein structure determination by solid state NMR spectroscopy. 
              Preliminary results demonstrate the feasibility of constructing and tuning high
              power double-and triple-resonance probes for frequencies in the range of 700 to
              1100 MHz.  There will be substantial impact on future generations of
              spectroscopists because much of the development and experimental work will be
              performed by graduate students and postdoctoral research associates at the
              Resource for Solid-State NMR of Proteins at the University of Pennsylvania.

