Title       : Characterization of Insect Prenyltransferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9977889

Award Number: 9977889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie E. Sen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dring N. Crowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sen

Juvenile hormone is the common name given to one or more structurally
              related compounds that are produced by insects and are essential for regulating
              insect growth and development.  The primary objective of this proposal is to
              better understand how moths make homologous juvenile hormone and in so doing,
              gain insight for how insect metabolism differs from other animals.  Moths are
              unique with regards to juvenile hormone metabolism- in this insect, the hormone
              is a heterogeneous mixture of compounds that differ structurally from one
              another by the presence of one to three extra carbons.  Moth juvenile hormone
              levels appear to be highly regulated, although the functional role of each of
              the homologues is not understood.

The specific aim of the research is to
              isolate and characterize the enzyme, prenyltransferase, which catalyzes the
              condensation of isoprene units (or in the case of moths, homologous isoprene
              units) and is a required event in juvenile hormone production. 
              Prenyltransferase will first be isolated from the endocrine gland that
              synthesizes the hormone, using both conventional protein purification methods
              and recombinant DNA technology.  These initial experiments will focus on
              ascertaining how many and what kind of prenyltransferase is present in moths
              and which of these are responsible for juvenile hormone production. 
              Subsequently, we will analyze the structural differences between juvenile
              hormone producing and other prenyltransferases, by evaluating their variability
              in amino acid sequence, catalytic properties, 3D-structure (to be determined
              computationally), and expression profiles.  For the latter, we will
              specifically examine whether juvenile hormone producing prenyltransferase is
              developmentally regulated and whether its levels (both transcriptional and
              translational) parallel those of hormone production, indicating the role of
              prenyltransferase in regulating juvenile hormone production (and structure) in
              moths.
   


