Title       : Secure Multicast Services and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9977292

Award Number: 9977292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Calvert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most Internet applications are based upon the client-server paradigm and make
              use of unicast delivery of data sent as independent packets.  The technical
              issues of securing unicast communications for client-server computing is fairly
              well understood.  However, many emerging Internet applications are based upon a
              group communications model.  In particular, they require packet delivery from
              one or more authorized senders to a large number of authorized receivers. 
              Furthermore, the data of many of these applications should be viewed as flows
              rather than as independent packets.  Conceptually, since every
              point-to-multipoint communication can be represented as a set of point-to-point
              communications, and every flow can be treated as a sequence of individual
              packets, the current technology base for securing unicast packets can be
              extended in a straightforward manner to securing applications that employ flows
              and multicasts.  Such extensions, however, would be highly inefficient.  They
              will not be applicable to high-speed transmission and delay-sensitive flows,
              nor scalable to large groups.

The objectives of this proposal are to
              investigate architectures and protocols for securing multicast and flow
              applications with emphasis on efficiency, latency, and scalability.  The
              researchers have obtained some preliminary results on scalable group key
              management and efficient digital signatures.  These are essential ingredients
              for designing and implementing secure multicast services.  However, to design a
              scalable service for secure multicast on the Internet, even with just
              best-effort delivery, several research issues remain, namely, performance
              comparison of alternative architectures, efficient and reliable delivery of
              rekey messages (and their impact on a wide area network), and deployment of
              trusted components and active agents.

The researchers next propose to
              investigate the more difficult problem of reliable secure multicast. For the
              Internet, this problem has been largely unexplored.  Initially, they plan to
              approach this problem from two directions, namely, (i) how to make reliable
              multicast secure, and (ii) how to make secure multicast reliable. In addressing
              this problem, our concerns are, first, correctness, and second, performance
              issues such as latency and scalability.

There are many applications that can
              benefit from techniques and services for securing flows and multicasts, e.g.,
              teleconference, pay per view, information services, virtual private networks,
              collaborative work, software distribution, etc.  The researchers propose to
              experiment with some of these applications.  In particular, they propose to
              investigate a less obvious application, namely, active networks, which raises
              some interesting research issues.  Securing active networks is an important
              problem with many different concerns, some of which are being addressed by
              other researchers.  In the proposed project, the researchers are primarily
              concerned with characterizing the authenticity and confidentiality requirements
              of mobile code distribution in active networks and ensuring their satisfaction
              using efficient methods.

