Title       : Vertical Integration of Research and Education in the Mathematical Sciences at
               the University of Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9977116

Award Number: 9977116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard Millman                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2288324            (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. McCallum wmc@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry C. Grove  (Principal Investigator former)
              B J. Bayly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Tabor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Ercolani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid Friedlander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann Flaschka  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas G. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
University of Arizona

The combined forces of the Mathematics
              Department and the Applied Mathematics Program at the University of Arizona
              provide an environment in the mathematical sciences that offers breadth and
              excellence in both research and innovative teaching activities.  The research
              spectrum spans a wide range of activities from number theory and geometry to
              biomathematics and scientific computation; and the teaching program was among
              the first to embrace technological innovation, outreach, and vertical
              integration.  Over the past several years the Department  and the Program have
              introduced many training innovations, including Research Tutorial Groups, a
              unique experimental modeling laboratory, a variety of options aimed at
              improving communication and  computational skills, an internship program, and
              vertically integrated outreach activities.  Combined with additional activities
              especially designed for students who will be supported by VIGRE grants, and the
              rich research and teaching environment, all these initiatives will provide
              graduate students, undergraduates, and postdoctoral associates with the
              training they will need to be successful mathematicians in the coming decades.
              
Central to our proposal are distinguished research groups in Algebra/Number
              Theory, Biomathematics, Dynamical Systems, Fluid Dynamics, Geometry,
              Mathematical Physics/Applied Probability, Mathematics Education, Nonlinear
              Optics, and Partial Differential Equations.  Each of these groups has not only
              an outstanding reputation in research but  an excellent track record of
              integrating graduate students, undergraduates, and postdoctoral fellows into
              their research activities.  We note that the Number Theory group was recently
              recognized by the award of a Group Infrastructure Grant by the NSF Division of
              Mathematical Sciences, and the Biomathematics activity is part of a larger
              enterprise that was recently awarded one of the new IGERT (Integrative Graduate
              Education and Research Training) grants by the NSF.
The interdisciplinary
              graduate Program in Applied Mathematics adds an extra dimension to this
              spectrum of research.  Established twenty years ago to foster campus-wide
              cross-disciplinary research and training in the mathematical sciences, the
              Program connects students with faculty across an array of disciplines, drawn
              from 15 departments in the Colleges of Science,  Engineering, and Medicine. 
              Despite the Program's executive independence it maintains a unique working
              relationship with the Mathematics Department, many of whose faculty are among
              its most active members; 31 of the 53 PhDs awarded by the Program in the past
              five years were supervised by faculty from the Department of Mathematics.
              
Graduate Funding:  Except for two first-year fellowships VIGRE funds will be
              used to support students who have passed Qualifying Examinations.  To apply for
              VIGRE support a student will write a short proposal describing a research
              strategy and chosen elective activities.  The proposal should identify a
              research group that the student will join and explain the student's intended
              contribution to the group.  A small number of summer support awards will be
              made to students preparing for examinations.  We anticipate a steady state of
              approximately 18 students supported by VIGRE or matching funds in each academic
              year semester, and slightly larger numbers having at least partial summer
              research support. 
Undergraduate Activities:  Engaging the interest of
              undergraduates in mathematics and encouraging them to pursue careers in
              mathematics - either as teachers, researchers, or in industry - is a major goal
              of our proposal.  The various training components that will fulfill these goals
              are a comprehensive range of research experiences, an expanded summer
              internship program, and opportunities for qualified undergraduates to help in
              teaching.  Under the aegis of VIGRE we will coordinate all undergraduate
              research initiatives carried out by the Department  and the Program.  Graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows will be encouraged to participate in the
              supervision of selected undergraduate projects.   Participating undergraduate
              students will prepare written reports about their activities, and at least once
              each semester the students will present their results at a Saturday conference
              devoted to undergraduate research.  The participants whose presentations are
              judged the best will be provided with travel funds to present their results at
              regional or national meetings of appropriate professional organizations such as
              the Mathematical Association of America and the American Mathematical Society. 
              We anticipate supporting 10-12 REU students each academic year, and slightly
              smaller numbers in the summers. 
Postdoctoral Fellows:  Our recruitment of
              VIGRE Postdoctoral Fellows will target recent PhDs who anticipate future
              careers as faculty members in research universities, and whose research
              interests have significant intersection with at least one of our research
              groups. To prepare them for such careers we will provide them with exciting
              research opportunities, innovative teaching experiences at all levels, and a
              leadership role in a variety of graduate and undergraduate educational
              experiences outside the classroom.  A Postdoctoral Mentoring Committee will
              ensure, beginning with the postdoctoral recruiting process, that appropriate
              faculty mentors will be available for all VIGRE postdoctoral fellows. 
              Postdoctoral fellows will teach one course each semester (in residence).  To
              prepare them properly for university careers, these courses will be at all
              levels. At least one course will be a graduate course in the fellow's area of
              research, possibly team-taught with a faculty mentor.  Postdoctoral fellows
              will be encouraged to spend a summer or semester internship at a national
              laboratory, a research institute such as MSRI, or in industry.  We will support
              four VIGRE postdoctoral fellows in each year after the first, with matching
              support being provided for two each from the Department and the Program.  The
              two fellows supported and selected by the Department will be chosen to ensure
              continuing strength and growth in existing research groups. The two  supported
              by the Program will be chosen by a committee of Program faculty to create
              cross-disciplinary ties with other departments.

