Title       : Diversity of Nitrogen-Cycling Microorganisms at the H.J. Andrews LTER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9977933

Award Number: 9977933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $561431             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Myrold David.Myrold@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kermit Cromack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Bottomley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1089,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Microbial Observatory is dedicated to the study of bacteria and fungi
              central to biogeochemical processes of coniferous forest ecosystems associated
              with the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest, located in the Cascade Mountains of
              Central Oregon. The research focuses on the functional diversity of
              microorganisms that perform nitrogen cycle processes because N is the most
              limiting nutrient to tree growth in this ecosystem.  Concentration is primarily
              on the processes that produce and consume NO3 - because of their pivotal role
              in supplying N for plant growth and because of the environmental importance of
              N losses to ground and surface waters as NO3 - or to the atmosphere as N2 O. 
              The functional diversity of specific enzymes that produce and consume NO3 - in
              soils located at specific sites at the Andrews where aspects of N-cycling have
              been shown to change in response to the influence of man (timber harvest,
              burning) or to natural successional events (actinorhizal to coniferous species
              transitions) will be examined.  The following objectives are being pursued: (1)
              To determine how the functional diversity of key N-cycling microorganisms
              changes during secondary succession following the clear cutting of old-growth
              coniferous forest; (2) To determine the influence of grassland meadow and
              coniferous vegetation on the functional diversity of key N- cycling
              microorganisms; (3) To determine how naturally high inputs of N from
              actinorhizal N2 -fixing symbioses affect the functional diversity of key N
              cycling microorganisms; and (4) To examine how the presence of ectomycorrhizal
              mats affects the functional diversity of key N cycling microorganisms.  The
              diversity of key N cycling microorganisms is being determined using methods
              based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).  PCR primers will be selected
              that are  specific to genes that code for selected N cycling enzymes,
              concentrating on those processes that produce or consume NO3 -, such as NH3
              monooxygenase, assimilatory NO3 - reductase, and dissimilatory NO2 - reductase.
              The diversity of the PCR products will be determined by separating them by size
              using gel electrophoresis either with terminal restriction fragment length
              polymorphism (TRFLP-PCR) or without (length heterogeneity or LH-PCR) digestion
              with restriction enzymes. These measures of functional diversity will be
              related to measurements of their respective process rates to examine whether
              there is a link between the types of functional enzymes and their functioning
              in the
ecosystem.  If meaningful relationships among the process rates and the
              diversity of the enzyme systems that carry out these functions are found, 
              attempts will be made to sequence these genes, isolate the microorganisms
              representative of these functional groups, and characterize them by 16S rDNA
              sequencing.  Any isolates obtained will be maintained locally and made
              available to others by request. Sequences generated by this research will be
              deposited in GenBank.  Historically, creative cutting-edge research and
              educational activities conducted at the Andrews have played a major role in
              increasing  understanding of how temperate coniferous forest ecosystems
              function. Furthermore, these activities have been used to drive
              the
development and acceptance of more sophisticated land-use policies for
              managing this productive ecosystem. This project will introduce molecular
              ecology to this ecosystem and use it to further an understanding of how
              disturbance and plant succession influence the microbial communities that drive
              the biogeochemical processes.

