Title       :  
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9977216

Award Number: 9977216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1846500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Vigdor vigdor@iucf.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie C. Bland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott W. Wissink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Sowinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977216
Vigdor
	This project is aimed at building a detector that will enable
              a qualitative advance in understanding of the internal structure of protons. 
              The detector proposed is an Endcap Electromagnetic Calorimeter (EEMC) to be
              added to the major STAR (Solenoidal Tracker at RHIC) detector system currently
              being assembled at the new Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider facility.  RHIC and
              STAR were originally designed to search for new phases of strongly interacting
              matter in collisions of very energetic heavy nuclei.  The EEMC would critically
              enhance their capabilities as a platform for a complementary class of
              experiments, utilizing high-energy colliding beams of spin-polarized protons. 
              It would do so by providing detection of high energy gamma rays, electrons,
              positrons and neutral pions in a kinematic regime of optimal sensitivity to
              unmeasured contributions to the proton's intrinsic spin.
	The flagship EEMC
              experiment would map out the net gluon spin contribution, a key to
              dis-entangling the supplementary contributions from quark and antiquark spins
              and from the orbital motion of quarks and gluons.  The enhanced STAR detector
              would allow the world's best measurement of the integral gluon spin
              contribution, by detecting gamma rays from hard polarized proton collisions in
              coincidence with "jets" of hadrons - products when a polarized quark in one
              proton beam strikes a polarized gluon in the order.
	The EEMC is also crucial
              for separating antiquark from quark polarizations via the production of weak W+
              bosons, with the goal of elucidating the physical origin of the quark-antiquark
              sea inside a proton.  The antiquark polarizations will provide important new
              information, while the quark polarizations can be compared to results from
              electron or muon beams, to provide an essential calibration of the entire RHIC
              spin program.  Other important physics questions whose investigation is
              considerably enhanced by the EEMC include the following:  Do the quarks and
              antiquarks inside a hyperon carry as small a fraction of the overall spin as
              appears to be the case for a proton?  Can parity violation in hard quark
              collisions reveal new interactions of ultra-short range, beyond those included
              in the Standard Model of particle physics?  How is the gluon abundance at small
              momentum fractions modified by the environment when a nucleon is embedded in a
              heavy nucleus?

