Title       : VIGRE: The University of Chicago's Vertical Integration Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9977134

Award Number: 9977134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3020593            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Peter May may@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Sally  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Fefferman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9977134
Principal Investigator: J. Peter May
Abstract: The
              University of Chicago's VIGRE Program

Vertical integration of teaching and
              research has been a tradition of the Department of Mathematics at Chicago for
              decades, and the very term "vertical integration" has been in use for over
              twenty-five years. Our program is based on both formal and informal
              institutionalization of interactions among people at different levels. The
              logic of vertical integration is based on the principle that people in our
              educational and research programs should learn from those more advanced and
              teach those less advanced. The VIGRE program will allow us to implement the
              principle more fully at several levels. 
The program consists entirely of
              direct support of postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates. On average,
              6 postdocs, 12 graduate students, and 18 undergraduates will be supported each
              year. This support will be used to further the training of these young people,
              to enhance vertical integration of the existing core research and educational
              programs of the Department of Mathematics, and to better integrate these
              programs with the outreach programs of the Department. We will briefly describe
              the Department's programs and VIGRE's impact on them, working from the top
              level down.
At the highest level, it is departmental tradition that the
              advanced seminars and research level graduate courses are a communal exercise
              of tenured faculty, nontenured faculty, and graduate students. The form this
              has taken has intensified dramatically this year, with several year long
              topical seminars with a broad mixture of participants. The Department provides
              an environment in which postdocs and graduate students can maximize their
              potential to become productive research mathematicians. Most of our graduate
              students obtain first jobs at major research universities, and most major
              research departments have hired new Chicago PhD's in the last few years. The
              VIGRE grant will greatly aid in this by providing postdocs and graduate
              students with release time from teaching that enables them to focus more fully
              on research. VIGRE postdocs will have a decreased teaching load, and VIGRE
              graduate students will have periods free of teaching duties. We expect that
              this will allow greater numbers of them to complete their Ph.D.s in a more
              timely fashion.
Our graduate program begins with an intensive first year of
              basic courses, and first year students have no teaching duties. There are no
              course assignments or examinations for graduate students beyond their first
              year. One relatively weak link has been in our second year graduate program,
              where there have been insufficient course offerings intermediate between the
              first year courses and the advanced courses at or near the frontier of
              research. 
We intend to offer some VIGRE supported postdocs the opportunity to
              run seminars in their field on the second year graduate level in lieu of
              regular teaching. The postdocs and the students will present essential basic
              material in informal talks. This will have the salutary effect of giving these
              young people a good first opportunity to present lectures at a higher level
              than undergraduate teaching, and it will foster interaction between postdocs
              and graduate students.
Undergraduate teaching at the University of Chicago is
              very explicitly based on a system of vertical integration. It is a truism that
              mathematics can be intimidating. People need to feel comfortable to ask
              questions. They need patient help to reach understanding. They must not be
              afraid to show their ignorance. We use vertical integration to provide maximal
              opportunities for learning to take place in a friendly and unstressful setting.
              It is usually the case that people find those just a few years older than
              themselves to be less intimidating teachers than people considerably senior.
              This is certainly not always the case, and it is not an argument for lack of
              involvement of senior faculty in teaching at all levels. Rather it is an
              argument for collaborative teaching, where an older and younger teacher work
              together. Our teaching is done in small classes taught by faculty with graduate
              student assistants or by graduate students with assistance from undergraduates.
              This method of teaching fosters strong ties between faculty and graduate
              students and between graduate students and undergraduate students.The idea of
              second year graduate seminars run by postdocs described above is an extension
              of this idea.
Undergraduate classes usually have no more than 25 students, and
              over 200 quarter courses are taught each year. Upper level undergraduate
              courses are taught exclusively by junior and senior faculty. They are assisted
              by "College Fellows," who are second year graduate students serving as
              apprentice teachers. The College Fellows sit in on classes, hold problem and
              review sessions, have office hours, and teach occasional classes. They provide
              feedback to the faculty that allows immediate review and amplification of
              material that has not been well assimilated. 
Lower level courses, below
              honors calculus, are taught primarily, but not exclusively, by graduate
              students. They are assisted by undergraduates who serve as tutors and graders.
              In the lowest of our three tracks of calculus courses and in a few other lower
              level courses, there are several tutors per class. The tutors work with small
              groups of students, typically 8-10 students to a tutor, helping them gain
              confidence and mastery in an open and nonthreatening environment. This method
              of teaching makes it possible to teach students with relatively weak
              mathematical background while retaining our traditional level of mathematical
              rigor. The tutors find that the process of tutoring enhances their own
              mathematical understanding. Again, the tutors report back to the teachers when
              students are having trouble with any aspect of the material, allowing immediate
              feedback and course correction. The graduate students supervising these tutors
              obtain experience in supervising others.

Undergraduates also play a major
              teaching role in one of our most distinctive outreach programs, one which
              brings around 100 gifted Chicago area high school and middle school students to
              the department each July. The program, which is an outgrowth of the NSF's Young
              Scholars Program, offers these students a diversity of material inmathematics,
              computer science, and physics. It is run on several tracks with rotating
              subject material, so that students canparticipate and encounter new material
              over six summers.Undergraduate counselors are central to the success of this
              program. Undergraduates serving as counselors also participate in REU-type
              mathematical programs that consist of mixes of lectures, study groups, and
              research projects. The experience of tutoring in lower level undergraduate
              courses and teaching gifted grade school students has enticed many mathematics
              majors at the University of Chicago into teaching careers. 
The VIGRE program
              will allow us to offer the proven combination of REU-type activities with
              outreach service to many more undergraduates than has been possible in the
              past. Our students are eager for the opportunity. In recent years, many have
              been frustrated by the fact thatthe quarter schedule of the University of
              Chicago has prevented themfrom participating in REU programs elsewhere. The REU
              activities will be organized and run by senior faculty members, who will give
              lecture series and provide supervision. The study groups and research projects
              will be carried out by groups of four or five undergraduates mentored by VIGRE
              supported Dickson Instructors and graduate students. This mentoring will both
              significantly enhance the REU programs and significantly enhance the training
              of Dickson Instructors and graduate students as college teachers. 

On a
              voluntary basis, VIGRE supported postdocs and graduate students will have the
              opportunity to participate in the RE
