Title       : Microbial Observatories: Salt Marsh Microbes and Microbial Processes: Sulfur and
               Nitrogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9977897

Award Number: 9977897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1165771            (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hobbie jhobbie@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas P. Teske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Waterbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell L. Sogin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1089,9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977897
Hobbie

This Microbial Observatory at the Plum Island Long Term
              Ecological Research (LTER) site in northeastern Massachusetts identifies
              microbes and microbial communities in the salt marsh and determines their role
              in controlling major ecosystem processes. The observatory project, staffed by
              scientists from the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution, and Northwestern University, adds knowledge of the
              microbes and their ecology to the LTER research on the effects of changing
              inorganic nutrient supply and the quality and quantity of organic matter on
              estuarine trophic structure. The LTER research gains detailed knowledge about
              the microbial communities underlying the processes and control parameters which
              it investigates; the Microbial Observatory uses LTER data to place microbial
              communities into the larger context of their physical and chemical environment.
              In the salt marsh sediments, nitrogen and sulfur cycles influence all of the
              salt marsh biogeochemical cycles while sulfate reduction dominates
              decomposition. Therefore, the Observatory Project focuses on the microbes
              involved with the nitrogen and sulfur cycle with special attention to
              nitrification and sulfate reduction. This focus is possible because these
              investigators bring a suite of tools for culturing, molecular detection, and
              identification of nitrifying and sulfate reducing bacteria.  The Microbial
              Observatory carries out the following activities:  1. identifies the microbes
              and microbial communities by means of culture and sequencing techniques, 2.
              investigates the seasonal changes in the community structure with culture
              methods and with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of nucleic
              acids, 3. links functional genes and microbial populations responsible for
              specific processes with rRNA hybridization techniques, and 4. correlates the
              presence and activity of various populations with ecological measurements of
              major processes in the salt marsh.  Molecular surveys using functional genes
              and rRNA hybridization techniques are correlated with LTER measures of sulfate
              reduction and the nitrogen cycle. Carbon sources are identified with techniques
              using the delta 13C of phospholipid fatty acids specific to bacteria.  Salt
              marshes provide one of the best examples of a site where microbes build and
              shape an entire ecosystem. Cyanobacteria are the pioneer organisms in salt
              marshes; they initiate microbial mat communities on mudflats that prevent
              erosion, trap sediment particles, and elevate the surface of the sediments.
              When higher plants colonize the site, the microbes fix nitrogen, recycle
              organic matter and nutrients, oxidize sulfides, and provide food for higher
              trophic levels.  Salt marshes continue to be important models for basic
              microbiological and biogeochemical research. These systems are easily
              accessible. Their high process rates, large and diverse populations of
              functionally distinct microbes, and steep chemical and microbial gradients
              allow scientists to understand how microbial interactions and chemical cycles
              work. For example, many of our insights into the process and microbiology of
              sulfate reduction in the marine environment have come from the study of salt
              marshes. The value of salt marshes in teaching and education is well
              established. Students of the Microbial Diversity Course at the MBL in Woods
              Hole, associated with this Microbial Observatory, use the salt marsh as a
              "Microbial Rainforest" for the isolation and identification of a wide diversity
              of microbes.
