Title       : Development of an Integrated System for Analyses of Aerosol Composition and
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9977745

Award Number: 9977745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darin W. Toohey toohey@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen B. Toon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shelly L. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann M. Middlebrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Tolbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1524,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) proposal is to develop a
              comprehensive laboratory system to characterize the composition and chemistry
              of aerosols. Three analytical subsystems will be assembled and integrated into
              a unique and powerful system for studying the composition, size distribution,
              and reactivity of aerosol particles believed to be important in the earth's
              atmosphere. Particles of controlled size and chemical composition will be
              generated with commonly used techniques such an atomizer and a fluidized bed
              nebulizer. The aerosols will be characterized by differential mobility
              analyzers and aerodynamic particle sizers and subsequently injected into a
              pressure- and temperature-controlled flow system similar to those employed for
              studies of highly reactive radicals and weakly bound species. In this reaction
              chamber the particles will be exposed to variable concentrations of gases like
              nitric acid, water vapor, inorganic acids, and organic compounds. The gas-phase
              composition of stable species (both reactants and products) will be monitored
              by tunable diode laser spectroscopy (TDLS), chemical ionization mass
              spectrometry (CIMS), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The
              particle number and size distributions will be monitored in situ by optical
              scattering techniques. Finally, the particles will be focused through an
              aerodynamic inlet into a vacuum chamber where they will be sized by aerosol
              time-of-flight and their composition determined by mass spectrometry.  The
              long-term goal of this project is to establish a multidisciplinary center for
              aerosol science which will foster close collaborations between investigators in
              universities, national laboratories, and industry.
