Title       : Acquisition of a Multichannel Confocal Microscope for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9977204

Award Number: 9977204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266423             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Gard gard@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract 9977204

This award will be used to purchase a Zeiss model LSM
              510 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for research in the Department of
              Biology at the University of Utah. Research programs in the Biology Department
              require features or capabilities available on the Zeiss LSM 510 confocal
              microscope, including: the ability to collect multiple fluorescence channels
              and transmitted light simultaneously; enhanced sensitivity; enhanced resolution
              of wide-field images provided by the 1024 x 1024 pixel array; and the ability
              to scan selected regions of interest. The confocal microscope will be fully
              equipped with up-to-date features, including: argon ion and He/Ne lasers for
              multi-wavelength excitation; detectors for simultaneous imaging of three
              fluorescence channels; transmitted light detector; differential interference
              optics; and software for 3-D reconstruction from serial optical sections. The
              confocal microscope will also be configured for future addition of a pulsed
              infrared laser for multi-photon microscopy of living cells and/or
              organisms.
	The Zeiss confocal microscope will become part of the Biological
              Imaging Facility in the Biology Department at the University of Utah, replacing
              an aging Biorad MRC-600 confocal microscope. The Biological Imaging Facility is
              a core facility used by members of the Biology Department and other departments
              at the University of Utah. As part of the core imaging facility, the instrument
              will have a dramatic impact on the research programs of more than forty
              individual investigators, including faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate
              students, undergraduate students, and technical personnel from at least sixteen
              different laboratories in the Biology Department. These investigators will use
              the confocal microscope to study a variety of organisms encompassing major taxa
              of plants (Arabidopsis), fungi (yeast), algae (brown algae), invertebrates
              (nematode worms, fruit flies, grasshoppers, and moths), and vertebrates
              (amphibians, electric fish, birds). Four major users will employ the instrument
              in their investigations of: (1) the organization, regulation, and role of the
              cytoskeleton during oogenesis and early development in frogs; (2) the role of
              the cytoskeleton and cell wall during early development of brown algae; (3)
              neurogenesis and connectivity in C. elegans (worms) and grasshoppers; and (4)
              the genetics of synapse formation and function in Drosophila (fruit flies). The
              instrument will also be available to other investigators in the Colleges of
              Science, Engineering, and Medicine, making it a University-wide resource for
              basic research.
	In addition to its research mission, the Zeiss confocal
              microscope will have a major impact on education and research training at all
              levels. More than thirty postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and
              undergraduate students are expected to be trained in the operation of the
              instrument and use it in conducting their research. The Director of the
              Biological Imaging Facility will also teach a course on the theory and
              application of modern imaging techniques, including confocal microscopy, in
              biological research to graduate students and advanced undergraduate students.
              Finally, demonstrations of the confocal microscope and its application in
              biological research will be featured in outreach programs directed at
              elementary and secondary school students, teachers, and parents. In summary,
              the instrument will provide substantial benefits to basic research and
              education in the Biology Department at the University of Utah.

