Title       : Acquisition of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Scanner for Functional Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9977521

Award Number: 9977521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1175680            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Jonides jjonides@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Noll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support the University of Michigan will
              purchase a state-of-the-art 3 Tesla MRI system: a GE Signa LX Horizon 3 T with
              an advanced development workstation for real-time processing of fMRI
              (functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging) data. The proposed system will be
              capable of acquiring up to 18 image slices/second with 20 cm field of view,
              64x64 matrix echo-planar imaging over a sustained period. FMRI measures
              hemodynamic response as a function of change in neural activity in the face of
              cognitive challenge in behaving humans and thus has the ability to illuminate
              the brain bases of cognitive processes. The scanner will form the core of a
              Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Laboratory dedicated to basic research
              studies of cognitive processes. Co-directed by Drs. John Jonides and Douglas
              Noll, a  cognitive scientist and biomedical engineer respectively, the
              instrument will be housed in newly renovated space in the University's
              Neuroscience Laboratory Building. The laboratory will provide facilities for
              researchers from cognitive neuroscience, neuroscience, biomedical engineering,
              physics, biostatistics, linguistics, computer science, radiology and psychiatry
              to explore basic issues in perception and cognition.  It will thus serve to
              coalesce interdisciplinary work already underway at Michigan.

Two types of
              research will be conducted at the fMRI laboratory. The first involves numerous
              interdisciplinary collaborations centered around issues of cognitive process.
              This work concentrates largely on higher cognitive functions, especially memory
              and executive processes. The basic thrust is to understand the nature of
              storage mechanisms involved in memory and the relation of these storage
              mechanisms to processes used to manipulate information in memory. The second
              class of studies proposed for the new Laboratory center on methodological
              issues of data acquisition and analysis involving fMRI. One focus of this work
              will be on continued development of new pulse sequences that are specialized
              for functional data collection. Expansion and testing of new non-parametric
              data-analysis tools should also substantially expand the resources currently
              available for data treatment. The University has developed a number of programs
              to introduce students to fMRI research and to train scientists in use of the
              machine. It will actively work to attract under represented groups. The
              University of Michigan has allocated significant resources both the assist in
              purchase of the instrument and renovate a laboratory to house it.

