Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleoglaciology of Alaska -- Climate Parameters During
               the Last Glacial Maximum from GIS Determination of Equilibrium Line Altitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9977974

Award Number: 9977974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell S. Kaufman Darrell.Kaufman@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-9977972
OPP-9977974


This is a collaborative project with
              Principal Investigators from the University of Colorado and Northern Arizona
              University.  One of the most effective means for better understanding the
              global climate system is to understand the conditions during the last ice age
              and Alaska is a pivotal area for such ice-age experiments.  Environmental
              response in the Arctic is expected to amplify regional and global climate
              change through feedbacks of sea-ice extent, glacier/permafrost melting, carbon
              cycling, and albedo.  Paleoclimate proxies are available for large areas of
              Alaska that escaped continental glaciation during the Last Glacial Maximum
              (LGM).  Assessing terrestrial paleoenvironmental response to past climate
              forcing will enable the Principal Investigators to test and refine global and
              regional circulation models of climate change.

Recent advances enable us to
              estimate past climate parameters from glacial-geological records on a regional
              scale and in a quantitative, spatial manner for direct comparison with climate
              models.  Valley glaciers are relatively simple recorders of climate.  Winter
              precipitation and summer temperature locally control the vertical position of
              the Equilibrium Line Altitude (ELA) for individual glaciers, where the sum of
              accumulation and ablation equals zero.  Regional variations in ELA's primarily
              reflect spatial variability in winter precipitation.  Climate dynamic
              activities responsible for glacial extents during the LGM in Alaska have
              previously been assessed qualitatively and have suggested that Alaska has
              experienced a significant reduction in precipitation relative to the present. 
              However, none have used recent empirical regressions between precipitation and
              temperature for ELAs, and none have taken advantage of the Geographic
              Information System (GIS) to perform spatial calculations and to produce past
              climate grids.

The Principal Investigators propose to use glacial-geologic
              evidence to further refine the record by compiling LGM glacier extents in
              Alaska and produce digital maps of ELA variation and winter precipitation
              anomalies.  Aerial photography and published maps will be used to determine
              glacier outlines.  For selected, poorly studied areas, they propose to conduct
              field research to constrain the limits of LGM valley glaciers and to evaluate
              their age.  This work will focus on two statewide transects: one spanning west
              to east from the Kuskokwim Mountains to the Yukon-Tanana Upland, and the other
              extending south to north along the western coast of the state.  They will use
              carbon14 and cosmogenic isotopes to determine the absolute and relative ages of
              LGM moraines when suitable rocks available.  In conjunction with modern climate
              data and estimates of LGM temperature depression, the ELA's can then be used to
              calculate LGM winter precipitation.  The statewide computations will be
              compared with output from circulation models and will provide an empirical
              basis for evaluating climate dynamics.  The GIS has advanced far enough to
              where we can now bring empirical paleoclimate data to the scale and resolution
              of global circulation models.

