Title       : A Microbial Observatory for the Northern Temperate Lakes Long Term Ecological
               Research Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a9977903

Award Number: 9977903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1174501            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric W. Triplett triplett@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda E. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Kratz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Triplett
9977903
Lakes are foci for biogeochemical processing on the
              landscapes they drain. Most biogeochemical transformations in freshwater
              ecosystems are mediated by bacteria. Thus, lakes offer tremendous opportunity
              for study of microbial composition and diversity linked to ecosystem processes.
              This Microbial Observatory will describe microbial dynamics and their
              relationship to the fundamental processes of microbial production and
              respiration in three contrasting lakes that represent the major trophic types
              of temperate landscapes: oligotrophic, dystrophic and eutrophic. These lakes
              are part of the North Temperate Lakes Long Term Ecological Research Site
              (NTL-LTER). The overall goal of this project is to identify and characterize
              predominant bacterial populations in north temperate lake ecosystems and their
              part in ecological processes. Bacterial population dynamics are currently the
              least well understood among all planktonic microbes. Phytoplankton and protozoa
              will also be described because of their important roles in the microbial
              foodweb, and protozoa are a priority group for the Integrated Taxonomic
              Information System (ITIS).  The spatial and temporal variability in freshwater
              microbial community structure and function will be determined.  The resource
              and food web factors that drive this variability will also be studied.
              Predominant microbial taxa within contrasting freshwater ecosystems will be
              identified, and characterization of these taxa in terms of their biochemistry,
              physiology and ecology will be done.   Traditional microbiological and
              limnological techniques with will be combined with molecular-based
              methodologies, and both comparative and experimental approaches will be
              employed.  Parameters being measured that are not currently monitored by the
              NTL-LTER include total bacterial abundance, active cell count and productivity,
              total community and microbial respiration, and microbial community composition
              and diversity. This research should provide significant new insights into the
              influence of microbial community composition and diversity on fundamental lake
              ecosystem processes and the ways that lake properties affect microbial
              dynamics.  Strong new connections between the fields of classical microbiology,
              molecular microbial ecology, limnology, and ecological theory are expected.

