Title       : Development of a Fourier Transform-Based Time-of-Flight Electron Spectrometer
               with Ultra-High Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9977800

Award Number: 9977800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357435             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. G. Frederick Brian.frederick@umit.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Kleban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977800
Frederick

This project, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation
              program, will develop a time-of-flight electron velocity analyzer using
              advanced modulation and Fourier deconvolution techniques with a throughput
              advantage on the order of 1000 over existing instruments.  The new spectrometer
              will operate with ultra-high resolution in the energy range 1-1000 electron
              volts.  It will be useful for the investigation of surface properties under
              ultra-high vacuum and a variety of other scientific and commercial
              applications.  The device utilizes secondary chopping of the electron beam in
              the nanosecond or sub-nanosecond time regime, and state-of-the-art Fourier
              transform-based digital signal recovery methods.  Additionally, there is
              potential for several orders of magnitude more throughput by using array
              detectors. Other substantial performance advantages arise when it is used with
              synchrotron sources.  The ultimate result will be a new generation of
              spectrometers allowing a wide range of new applications, both applied and
              fundamental, to research, research training, and analytical work.  This
              sophisticated instrumentation is of wide applicability to vibrational electron
              energy loss spectroscopy, e.g. high resolution electron energy loss
              spectroscopy (HREELS), higher energy spectroscopies (X-ray photoelectron (XPS),
              Auger electron (AES), and ultraviolet photoemission (UPS) spectroscopy), and
              gas phase ion (mass) spectrometry and gas phase photoemission.  The new device
              allows a number of new experiments and analytical techniques.  By reducing
              acquisition time from hours to seconds, surface reactions can be followed on a
              much faster time-scale, for example during thermal processing.  The several
              orders of magnitude improvement in throughput has a dramatic affect on the
              sensitivity to low intensity processes, such as trace analysis in analytical
              surface chemistry applications, non-dipolar scattering in HREELS and inelastic
              diffraction. Broader applications include practical surface analysis of soft
              and rough materials, e.g. HREELS of polymers, as well as greatly improved
              analytical capabilities in more standard types of measurements, such as XPS.
              Development requires optimizing the design of charged particle beam chopping
              devices. The new instrument requires the adaptation of deconvolution software
              for optimum performance. In collaboration with several experienced private
              sector software companies, sophisticated numerical algorithms for signal
              recovery will be implemented.  Development of the spectrometer includes
              extensive participation by faculty and students, involving both experimental
              and theoretical work.  

A new time-of-flight electron spectrometer,
              developed with funding from the Major Research Instrumentation program, will be
              useful for the investigation of surface properties under ultra-high vacuum and
              a variety of other scientific and commercial applications.  The scientific and
              engineering infrastructure at the University of Maine will be strengthened not
              only by the research enabled by this new instrument, but also by the education
              and career development of participants in the project, since students as well
              as faculty will be involved. 

