Title       : Acquistion of an Advanced Magnetron Sputter Deposition System With In Situ
               Diagnostics for Making Superlattices, Hard Coatings and Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977732

Award Number: 9977732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yip-Wah Chung ywchung@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anita Madan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melville P. Ulmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9145,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977732
Chung

Multilayer coatings are at the forefront of advanced coating
              development for many applications e.g. tribological coatings, optical films,
              x-ray mirrors, sensors etc. Graded layer thicknesses and compositions are of
              particular interest in meeting design needs, and sophisticated systems/controls
              are needed to create these structures. The coating performance critically
              depends on the layer thicknesses, intrinsic stress, surface roughness,
              microstructure etc. Careful control of process parameters (pressure, gas
              composition, plasma density, substrate temperature etc) is critical in
              obtaining reproducible and high-quality films.  An advanced multi-target
              magnetron sputter-deposition system will be acquired using Major Research
              Instrumentation support. The system will include in situ monitoring tools
              including an optical emission spectrometer, mass spectrometer and ellipsometer
              that will provide precise partial pressure information and real-time phase
              identification of the deposited films, enabling the investigator to monitor
              both the plasma environment and the growth process in real time. Precision
              substrate rotation results in accurate thickness control for individual layers
              in a multilayered coating. The sputtering system will have the provision for
              four planar and one cylindrical magnetron source. It will have the capability
              to deposit multilayers on large 3D parts of cylindrical geometry. The magnetron
              sources provide enhanced magnetic field strength as well as improved field
              configuration to effectively trap secondary electrons to increase ionization
              fraction in the plasma. Under optimum substrate bias conditions, this system
              may permit the growth of crystalline thin films at much lower substrate
              temperatures. With the proposed system, the investigators will have the
              flexibility to use small targets for basic and exploratory studies, and large
              targets for uniform deposition on engineering substrates. 

A multi-target
              magnetron sputter-deposition system with monitoring tools will be acquired with
              funds from the Major Research Instrumentation program. This instrumentation
              will be housed in the Advanced Coating Technology Group and will be used in the
              research programs of investigators from the Departments of Materials Science
              and Engineering, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Physics at the
              university. In addition, it will be available for use by members of the
              Industrial Consortia and the Technology Corporate Partners of the Group.  The
              educational impact of the instrument will be high as it will be used for
              teaching and research training for people from high-school science teachers
              through the graduate and post-doctoral students working on research projects.

              

