Title       : Acquisition of a Solids NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a9977388

Award Number: 9977388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Meier   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Atwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Folami T. Ladipo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Haddon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne-Frances Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977388
Meier

This Major Research Instrumentation award provides funding for
              the acquisition of a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer for
              solids in the Chemistry Department at the University of Kentucky.  The
              instrument will greatly facilitate the existing research activity on campus as
              well as create new opportunities for collaboration between researchers on
              campus, with local colleges, and with industry.  Vigorous programs in
              chemistry, biological chemistry, and materials science have developed at the
              University of Kentucky in the past 10 years that are pushing the limits of the
              instrumentation available on campus.  The major research areas to be undertaken
              with this newly acquired instrument include the following:  1) Organic Solids -
              solid-state NMR will be used to probe the structure of carbon nanotubes and new
              composite materials incorporating these nanotubes.  This instrumentation will
              allow the probing of the electronic states of these exciting compounds.  2)
              Main Group Organometallic Materials -solid-state NMR will be used to probe the
              structure of alumina, formed by a novel relatively low-temperature process. 
              The data will be essential for a full understanding of this material, for
              further optimization of the precursors, and for future applications.  3)
              Polymeric Materials - solid-state NMR will be used to study polycarbosilanes,
              which are precursors to silicon carbide materials.  An understanding of the
              structure of these hyperbranched polymers will facilitate design of better SiC
              precursors.  4)  Biological Structures - the chemical shift anisotropy of
              resonances measured in the solid-state spectra of enzymes will be used to
              further understanding of how a protein matrix affects the reactivity of
              cofactors such as flavin.

The acquisition of this nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectrometer, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program,  will
              provide capabilities not currently available at the University of Kentucky and
              will enhance research in important emerging materials chemistry areas.  It will
              also create new opportunities for collaboration between researchers in
              different departments on campus, with local colleges, including a local
              minority institution, and with industry.  In addition, not only the students
              working with the PIs will be trained on this instrument, but graduate and
              advanced undergraduate Chemistry students at the university will be trained on
              the instrument as part of a course on spectroscopy.  Thus this instrument will
              have a large impact on the infrastructure for materials chemistry research at
              the University of Kentucky.

