Title       : XV University Conference on Glass Science: Structure, Properties and
               Applications of Phosphate and Phosphate-Containing Glasses, Rolla, MO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9977881

Award Number: 9977881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Brow brow@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The scientific basis for the development of advanced materials and their record
              performance is founded on our fundamental understanding of the correlations
              between their properties and various aspects of the structure.  One of the most
              important new classes of glasses that are finding innumerable applications on
              the market place today are phosphate and phosphate-containing glasses. The wide
              compositions ranges over which phosphate and phosphate glasses can be prepared
              enable these glasses to be tailored for many different applications - optical,
              electrical, biomedical, and structural, at temperatures that are far more
              compatible with other low temperature materials such as plastics used in many
              applications such as telecommunications. While these glasses hold exceptional
              promise in enabling breakthrough technologies, these glasses are also among the
              least well studied of all oxide glasses.  It is to this critical information
              gap about this very important class of glasses that this first-ever conference
              on Phosphate and Phosphate Containing Glasses is directed.  This conference is
              organized under the auspices of the University Conference on Glass Science
              series to take advantage of its well established structure and low costs.  An
              international organizing committee is in place to coordinate the meeting.  The
              invited speakers include the top US and international researchers in this
              topical area. The conference will consist of morning and afternoon oral
              sessions and a poster session.  Attendance is estimated to be about 100
              scientists from academia, national laboratories, and industry, with strong
              participation from students and young researchers.  The information presented
              and generated at the Conference will be published in the most widely read
              archival Journal on the subject.
	In short, this conference will be the first
              ever such conference on phosphate and phosphate containing glasses.  It will
              bring together a broad range of glass scientists and engineers whose close
              interaction will naturally lead to cross-fertilization of new ideas and
              approaches to solving the many problems inherent in these complex glasses. 
              This conference will provide a catalyst for continued vigor in this area.
***
