Title       : The Critical Role of Glass Transition Phenomena on the Dynamics of Miscible
               Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a9977928

Award Number: 9977928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph H. Colby rhc@plmsc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanat K. Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977928
Kumar

Intermolecular friction in glass-forming liquids is poorly
              understood - a fact that is strongly demonstrated in miscible mixtures of two
              polymers.  The effective friction coefficient between two monomers can vary
              over several orders of magnitude in a nonmonotonic fashion as blend composition
              is changed at constant T - Tg.  A concentration fluctuation model appears to
              offer a promising framework for understanding such phenomena, and has been
              tested with experiments.  A comprehensive study of two model polyolefin blend
              systems, tested with experiments.  A comprehensive study of two model
              polyolefin blend systems, using a suite of experimental probes, is proposed
              here.  This will delineate the dynamics at all relevant length scales, from the
              segmental motion of monomers to the motion of entire chains.  These blends are
              chosen to vary concentration fluctuation in a systematic manner, and will serve
              as a greatly needed database for blend dynamics.  Information on segmental
              dynamics will be used to test and improve the current concentration fluctuation
              model for local dynamics.  Chain dynamics data will allow testing of proposed
              extensions of this model to the chain level, enabling prediction of
              intermolecular friction, and thus the viscosity and diffusion coefficients of
              miscible blends.  The least-understood part of the current model is the notion
              of a cooperatively rearranging region, which refers to a region in space where
              all monomers have to move cooperatively to relax stress.  Thus, molecular
              simulations will be utilized to understand cooperative motion, crucial for
              understanding dynamics in polymer blends, and also in all glass-forming
              liquids.  The goal of this proposal is to construct a predictive model for
              chain dynamics, which will make the connection between concentration
              fluctuations and effective intermolecular friction.  This will not only result
              in a predictive model for the viscosity of miscible polymer blends, needed in
              the polymers industry, but also have far-reaching consequences for
              understanding the dynamics of all glass-forming liquids.

Polymer blends are
              used in an increasing number of consumer products, including metals replacement
              in the transportation industry that enables weight to be reduced without
              sacrificing strength, thereby using less fuel in transportation.  Polymer
              blends are also vital for plastics recycling.  The proposed research will
              greatly expand our understanding of these complicated materials.

