Title       : LExEn: Extraordinary Climates of Earth-Like Planets: GCM Simulations at High
               Obliquity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9977980

Award Number: 9977980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darren Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Pollard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kasting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1075,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
P.I.: Williams, Darren				
Proposal Number: AST-9977980



The obliquity
              of Earth is stabilized by the size and proximity of the Moon.  The formation of
              the Moon through a giant impact may be a relatively improbable outcome of
              planetary accretion.  Thus, many Earth-like planets around other stars may not
              be well configured for spin-axis stability, which could allow their obliquities
              to vary wildly and to episodically approach 90 degrees.  A natural question is
              whether Earth-like planets with high obliquities might still be climatically
              suitable for life.  Past work using an energy-balance climate model has
              revealed that climate at high obliquity would be made regionally severe by
              large-scale seasonal changes to insolation received in the middle and upper
              latitudes.  The extraordinary seasonal temperature fluctuations that would
              result might be damaging to many forms of life that depend on liquid water. 
              The response of other Earth-like planets will depend primarily on their
              land-sea fractions and continental geographies, which affect the rate of
              seasonal heating and cooling, as well as levels of greenhouse gases such as H2O
              and CO2.  

Dr. Williams and colleagues will use a three-dimensional general
              circulation model (GCM) to simulate extreme climates at high obliquity.  These
              models are better suited to examining changes to climate caused by high
              obliquity because they simulate heat transport by winds and other processes
              more realistically than do simpler one-dimensional models.  The GMC that will
              be employed includes a coupled ice-sheet model equipped to monitor the growth
              and ablation of glaciers.  This will enable an investigation of whether high
              obliquity could have been the cause for low-latitude glaciation in the
              Precambrian Era of Earth's history.  A suite of experiments will be performed
              for different continental arrangements, CO2 levels, and obliquities to place
              constraints on possible climates of early Earth and on the habitability of
              planets around other stars. 

