Title       : Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
               (SCREMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9977234

Award Number: 9977234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Renaut renaut@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Lohr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Kostelich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank C. Hoppensteadt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematics at Arizona State University will purchase a
              cluster of high performance PCs that will be dedicated to the support of
              research in the mathematical sciences. The equipment will be used for
              interdisciplinary-focused research projects. These projects include,
*
              Integrated Intelligent Modeling, Design and Control of Crystal Growth
              Processes
* Mathematical Studies in Brain Dynamics
* Analysis of
              Spatiotemporal Data from Complex Dynamical Systems
* Parallel Optimization for
              Reconstruction, Quantification and Segmentation
* Nonparametric Function and
              Variance Estimation

Parallelism will be exploited on coarse granularity
              problems to achieve high-speed large-scale computation for relatively low cost
              by networking a cluster of PCs  using the Beowulf system. The acquisition of
              this cluster will also impact and enhance research activities of other
              departmental research groups, comprising faculty, postdoctoral visitors and
              graduate students, in computational fluid dynamics, discrete mathematics, and
              number theory. 

In support of the research activities, a Systems
              Administrator will be hired 50% on NSF funds for the first two years. This
              position will be regularized to university funds in year three.

