Title       : Consortium: Research Computing Resource for the CMU/Pitt Center for the Neural
               Basis of Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9977293

Award Number: 9977293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314779             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. McClelland mcclelland+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Plaut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. James McClelland and the Center for
              the Neural Basis of Cognition (CNBC) , a consortium of Carnegie Mellon
              University and the University of Pittsburgh will purchase a 24 processor
              compute server and a 500 Gb disk array, together with necessary ancillary
              facilities for backup, archival storage and data presentation. These will be
              augmented by desktop display stations necessary for individual researchers to
              access these resources. The center provides a nexus for scientists who wish to
              understand how cognitive processes arise from underlying neural mechanisms, how
              anomalous forms of cognition arise from biological disturbances, and how
              experience and brain development interact to give rise to the emergence of
              cognitive functions. The center brings together the methods of behavioral
              analysis, neurophysiology, functional imaging and computational modeling, in an
              effort to understand how functions such as perception, attention, memory and
              language emerge from interactions among neurons in the brain. The research in
              the Center has a range of foci, which can be grouped into the areas of memory
              and learning, language, attention and control of processing and perception and
              spatial cognition. In addition, several laboratories address general principles
              of neural function relevant to many aspects of cognition and several have
              contributed to the development of tools for computational modeling or
              functional imaging research. The effort to understand the neural basis of
              cognition requires the exploitation of computational technologies. This applies
              both in the area of analysis of experimental data obtained from functional
              imaging and neuronal recording studies, and in the area of computational
              modeling of cognitive and neural functions. Functional imaging studies in
              particular generate masses of raw data that must be processed and carefully
              treated to extract small signals from noisy inputs. To model cognition,
              likewise, places greater and greater demands on computing technologies as they
              are applied to understanding how detailed aspects of the physiology of the
              brain may influence the time-course and the outcome of cognition. 

This
              award provides the CNBC with a powerful cost-effective centralized computing
              facility which will significantly enhance the research of 17 faculty members
              and assist in the research and training of 21 post-doctoral fellows and 44
              graduate students. The instrumentation will also be utilized by undergraduates
              and therefore serve valuable research and training functions.

