Title       : SGER: Molecular Basis of Modulation of Neuronal Sodium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9977920

Award Number: 9977920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Satin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9125,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Satin, Jonathan

Abstract
Voltage-gated sodium
              channels are key molecules for initiating and shaping neuronal excitability. It
              is known that protein kinase C modulates cellular excitability in part via
              attenuation of fast Na current, but there is an incomplete understanding of the
              molecular mechanism for effects of modulation on Na channel function. In
              particular, little is known regarding modulation of slow Na current components.
              The reason for this incomplete understanding is that two factors have
              complicated the study of Na channel modulation: 1) an inadequate understanding
              of the interaction between channel kinetics and channel modulation, and 2) the
              expression of numerous Na channel isoforms in many native preparations. My
              long-term research goal is elucidate structure-function relationships of
              voltage-gated ion channels. Heterologously expressed, cloned voltage-gated Na
              channels serve as an ideal model system to determine molecular
              structure-function constraints. The objectives of this proposal are to test our
              molecular structure-function hypothesis for the interaction of channel domains,
              and to evaluate conditions that promote slow to fast gating transitions. These
              studies are motivated by our preliminary data showing that protein kinase C
              mediated phosphorylation of the Na channel leads to slowing of activation
              gating, and shifting of the fraction of fast gating channels. In the first aim
              we will perform site-directed mutagenesis of the rat brain ha Na channel to
              define the site of action of PK-C. Replacement of the PK-C target serine
              residue with a cysteine residue will allow us to probe structural hypothesis by
              the use of chemical modifiers. Chemical modifiers in the methanethiosulfonate
              class (MTS) will allow us to add positive or negative charges, and to create
              reversible cross-linkers with known molecular dimensions. In the second aim we
              will test our hypothesis that PK-C mediated phosphorylation of the serine on
              the inactivation domain contributes to slow -- fast mode switching. We will
              also test the effects of concentration of kinase. Finally, we will use a second
              neuronal isoform that may exhibit additional slow gating components. Our
              hypothesis suggests that channels with different slow gating may respond
              differently to modulation by PK-C activators. The latter experimental design
              will stress comparison of two different isoforms of neuronal Na channels
              expressed in an identical expression system. We will utilize molecular
              biological and electrophysiological techniques to understand molecular
              structure/function correlates for fast and slow inactivation, and modal gating.
              This proposal will advance our knowledge of the biophysical basis of membrane
              electrical properties, and their regulation by intracellular second
              messengers.

