Title       : Acquisition of an Optima XL-I Analytical Ultracentrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9977029

Award Number: 9977029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Lowey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Trybus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977029

Abstract

	This project involves the acquisition and installation
              of a state-of-the-art-analytical ultracentrifuge in the Department of Molecular
              Physiology and Biophysics at the University of Vermont.  This instrument
              represents newly developed technology, fully computerized to provide convenient
              and rapid data acquisition and manipulation.  Computer programs are available
              to perform the many of the computations needed to determine molecular weights,
              sedimentation and diffusion coefficients and the degree of homogeneity or
              polydispersity of macromolecules.  One of the most important applications of
              the new technology will be the ability to quantitatively analyze the
              association-dissociation equilibria of complex macromolecular assemblies that
              carry out most cellular functions.  With the rapid advances in molecular
              biology and the unprecedented ability to create unlimited new proteins in
              bacterial and baculovirus expression systems, there is a compelling need to
              characterize wild type and mutant proteins by precise physical chemical
              techniques.  The analytical ultracentrifuge remains the tool of choice for such
              studies.  The research of the major users is dedicated to understanding the
              structure and function of macromolecules and their assemblies, in particular,
              those involved in muscle contraction and non-muscle motility.  Most of the
              projects will use the instrumentation to study some aspect of the molecular
              motor, myosin, and its interactions with actin; the role of light chain
              isoforms in cardiac myosins; the regulation of non-muscle myosins by
              calmodulin, and assembly properties of smooth muscle myosin; forces and motions
              generated by single myosin molecules; molecular interactions at the actomyosin
              interface; role of Drosophila myosin regulatory light chain in oscillatory
              power generation; thin filament regulation in heart failure.  Several of the
              projects will use the instrumentation to characterize the expressed proteins
              for homogeneity, a property essential for single molecule mechanics in optical
              traps; and for x-ray crystallography.  In addition, this instrument will serve
              as an excellent teaching tool for graduate students and post-doctoral fellows
              as well as for undergraduates.  Few instruments demonstrate as vividly as this
              the effects of environmental conditions on the size, shape and interaction
              properties of biological macromolecules.
