Title       : The Development of an Integrated System of Instrumentation and Equipment to
               Measure Atmospheric Boundary Layer Winds and Their Effects on Built Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9977702

Award Number: 9977702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. Doggett Tim.Doggett@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Dunyak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kishor C. Mehta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1525,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scientists at Texas Tech University have been working toward the goal of better
              understanding the effects of damaging wind events since 1970 when a devastating
              F5 tornado struck near the University and destroyed much of downtown Lubbock. 
              In spite of the large societal impact of such wind events, surprisingly many
              crucial questions about wind and its effects are left unanswered.  Behavior of
              the wind within the surface boundary layer of severe storms, sources of
              momentum related to these events, and the influence of the boundary layer wind
              on buildings and other structures are poorly understood.  Additionally, wind is
              responsible for soil erosion and blowing dust, which is especially a problem in
              West Texas and other areas of the Midwest Research into these complex problems
              is interdisciplinary in nature, requiring a team with comprehensive expertise
              in the fields of atmospheric science, civil engineering, and mathematics. Texas
              Tech researchers have embraced this philosophy and have become national leaders
              in wind related research.

Texas Tech offers a unique environment for this
              research, fostering a well-developed multidisciplinary program in Wind Science
              and Engineering (WISE) research with active participation by faculty in Civil
              Engineering, Atmospheric Sciences, Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering,
              Electrical Engineering, and Economics.  West Texas weather provides ample
              opportunity to directly measure the boundary layer wind profiles of severe
              thunderstorm events and to study problems related to soil erosion.  In
              addition, Texas Tech researchers have demonstrated the ability to travel to
              coastal areas and successfully deploy instrumentation in the eyes of
              land-falling hurricanes.  An important aspect of the WISE program is the
              recruiting of a diverse student population and the training of both graduate
              and undergraduate students in the use and application of the wide variety of
              available instrumentation.

Current existing facilities include the Wind
              Engineering Research Field Laboratory (WERFL) that is designed to measure the
              vertical wind structure at a field site location using an instrumented tower
              and to measure the resulting pressure loads from the wind on a full-scale test.
              Funding has also been obtained to install a local network of meteorological
              instrumentation (a mesonet) capable of measuring mesoscale atmospheric
              conditions, including the capability of measuring some boundary layer wind
              profiles.  This represents a vast improvement in the amount of regional
              meteorological information that will be available for research activity.  In
              addition, a rugged mobile-instrumented tower has been developed for field
              research activity.

These research facilities produce the foundation for WISE
              research activities.  Unfortunately, many of these facilities have evolved over
              time from a non-interdisciplinary perspective; the wind engineering research
              was interested in wind effects at a given site, while the atmospheric research
              focused on scales larger than the boundary layer.  As a result, the current
              interdisciplinary research is limited by the inability to take measurements of
              wind events on the intermediate scale between these focuses.  On this scale
              atmospheric boundary layer phenomenon hinder the ability to correlate the
              observable meteorological phenomenon with tie effects of the wind on
              structures.

This major research instrumentation effort (MRI) is designed to
              provide an integrated system for measuring atmospheric processes in the surface
              boundary layer and the effects of those processes on built structures.  The MRI
              equipment includes instrumentation to:

  measure standard surface
              meteorological parameters.
  equip an array of fixed meteorological towers to
              take very detailed measurements of winds in the vicinity of     the full-scale
              test building.
  measure the amount of suspended dust in the air to measure
              the effects of local soil erosion and to develop     studies into air quality
              base on regional scale wind information.
  measure the effects of wind
              pressure on the corners of buildings.
  develop a computer system required to
              integrate these data with existing data sets and to archive the    resulting
              data set.

