Title       : Advanced Microbe Isolation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9977469

Award Number: 9977469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni steve.giovannoni@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Gerwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract - 9977469

Advanced Microbe Isolation Laboratory

      This
              grant will support the integration of existing instruments in new ways to
              provide an automated facility for culturing microbial cells from nature.  Both
              in design and function, this facility will be unique. Many scientific fields -
              medicine, environmental microbiology, industrial chemistry, exobiology and
              genomics - have been impacted by the past decade of discoveries of novel
              uncultured microbial diversity in the natural world.  The key to these
              discoveries was the use of genetic techniques to detect microorganisms that had
              never been cultured in scientific laboratories.

     The strategy of the new
              facility will be to miniaturize the process of culturing microorganisms, and
              apply genetic probes to systematically search for cultures of cell types that
              have been shown to be common on earth but phylogenetically remote from any
              organism studied previously in scientific laboratories.  The Advanced Microbe
              Isolation Laboratory (AMIL) will use robotic technology to isolate and identify
              microorganisms in cultures that have organic carbon concentrations and cell
              densities that are 1000 fold lower than standard laboratory conditions.   The
              central instrument in this laboratory will be a flow cytometer integrated with
              robotics for handling and sampling from arrays in microtiter dishes.  The
              instrument was designed to screen a very large number of chemical variables and
              replicates.   The facility will also include incubators and cryogenic equipment
              for storing and distributing cultures.  A consortium of investigators will use
              the facility to produce data on the probabilities of culturing cells, and to
              systematically investigate combinations of cells of different species, to
              identify microbial consortia that depend on intra-species interactions, and to
              identify patterns of positive and negative interference caused by the
              production of compounds such as siderophores, quorum sensing compounds, and
              antibiotics.

