Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Workstation Cluster for High Performance Computing in
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9977582

Award Number: 9977582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Hirschi Stanley.Hirschi@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mihai Horoi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Current  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Koblar A. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudha Srinivas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977582
Hirschi

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program, a parallel array of high performance workstations will be acquired. 
              These will be used to improve the scientific computational capability in the
              Department of Physics at Central Michigan University.  Eight SMP workstations
              comprising sixteen DEC Alpha 21264 processors will be linked using a fast
              system area network (SAN).  Parallelization on the array will be accomplished
              using MPI, the Message Passing Interface. This cluster will provide a
              theoretical peak performance of about 32 GFLOPS at an estimated cost of
              $6/MFLOPS.  The cluster will meet critical hardware needs of three very active
              research groups in physics at Central Michigan University.  These groups
              conduct computationally intensive research in materials and cluster physics (2
              groups) and in nuclear structure physics (1 group).  A polymer fluid dynamics
              group, which includes faculty from the departments of chemistry, physics, and
              mathematics, will also benefit from the use of this new capability.  At present
              these groups use a variety of individual workstations, of which only one has a
              performance approaching 1 GFLOPS.  Thus, the new array will increase the
              available peak computing power by at least a factor of 30.  Such a performance
              enhancement will permit these groups at CMU to attack exciting new research
              problems involving larger and more complex systems. The planned parallel array
              of high performance workstations will also afford important new training
              opportunities for undergraduate and M.S. students at CMU in the area of
              parallel computing. 

A parallel array of high performance workstations will
              be acquired with support from the Major Research Instrumentation program.  This
              array will provide increased computing power for both research projects and
              research training of M.S. level and undergraduate students, and thus will have
              a large impact on the infrastructure at CMU.



