Title       : Acquisition of a High Performance Digital NMR Spectrometer Console for Studies
               in the Structure and Dynamics of Self-Assembled Systems.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9977269

Award Number: 9977269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay T. John vijay.john@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. Landry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kyriakos D. Papadopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pernilla Wittung-Stafshede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9977269
John, Vijay T	

Project Summary
Acquisition of a High
              Performance Digital NMR Spectrometer Console for Studies in the Structure and
              Dynamics of Self-Assembled Systems

Over the past couple of decades, nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has evolved to become an exquisite
              technique to probe chemical structure and function.  With the advent of
              multinuclear and multidimensional pulse NMR, and pulsed gradient spinecho NMR,
              techniques now exist to probe the structure and dynamics of complex systems
              including synthetic polymers, surfactant aggregates, etc.  Applications of the
              technique span the areas of the physical, life, and engineering sciences.  This
              request is to enhance the NMR capabilities at Tulane to allow us to use these
              advanced techniques to solve specific research problems, and to integrate our
              research with education.
	
	Tulane University will acquire a high performance
              digital NMR spectrometer console.  The console will be coupled to an existing
              high field magnet (500MHz) to constitute an advanced NMR facility at the
              university.  A primary objective of instrument acquisition is the development
              of a core competence at Tulane, in the use of advanced NMR spectroscopy to
              solve problems related to self-assembly in specific biomacromolecular and
              amphiphilic systems.  The proposal is written by five investigators with
              interests in (a) self-assembly of surfactant microstructures for materials
              synthesis (b) transport and stability in double emulsions (c) membrane
              penetration of genetic drugs (d) protein folding and conformational dynamics
              (e) polymer chain dynamics.  The investigators will work together to develop an
              interdisciplinary core competence in advanced NMR spectroscopy.

	The
              spectrometer will be maintained and operated by a Coordinated Instrumentation
              Facility (CIF) at Tulane.  This is a university-wide, centralized facility that
              operated the major instrumentation on campus.  One of the core functions of the
              CIF is to provide training to students who wish to use specific instruments. 
              The principal investigators are committed to integrate their research with
              education.  In collaboration with the CIF, the new instrumentation will be made
              accessible to all researchers and students in the region interested in the use
              of NMR.

