Title       : EPSCoR: Research Infrastructure for Nevada's Growth - Targeting Research With
               Uniqueness and Excellence (RING-TRUE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9977809

Award Number: 9977809
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4073671            (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ & Comm Col Sys of NV
	      2601 Enterprise Road
	      Reno, NV  895121666    702/739-3517

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EPS-9977809
Coleman
This project will enhance the research infrastructure in
              the state of Nevada's major academic research institutions.  The University and
              Community College System of Nevada identified three scientific focal areas as a
              basis for building research capabilities at the University of Nevada - Reno
              (UNR), the University of Nevada - Las Vegas (UNL), and the Desert Research
              Institute (DRI).   The areas selected are 1) nutritional genomics, 2)
              interdisciplinary science of Nevada's unique environments, and 3) interface
              materials science and engineering.

The project will establish the Nevada
              Center for Nutritional Genomics, intended to a national center for engineering
              plants and foodstuffs with increased level of nutrients essential for the
              health and well-being of humans.  The Center will involve researchers at both
              the Reno and Las Vegas campuses of the University of Nevada.  Four tenure-track
              faculty positions will be established and state of the art research equipment
              will be installed.

In the area of environmental research, two unique
              research sites in the Mohave desert and in the Lake Tahoe watershed will be
              used to create a research infrastructure to encourage collaborations involving
              scientists at UNR, UNL and DRI.  Research will be centered on environmental
              problems that result from Nevada's unique environment and rapid population
              growth.  Start up costs will be provided for new faculty and a seed grant
              program established to initiate research projects at the targeted research
              sites.

UNR, UNL and DRI intend to develop their interface science programs
              in three areas that these institutions have existing strength and that are of
              particular relevance to the state of Nevada.  Research will focus on 1)
              environmental and geochemical materials, 2) electroluminescent materials, and
              3) testing and modification of complex materials such as fiber-reinforced,
              polymer-based composites.  New senior and junior faculty will be hired to
              increase the universities' critical mass in the field, and new specialized
              equipment will be acquired and existing equipment upgraded.

