Title       : Proxy Services in Wide Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9977635

Award Number: 9977635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1010263            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Towsley towsley@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Kurose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prashant Shenoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Interest in streaming media services has grown dramatically in recent years
              due to the unparalleled popularity of the Internet and the increase in backbone
              and access bandwidth. As client access bandwidth further increases, the demand
              for high-quality audio/video streaming will grow. Emerging applications include
              orchestrated media applications, such as distance learning, that combine audio,
              video, images, and text from one or more sources.  Other challenging multimedia
              applications are on the horizon, including virtual reality and distributed
              interactive simulation. These applications involve both constant-bit-rate and
              variable-bit-rate streams of varying popularity, and different degrees of
              support for user interactivity, such as VCR or branching operations.
    
              These emerging high-quality multimedia applications will pose serious
              challenges to the network infras-tructure.  A common thread among these
              applications is the so-called "continuous" nature of their data.  In continuous
              media (CM), strict timing relationships exist that define the schedule by which
              CM data must be rendered (e.g., a video displayed or audio played out). In a
              network setting, the playout timing constraints, the rate variability of
              specific CM such as variable bit rate (VBR) video, the possibility of packet
              loss and delay within the network, and the desire to use network resources
              efficiently combine to make the delivery of CM data an exceptionally
              challenging problem.  The challenge of delivering high-quality audio and video
              is further complicated by the fact that a single network service provider
              typically does not control the entire path from the source to the end
              client(s).  One promising approach to addressing these challenges is to deploy
              proxy services within the network.  Proxies can hide heterogeneity, reduce user
              start-up latency, lower the network resource usage, and adapt to fluctuations
              in network performance properties.
     In this proposal, the project director
              outlines research whose goal is to develop and evaluate proxy services that
              improves the perceived quality of CM streams seen by clients while providing
              low startup latencies. The project will focus on the development of the
              services themselves, the underlying resource management mechanisms required at
              the proxy, the programming interface required so that these services access the
              resource management mechanisms, and characterizations of the workloads and
              access patterns typically encountered by such proxies. The approach to
              evaluating these services and mechanisms is eclectic, relying on a combination
              of analysis, simulation, and experimentation with a Linux-based proxy, PRONTO,
              which will be further enhanced throughout the project.

