Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Transmission Electron Microscopy of Hydrated
               Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9977458

Award Number: 9977458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew R. Libera mlibera@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977458
Libera

Three inter-related tools associated with the cryogenic
              preparation and electron-optical examination of hydrated polymeric materials
              will be acquired with support from the Major Research Instrumentation program. 
              These tools - a cryoultramicrotome, a cryotransfer system, and a cryogenic
              anticontaminator - will be used to develop and apply techniques to map water in
              polymer structures and to study how exposure to water affects morphology.  They
              will be used in an established electron-optical facility containing two modern
              and well equipped transmission microscopes.  Work will initially target: (i)
              the spatially-resolved mapping of water concentration at interfaces within
              fiber- reinforced epoxy-matrix composites; and (ii) the nature of scaffold
              degradation and tissue ingrowth in polymeric tissue-engineering scaffolds. 
              These tools will impact both graduate research and teaching at Stevens.  More
              broadly, these tools will impact a number of research groups throughout the
              greater metropolitan New York area, particularly in scientific and engineering
              efforts associated with tissue engineering, biomaterials, and pharmaceuticals.
              

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation program, tools for the
              cryogenic preparation of hydrated materials will be acquired.  These tools will
              be used with a transmission electron microscope to study a variety of polymeric
              and colloidal materials of potential technological importance.  This instrument
              will have an impact on the research infrastructure at Stevens Institute of
              Technology.

