Title       : Acquisition of a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter (FACS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9977224

Award Number: 9977224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Hughes cchughes@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Cahalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter (FACS)
Abstract -
              9977224

One of the most powerful approaches in biology is reductionism, the
              process of break-ing down complex systems into their component parts, the
              better to understand their interactions in the whole.  A FACS machine allows
              for the enrichment of specific sub-populations of cells from large, diverse
              starting populations based on their expression of specific "markers".  These
              surface markers are detected by binding of fluorescently-labeled specific
              antibodies that glow when exposed to the UV laser in the FACS ma-chine. 

A
              diverse population of researchers at UCI has an equally diverse range of
              interests. These interests can be grouped into four broad areas.  These
              represent just some of the many research and teaching projects on campus that
              will benefit from a FACS machine.

1.	 Isolation of white blood cell (WBC)
              subsets.    Experiments are proposed that require isolating specific
              subpopulations of WBC to look at their role in protecting indi-viduals from
              infection by the parasite T. Cruzi.  Infection by this organism is a major
              cause of heart disease in South America.  Other investigators will isolate
              subpoulations of WBC to look at their role in diseases such as Multiple
              Sclerosis. 

2.	Isolation of cells in distinct stages of the cell cycle.   
              Experiments will be per-formed to test the effects of specific growth factors
              on regulating cell division.  Regula-tion of cell growth is important both in
              development and in cancer, which is an uncon-trolled growth of tumor cells.  A
              FACS machine is particularly well-suited to perform these kinds of
              experiments.

3.	Isolation of minority cell populations.    In many cases,
              both within science and without, the rarest examples are often the most
              intriguing.  Several investigators are in-terested in collecting rare, but
              important, cells from the body for analysis.  Some of these cells help protect
              us against certain diseases, others may carry a disease.  The FACS machine is
              very good at finding that one-in-a-thousand cell that is of
              interest.

4.	Enrichment of transfected cells.     Transfected cells are
              cells that have been genetically altered in the laboratory so that they express
              new genes.  One day it is hoped that people may be helped by giving them  back
              such altered cells to compensate for a genetic abnormality.  In the meantime
              the FACS machine is used in the lab to en-rich for these cells so that they can
              be analyzed in greater detail

In summary, a myriad of research and teaching
              projects at UCI will be facilitated and greatly enhanced by the acquisition of
              a state-of-the-art FACS machine.  Unlike "all the king's horses and all the
              king's men" we believe we can put the pieces back together again, and in so
              doing gain a greater understanding of complex biological systems.


