Title       : VIGRE: Integration of Research and Education in Mathematics and Applied
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9977372

Award Number: 9977372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2758640            (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Strauss wstrauss@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Craig  (Principal Investigator former)
              Chi-Wang Shu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Targan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Mallet-Paret  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas G. Goodwillie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Brown

    The Mathematics Department and the Division of Applied
              Mathematics at Brown University will undertake a program of integration of
              research and education, supported by a grant from the NSF VIGRE Program. We
              will develop activities on the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral level
              which will strengthen and provide better coordination for the mathematical
              sciences program of the two departments. Through the participation and support
              of the members of the Mathematics and Applied Mathematics departments, in
              particular VIGRE Postdoctoral Instructors, VIGRE Graduate Trainees and Brown
              undergraduates, our program will forge scientific communication and research
              interaction between participants at all levels of mathematical experience and
              seniority. 
    The VIGRE program is an opportunity for the Mathematics
              Department and the Division of Applied Mathematics to review and reshape their
              graduate and undergraduate programs, responding to changes in the discipline,
              research priorities and the evolving landscape of career opportunities for
              Mathematics degree holders with experience in research.  We plan to rethink our
              programs, broaden their scope and deepen their contributions to graduate
              education, without enlarging the size of the mathematical sciences program at
              Brown.  Our main objectives are to develop innovative activities in our
              programs which will serve (1) to provide modes of scientific interaction
              between practicing research mathematicians and students of mathematics at all
              levels, (2) to give our graduate and undergraduate students more in-depth
              contact with areas and material of current research interest, and (3) to
              produce graduate students who are more scientifically literate and more
              articulate, and who possess the basic skills for a wider range of career
              possibilities after completing their degree.

    This program will support
              12 graduate students as VIGRE graduate trainees (GTs), 3 VIGRE postdoctoral
              fellows (VPs) and up to 12 undergraduate research projects (UTRAs) at a time. 
              These resources will be shared equally between the two mathematics departments
              as described below.  The VIGRE program at Brown will consist of the following
              components:
   (1)  a graduate traineeship program (GTs)
   (2)  an
              undergraduate tutoring and research program (UTRAs)
   (3)  a postdoctoral
              fellowship program (VPs)
   (4)  support for a mentoring program for women in
              sciences (WiSE) and under-represented minorities in sciences (ExSEL)
   (5)  a
              graduate and peer tutoring resource center in mathematics for undergraduates
              (MRC)
   (6)  a program of outreach to gifted high school students at local
              area high schools
   (7)  a program of outreach for disadvantaged high school
              students, resumed education students and their teachers
   (8)  a program of
              internships with industry and with the National
        Laboratories

   
              Graduate Traineeships (GTs) sponsored by VIGRE are opportunities for students
              to complete a graduate education in mathematics in a stimulating and research
              productive  environment, with a balanced number of research and teaching
              semesters, and with adequate summer support.  Postdoctoral Fellows (VPs) will
              have the opportunity to work closely in research groups, with reduced teaching
              load and with close contact with both senior faculty and graduate
              students.
Principal features of the graduate, undergraduate and postdoctoral
              programs include:
   (1)  A series of VIGRE graduate seminars, modeled on the
              example of a 'literature seminar' and/or a 'lab meeting' that is common in
              experimental sciences.
   (2)  Additional advanced graduate/research level
              seminars, on a broad set of current topics in mathematics and applied
              mathematics.
   (3)  A seminar course series in the graduate program focusing
              on scientific communication and effective mathematics instruction.
   (4)  A
              focus on individual undergraduate research activities (UTRAs), directed by
              faculty and VIGRE Postdoctoral fellows.
Resources for these activities will
              come both from the VIGRE program grant and from an increased level of
              coordination and cooperation between the Mathematics Department and the
              Division of Applied Mathematics.
      Graduate Trainees supported by VIGRE
              will expect support for five years of study, and teach between two and four
              semesters during their tenure at Brown.  They will also participate in the
              VIGRE activities outside of their usual course work, which they will be
              directly involved in coordinating.  Activities involving undergraduates include
              (1) UTRA research seminars, (2) mentoring activities with the WiSE women in
              sciences undergraduate support group, and with the ExSEL minority sciences
              support group, and (3) organization and participation in the MRC, mathematics
              drop-in resource centers for undergraduates. Activities which involve the local
              community include (4) participation in outreach programs to Providence area
              schools, aimed both for gifted and for disadvantaged students and for teachers,
              and programs in community continuing education centers.
Graduate Trainees will
              be encouraged to broaden their scientific background, past the confines of
              their particular research specialization and across department boundaries.  In
              particular the VIGRE program intends to make the interface at Brown between
              Mathematics and Applied Mathematics substantially more permeable.  Furthermore,
              there will be regular programs of summer internships with industry and national
              labs.
VIGRE Postdoctoral Fellows will benefit from the strong research
              environment in both the programs in mathematics and applied mathematics, and
              they will be expected to contribute to the VIGRE graduate seminars.  They will
              be required to teach one course each semester that they are on campus.  They
              will also have opportunities to collaborate with research staff at national
              labs and in industry, and they are expected to benefit from communication with
              the Brown departments of Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Physics, and
              the campus-based group in cognition (computer and natural vision, artificial
              and natural intelligence).
Objectives:   We intend to provide our finishing
              PhDs with a broader view of mathematics and science, with perspective on the
              relationship of their particular discipline within it.  They should be aware
              and prepared for the many possible careers both in and outside of academia that
              are open to degree holders with mathematics research experience.  Graduate
              students will receive training in scientific communication and in mathematics
              instruction.  We intend to increase the quality of our incoming graduate
              classes, through a focussed identification and recruitment program, and to
              increase the proportion of women and under represented minority students in our
              program.  The Brown VIGRE program will pay particular attention to the problem
              of retention of these students. VIGRE resources will increase the number of
              research support semesters for participants, and as a result we expect to lower
              the average time to degree. We intend to produce better prepared undergraduate
              mathematics concentrators, who already have some research experience, many of
              whom are expected to go on to graduate school and subsequently a career in the
              mathematical sciences. We expect our VIGRE Postdoctoral Fellows to have an
              additional competitive advantage in the academic job market, from the breadth
              of their research experience at Brown, from the increased opportunity for
              collaborative research, from the availability of contacts with industry and
              national labs, and from the focus on instruction and communication of
              mathematics, and their experience teaching at a high quality undergraduate
              institution.
Impact:  We expect that we will be able to increase the numbers
              of American undergraduate majors in mathematics, and to increase the subset of
              the pool which goes on to graduate school in mathematics.  We expect to
              increase the proportion of Am
