Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research and Training in Functional
               Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9977377

Award Number: 9977377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianna K. Padilla padilla@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel T. Lerdau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract - 9977377

Functional Ecology is an integrative and
              interdisciplinary field that considers the biochemical, morphological and
              physiological bases of ecological processes, interactions and potential
              adaptations of organisms.  Studies of Functional Ecology span levels of
              organization from parts of individuals through ecosystems.  Although the field
              of Functional Ecology by its nature is integrative and interdisciplinary, much
              of the research traditionally progressed along separate taxonomic lines. 
              Animal and plant studies have followed different trajectories, and, because of
              tradition in both training and research, few researchers work on both animal
              and plant systems.  Similar divisions have occurred between terrestrial and
              aquatic systems, for both freshwater and marine systems.  In addition, research
              into areas of physiological function is traditionally separate from studies of
              morphological and behavioral function.
Functional Ecology research is
              equipment and technology dependent, much like Molecular Biology.  Share use of
              expensive equipment, research collaborations among scientists with different
              areas of expertise, and mutual training of students in a single facility has
              proven to be very successful for students and researchers.  This award will be
              used to develop a multi-user facility dedicated to research, training, and
              education in Functional Ecology.  This facility will fill a crucial need in
              training in the area of Functional Ecology by providing equipment that can be
              used by a variety of researchers and students whose analytical needs overlap
              and whose research areas are complementary.  The Ecology and Evolution
              Department at Stony Brook has a strong group of researchers in this field.  A
              core facility housed in a common lab space will significantly enhance research
              capabilities, facilitate research collaboration, and will improve capacity to
              train both undergraduate and graduate students in the modern analytical methods
              are essential for Functional Ecology.

