Title       : Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Electron Cryomicroscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9977556

Award Number: 9977556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. DeRosier derosier@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melissa Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolaus Grigorieff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar Ringe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977556

Abstract

	This project involves the acquisition and installation
              of a 300 kEV field emission gun (FEG) transmission electron microscope (TEM) to
              determine the structures of cellular machinery.  Cellular machines such as the
              actin cytoskeleton are often large structures difficult to study by methods
              other than electron cryomicroscopy.  For example, it has been possible to dock
              atomic models for the cytoskeletal components obtained by x-ray crystallography
              into the molecular maps of the cytoskeletal complexes obtained by electron
              cryomicroscope.  Analysis of filamentous structures has been extended to 10 A
              resolution in many cases.  A state of the art microscope is essential for these
              studies.  The microscope to be obtained and installed during this project will
              be utilized for the study of the splicesome, voltage-gated ion channels, the
              actin bundle of the intestinal microvillus, the bacterial flagellar motor and
              filament, the bacterial gas vesicle, the receptor-kinase signaling complex and
              the complex of actin with myosin.  The aim of these studies are atomic models
              of the structures.  In some instances the structure will be obtained to atomic
              resolution using electron cryomicroscopy alone.  In other cases, atomic models
              obtained by x-ray crystallography will be docked into molecular maps obtained
              by cryomicroscopy.  The 300 kEV FEG TEM is essential to these projects because
              the quality of the micrographs limits the resolution of the map in the same way
              that the quality of the objective lens limits the resolution of the light
              microscope.  No matter how sophisticated, computer processing cannot extract
              what is not present in the images.  The two key features of this microscope in
              this regard are the higher voltage and the FEG.  With these, it is possible to
              take highly defocused images which have strong contrast at low resolution but
              which preserve high resolution detail.  The strong contrast at low resolution
              is essential for accurate alignment of images prior to averaging.  If the
              alignment (or correction for distortion) is not accurate, one will average
              non-equivalent features and resolution will be lost.  This microscope will
              extend the resolution of current maps and therefore, the ability to obtain
              accurate atomic models whether it be directly or by the docking of atomic
              models into molecular maps.

	The cryomicroscope is essential to the training
              of young scientists.  Since the kind of microscopy being used represents a
              frontier in structural studies of cellular machinery, students and post
              doctoral fellows must be trained in these techniques.  The need for such
              scientists is increasing rapidly now that the power of cryoelectron microscopy
              has been demonstrated.  There are currently few places equipped for this kind
              of training.  

