Title       : Virtual Topologies for Multiparty Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a9977524

Award Number: 9977524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $922825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia M. Lo lo@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur M. Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Zappala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Proskurowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal seeks to improve multiparty communication on the Internet by
              applying models
and methodology from the fields of graph theory and parallel
              and distributed computing.  Multiparty
communication refers to any type of
              information exchange among a group of participants, including
conferences,
              advertising, electronic voting, remote monitoring, and
              meta-computing.
Multicast, or one-to-many communication, has received the most
              attention from network proto-
col designers and has been implemented on a
              subset of the Internet known as the MBone.  Several
obstacles to the universal
              deployment of multicast remain, such as high cost and lack of
              robustness.
Moreover, some multiparty applications are not able to operate, or
              operate less efficiently, because
multicast is a poor match for their style of
              communication.  Large-scale electronic voting, for exam-
ple, could use a
              many-to-one network service, with balloting results partially tabulated on the
              way
to a central reporting service.
     Research from the fields of graph
              theory and parallel and distributed computing has solved many
of these
              problems, albeit for environments that differ greatly from that of the
              Internet.  The key to
applying these results to Internet protocols is the use
              of a virtual topology that maps a theoretical
substructure onto the physical
              network.  As with the MBone, the links in the virtual topology could
consist
              of some physical links and some virtual links implemented by encapsulation
              tunnels.
The proposed research first addresses limitations in current
              multicast routing protocols.  The researchers
propose to investigate the use
              of spanners as a virtual topology for densely-populated multicast
groups, thus
              improving the efficiency of the periodic ooding used in this domain.  For
              sparsely-
populated groups, we propose to apply hypercube message passing
              algorithms used in parallel
computation to the design of a more efficient and
              fault-tolerant multicast protocol. The researchers then plan
to apply the
              techniques used for multicast virtual topologies to other multiparty
              communication
paradigms. The researchers have identified promising research
              directions for reduction (many-to-one), subcast (one-to-some), and multi-source
              multicast (few-to-many).
     The project will progress in three main stages:
              analysis, protocol design and evaluation.  The
analysis stage is intended to
              identify virtual topologies that are good candidates for multiparty
              com-
munication protocols.  The analysis will include definition of formal
              models of the virtual topologies
used, definition of appropriate metrics and
              statistical evaluation of random samples of the topologies,
and discussion of
              complexity status of the relevant exact and approximate optimization
              problems.
The protocol design stage will build on our analysis by using
              virtual topologies as the basis for
communication protocols.  Our emphasis
              will be on protocols that are feasible and practical to
implement and will be
              based on simulation studies of the static properties of proposed graph
              struc-
tures.  Evaluation of the new protocols will utilize dynamic simulation
              to look at traffic capacities,
delay, and fault tolerance recovery.
              Eventually, the developed protocols will be implemented and
evaluated on a
              network testbed built with prior NSF support.
     The major contributions of
              this work will be a methodology for applying virtual topologies to
Internet
              protocol design, formal models for these topologies, and new protocols for
              multicast rout-
ing, reduction, and other communication paradigms.  Further
              outcomes of our work will include
a database of topologies used in our
              simulations, methods for modeling dynamic group member-
ship and group
              distribution, and techniques for evaluation of fault tolerance properties of
              virtual
topologies and protocols.  The  contributions to education will
              consist of training of graduate and
undergraduate students in network theory
              and engineering, and development and dissemination of
curriculum materials for
              the design and evaluation of multiparty communication protocols.
