Title       : Development of a Cs-corrected small (0.1nm) Electron Probe EELS Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9977547

Award Number: 9977547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Silcox js97@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977547
Silcox

In this project, supported by the Major Research
              Instrumentation program, a spherical electron optical aberration, Cs, corrected
              scanned probe instrument will be designed and constructed.  It will be able to
              produce a 0.1nm probe at 100 keV and 0.3 eV emission width on a routine basis,
              and to detect electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectra and
              energy-filtered diffraction patterns with close to 100% efficiency.  The
              instrument will have complete digital control, be both flexible and easy to
              operate and be accessible over the net.  The instrument will provide much
              enhanced detection of core-edge spectra thus improving sensitivity limits for,
              e.g., determination of submonolayer impurities at interfaces, interface
              electronic states, enhanced zone axis Z-contrast mapping and increased
              sensitivities and precision at currently accessible levels.  The development of
              this instrument is a collaboration between Cornell University and Nion, a
              company based in Kirkland, WA.  Nion was formed to develop the know-how
              developed by the principals, Drs. Krivanek and Dellby, in constructing the
              first successful corrector on an electron probe instrument.  After
              construction, the instrument will be brought to Cornell to serve the 80 faculty
              groups carrying out undergraduate and graduate level materials research at the
              university.  It will be located close to the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility
              in a new building designed for Advanced Materials research and will be made
              available to external users as part of the Cornell Center for Materials
              Research outreach program.  Problems at the frontier of materials science will
              be studied using this instrument.  It will provide knowledge of local
              electronic structure at or close to the atomic scale to furnish essential
              insights into the properties of interfaces, grain boundaries and other
              nanostructural features of real materials that affect the properties. 
              Substantial undergraduate research opportunities will be offered.  The
              instrument will also feature in programs with local and other schools within
              the context of the Cornell Center for Materials Research K-12 outreach
              programs.   

A new instrument will be developed with funds from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program that will provide a probe size that will allow
              studies of the electronic structure at or close to the atomic scale to furnish
              essential insights into the properties of interfaces, grain boundaries and
              other nanostructural features of real materials that affect the properties. 
              This instrument will be located at the Cornell Center for Materials Research
              where it will have a large impact on the infrastructure, both in terms of
              research and education.


