Title       : Developing and testing a computer tool that critiques survey questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9977969

Award Number: 9977969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Graesser a-graesser@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1614,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The validity and reliability of answers to questions on a survey critically
              depend on whether the respondents understand the meaning of the questions. 
              This project develops and tests a computer tool that assists survey designers
              in improving the comprehensibility of questions.  The computer tool will have
              particular modules that diagnose each question in a survey on various levels of
              language, discourse, and world knowledge.  For example, the critique identifies
              questions with low frequency words, vague or ambiguous terms, unclear relative
              terms, complex syntax, high working memory load, misleading presuppositions,
              and content that appears to be unrelated to the survey context.  The computer
              tool will incorporate empirical findings and computational architectures in the
              fields of cognitive science, artificial intelligence, computational
              linguistics, discourse processing, and psychology.  Some of these modules are
              so complex, technical, or subtle that they are invisible to the unassisted
              human eye, including experts in survey methodology, questionnaire design, and
              computational linguistics.  This motivates the need for a computer tool to
              assist the research methodologist in revising questions and in learning about
              the complex mechanisms that underlie each component.

The computer tool will
              be useful to the extent that it provides an accurate and reliable diagnosis of
              problematic questions.  The project will therefore evaluate the performance of
              the computer tool on several measures.  Each module determines whether or not a
              particular question has a problem (e.g., unfamiliar technical term, working
              memory overload).  These decisions will be compared with the decisions of
              experts.  Other performance measures are needed because trained expert judges
              may miss subtle computational mechanisms.  These other measures will assess
              whether the computer output can predict the behavior of respondents when they
              answer the questions: (a) behaviors of respondents that indicate they are
              having difficulty comprehending the question in a conversational interview
              (such as clarification questions of respondents) and (b) test-retest
              reliability of answers to questions when respondents answer a question on
              multiple occasions.  Performance measures also will be compared for original
              questions, questions revised by survey methodologists who do not use the
              computer tool, and questions revised by survey methodologists who have had the
              benefit of using the tool. This research is supported by the Methodology,
              Measurement, and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical
              agencies under the Research on Survey Methodology Funding Opportunity.



