Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Biological Specimens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9977430

Award Number: 9977430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ute Frevert freveu01@popmail.med.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Sabatini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth S. Nussenzweig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arturo Zychlinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NYU Medical Center
	      550 First Avenue
	      New York, NY  100166481    212/263-6693

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract #9977430

A Confocal Microscope for Biological
              Specimens
This award will be used to establish a multi-user confocal
              microscopy facility at New York University School of Medicine.  The confocal
              microscope is generally used to study specimens labelled with fluorescent
              markers.  Its overwhelming superiority over conventional fluorescence
              microscopy comes from the fact that its optical system eliminates the
              contribution to the image of regions of the specimen that are "out of focus". 
              This not only increases the contrast and, hence, the visibility of fine
              details, but also permits the examination of thicker specimens.  The confocal
              microscope produces optical sections of the specimen and stacks of such
              sections can be obtained by repeatedly changing the plane of focus in an
              automated fashion by an exact fixed amount.  Digitized data from those sections
              can then be used to generate, by computer methodology, a three dimensional
              reconstruction of the object being studied.  From such reconstructions one can
              derive projections or optical sections through any plane in the object.
The
              confocal microscopy facility will be located in the Department of Cell Biology
              and will be primarily used by members of this Department and of the Departments
              of Dermatology, Medical and Molecular Parasitology, Microbiology, and Pediatric
              Cardiology.  Confocal Microscopy is an essential tool for the major research
              projects of the participating investigators.  Their projects include studies
              on: i) the mechanisms that establish and maintain the polarized organization of
              the cell membrane in epithelial cells; ii) molecules that regulate the
              recycling through the cell cytoplasm of receptors that function in the
              internalization of nutrients at the cell surface; iii) molecular interactions
              between a protozoon that causes malaria and the liver cells that it infects;
              iv) mechanisms by which killer lymphocytes recognize and eliminate
              malaria-infected liver cells; v) the apoptosis (i.e. programmed cell death) of
              macrophages and neutrophils that takes place when these cells are infected with
              the pathogenic bacterium Salmonella. vi) the biogenesis of melanosomes, i.e.
              the formation of the pigment granules of the skin; vii) the pathway that the
              ras oncogene product follows within the cell to reach the plasma membrane;
              viii) interactions within myelinated nerve fibers between the axonal membrane
              and supporting glial cells; ix) molecular mechanisms of cardiac
              excitation-contraction coupling. Most of the proposed projects involve the
              examination of various mammalian cell types and tissues at a subcellular level,
              with a strong emphasis on live cell studies.  Due to the small size of many of
              the cell organelles and intracellular microorganisms under investigation, and
              the emphasis on subcellular localization and intracellular transport, the
              planned studies require the most advanced instrumentation available which,
              nevertheless, must be user-friendly to serve effectively as a shared
              resource.
The confocal system to be acquired will be equipped with both
              upright and inverted microscopes and an additional image-processing
              workstation.  The inverted microscope will be used for many of the experiments
              involving live cell systems. However, the availability of a suitable water
              immersion objective will make it also possible to carry out combined
              microinjection/confocal microscopy studies with the upright microscope. 
              
Because processing of the data obtained with the confocal microscope is very
              time consuming, the data will be exported to a separate workstation to free the
              confocal system for other users.  This setup will also facilitate the use of
              the microscope for teaching and training purposes.  It is anticipated that
              access to the confocal facility will enhance our students' and postdoctoral
              fellows' appreciation of, and capacity to utilize, the power of this powerful
              instrumentation for studying diverse problems in cell biology.


