Title       : Secure Multicast Services and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9977267

Award Number: 9977267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $536507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon S. Lam lam@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative research proposal being submitted by the University of
              Texas at Austin
(PI: Simon S. Lam) and the University of Kentucky (PI: Kenneth
              Calvert).
Most Internet applications are based upon the client-server paradigm
              and make use of unicast
delivery of data sent as independent packets.  The
              technical issues of securing unicast communi-
cations for client-server
              computing are fairly well understood.  However, many emerging
              Internet
applications are based upon a group communications model.  In
              particular, they require packet
delivery from one or more authorized senders
              to a large number of authorized receivers.  Further-
more, the data of many of
              these applications should be viewed as flows rather than as
              independent
packets.  Conceptually, since every point-to-multipoint
              communication can be represented as a set
of point-to-point communications,
              and every flow can be treated as a sequence of individual pack-
ets, the
              current technology base for securing unicast packets can be extended in a
              straightforward
manner to securing applications that employ flows and
              multicasts. Such extensions, however, would
be highly inefficient.  They will
              not be applicable to high-speed transmission and delay-sensitive
ows, nor
              scalable to large groups.
The objectives of this proposal are to investigate
              architectures and protocols for securing mul-
ticast and flow applications
              with emphasis on efficiency, latency, and scalability.  The researchers have
              obtained some preliminary results on scalable group key management and
              efficient digital signatures. These
are essential ingredients for designing
              and implementing secure multicast services.  However, to de-
sign a scalable
              service for secure multicast on the Internet, even with just best-effort
              delivery, several
research issues remain, namely, performance comparison of
              alternative architectures, efficient and
reliable delivery of rekey messages
              (and their impact on a wide area network), and deployment of
trusted
              components and active agents.
The researchers next propose to investigate the
              more difficult problem of reliable secure multicast.  For the
Internet, this
              problem has been largely unexplored.  Initially, the researchers plan to
              approach this problem
from two directions, namely, (i) how to make reliable
              multicast secure, and (ii) how to make secure
multicast reliable. In
              addressing this problem, their concerns are, first, correctness, and
              second,
performance issues such as latency and scalability.
There are many
              applications that can benefit from techniques and services for securing
              flows
and multicasts, e.g., teleconference, pay per view, informaton services,
              virtual private networks,
collaborative work, software distribution, etc. The
              researchers propose to experiment with some of these applications.  In
              particular, they propose to investigate a less obvious application, namely,
              active networks,
which raises some interesting research issues.  Securing
              active networks is an important problem
with many different concerns, some of
              which are being addressed by other researchers.  In the pro-
posed project,
              the researchers are primarily concerned with characterizing the authenticity
              and confidentiality requirements of mobile code distribution in active networks
              and ensuring their satisfaction using efficient methods.

