Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational Determinants of the Gender Gap in
               Evaluative Ratings in the Uruguayan State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9977673

Award Number: 9977673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7410               (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Hachen hachen.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the organizational
              determinants of the gender gap in the evaluative ratings which are used to
              determine promotions. The objective of this research is to further our
              understanding of why and how women in some organizations continue to be
              excluded from management. To date there have been no systematic studies of how
              gender inequalities could be caused by such a rating gap. Therefore, this
              research asks: Why does an evaluative rating gap between the sexes exist? Why
              is this gap greater in some workplaces than others? Five predictions derived
              from two alternative models of gender inequality in organizations will be
              examined using comparative data from four agencies of the Uruguayan State (the
              Ministry of Public Health, the Ministry of Education, the Financial Bank, and
              the Bank of Social Prevision). According to the "structural model" it is
              expected that the gender ratings gap will be larger in organizations where the
              structure of work (proportion of women, job visibility, and management task
              uncertainty) reinforces superior's biased judgments. In contrast, according to
              the "gendered logic model" it is expected that the gender ratings gap will be
              larger in organizations where gender bias is embedded in the way the evaluation
              factors are constructed (i.e., in the tasks/skills included in the factors and
              the factor weights). In order to examine these expectations three data sources
              will be used in each of the four organization: a survey of supervisors,
              organizational memoranda, and aggregate quantitative information about each
              organization. This project will add to our growing knowledge about the causes
              of gender inequalities in organizations by analyzing one of the key factors in
              organizational promotions, the evaluations that superiors make of their
              subordinates.
