Title       : High Resolution Microfocus Scanning X-ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9977590

Award Number: 9977590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108797             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Riman riman@alumina.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Mayo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor A. Greenhut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977590
Riman

Rutgers University will use Major Research Instrumentation
              funds along with support from the Office of Naval Research to build a high
              resolution microfocus X-ray diffraction (HRMX) facility.  The system will be
              constructed using a base system purchased with DOD/ONR funds, which provide the
              high resolution goniometer and x-ray generator.  The Major Research
              Instrumentation funds will provide an improved sample holder and superior
              incident beam, diffracted beam and detector optical components.  These
              components will transform the base system into a high resolution x-ray
              diffractometer with microfocus capability.  The HRMX facility will produce
              synchrotron quality x-rays, which will solve a variety of problems associated
              with epitaxial single crystals, single crystals, textured polycrystalline
              materials, thin films and particulate mixtures.  The facility will serve both
              the academic and industrial community by being available on a fee for service
              basis.  The machine will have an impact on a large number of research groups
              and local industry, who otherwise would not have access to a high resolution
              X-ray diffractometer.  Training programs will be established via a
              collaboration with the instrument manufacturer (Philips Electronic Instruments
              Co.), who will jointly establish a summer school intended to train scientists
              and students interested in high resolution X-ray diffraction methods.  Since
              Philips has chosen Rutgers as a user-group, the HRMX facility will maintain its
              technological edge by providing feedback for Philips on new products that may
              be of use to the materials community. 

Support from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will be used to help build a high resolution microfocus
              X-ray diffraction facility that will be used to solve a variety of problems
              associated with advanced materials. The machine will have an impact on a large
              number of research groups and local industry, as well on the students that will
              be trained in its use.

