Title       : COMPASS: Composable and Parallel Simulation of Internetworks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9977544

Award Number: 9977544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $665864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Fujimoto fujimoto@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa H. Ammar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The unprecedented, exponential growth of the Internet has far outstripped
              the capacity of the
tools needed to analyze modern networks.  Simulation
              remains the method of choice for network
designers, researchers, and managers
              for many analysis problems.  However, modern simulation
tools are typically
              limited to analyzing tens to hundreds of network nodes, while studies
              of
current and future networks such as the next generation Internet call for
              analyses of thousands to
millions.  New, practical approaches to network
              modeling and simulation are needed to address
this growing problem.
     Two
              frequently heard problems with simulation technology today are (1) the
              excessive amount
of time required to construct a model for a large network,
              and (2) the inordinate amount of
computer time required to execute the
              resulting simulation program.  This project, called
COMPASS (COMposable and
              PArallel Simulation of internetworkS), will attack the first
problem by
              defining and realizing an approach to enable rapid construction of network
              models
by reusing model components developed by others, possibly using
              different simulation software
packages.  The second problem will be attacked
              through execution of the model on parallel
and/or distributed computers.  In
              this regard, this project will focus on realizing a practical,
flexible,
              approach to parallelization that can be widely exploited by the networking
              community.
This approach, based on composing (federating) autonomous
              simulators executing on different
processors, cleanly separates the parallel
              and sequential portions of the simulation, allowing
concurrent optimization
              and refinement of each.  A related problem that will be studied
              concerns
execution of models over a geographically distributed area in
              situations where model
components cannot be easily co-located.
     To
              demonstrate this approach, an optimized parallel/distributed implementation of
              the ns2
simulator will be realized as part of this project.  This software
              will be realized on widely
available computing platforms and will be made
              freely available to the networking community in
collaboration with the VINT/ns
              group at USC/ISI.  Because ns2 is widely used in the networking
community, the
              potential impact of this project is large. Moreover, the ability to easily
              reuse
network models developed by others using different simulation packages
              can lead to a paradigm
shift in the way modeling and simulation is routinely
              practiced in the networking community.
Finally, simulation of multicast
              protocols will be used as a vehicle to evaluate and refine the
parallel
              simulation designs and demonstrate their effectiveness.  Multicast protocols
              have a
particularly strong need for scalable simulation tools.  It is an area
              where new ideas and
proposals are still being generated.  Research in this
              project will focus on multicast protocols that
are of current interest to the
              Internet community; reliable multicast, layered video multicast and
data
              dissemination applications will be studied.  This work will not only provide a
              proof of
concept for the parallel simulation research, but will also provide
              an improved evaluation
capability to the networking community for solutions to
              problems of current interest.

