Title       : MRI: Development of a High Repetition Rate Raman Scattering Instrument for
               Combustion Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9977481

Award Number: 9977481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel T. Clemens clemens@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip L. Varghese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:  CTS 9977481

Principal Investigator:  N. Clemens

This
              Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the development of a
              spontaneous Raman scattering instrument. Spontaneous vibrational Raman
              scattering has proven to be one of the most important diagnostic techniques in
              combustion research owing to its ability to provide spatially resolved
              information on the concentration of several species simultaneously. However,
              conventional Raman scattering systems employ high-power pulsed lasers where the
              rate at which they can acquire data is limited by the pulse repetition rate
              (typically 5 to few hundred Hz). The problem with low sampling rates is that
              they restrict measurements to essentially random sampling, so that statistical
              information can be extracted, but important time-correlation information cannot
              be captured.

It is proposed to develop a spontaneous Raman scattering
              instrument that will enable essentially continuous single-point measurements of
              all major species (hence mixture fraction) and temperature simultaneously in a
              turbulent flame, at a rate of 10 kHz or more. A core element of this effort
              will be the development of a high-repetition rate laser system that operates at
              visible wavelengths. In order to accomplish this, the proposes will work with a
              partner in industry to develop a laser that meets the demanding requirements
              for the proposed instrument. The proposed laser will be a diode-pumped Nd:YAG
              laser that will be frequency doubled to a visible (green) wavelength. It will
              operate at an average power of 150 W in the green with a repetition rate of 10
              kHz and above; such a laser would be the first of its kind developed
              commercially. 

Once the laser is delivered, substantial work will be
              required to develop an instrument that can be used to make meaningful
              measurements in actual large-scale laboratory flames. Despite the fact that the
              average power of the laser is quite high, the energy per pulse is not (15 mJ at
              10 kHz), and thus substantial effort will be required to maximize the light
              collected. This will be accomplished by utilizing a multi-pass cell so that the
              laser energy in the probe volume is increased by an order-of-magnitude. The
              system will employ separate custom-designed fast collection optics and high
              efficiency interference filters. This system will yield excellent
              signal-to-noise ratios on a single-shot basis, for all major species in an
              atmospheric pressure turbulent methane flame.



