Title       : Spatial Scales of Genetic and Phenotypic Diversity Among Streptomycetes in
               Native Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a9977907

Award Number: 9977907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $989992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Kinkel kinkel@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Samac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977907
Kinkel, L.
Samac, D.
This Microbial Observatory  will provide
              fundamental information on the genetic and phenotypic diversity among
              Streptomycetes bacteria occurring in native soils at Cedar Creek Natural
              History Area, a Long Term Ecological Research site at the forest-prairie
              interface in central Minnesota. In particular, this work will provide
              significant insight into the dynamics of interisolate antibiotic inhibition,
              resistance, and induction within these communities, as well as a spatial,
              temporal, and genetic context for analyzing these phenotypic characters. The
              influence of soil nitrogen treatment on the community will also be evaluated
              here. The specific objectives of the research are to:  1. Evaluate the
              influence of nitrogen inputs on the Streptomycete community in soil.  This will
              be done by contrasting the population densities of Streptomycetes in soils
              maintained at two different nitrogen input levels;  contrasting the diversity
              of Streptomycete communities in soils maintained at the two nitrogen levels,
              specifically focusing on genetic diversity and diversity in antibiotic
              inhibition and resistance. 2.  Quantify the genetic and phenotypic diversity in
              Streptomycetes across a range of spatial scales; quantifying genetic diversity
              among Streptomycetes in individual soil cores, in separate cores from the same
              plot, and from different plots; quantifying diversity in inhibition profiles
              among Streptomycetes in individual soil cores, in separate cores from the same
              plot, and from different plots; and quantifying diversity in resistance
              profiles among Streptomycetes in individual soil cores, in separate cores from
              the same plot, or from different plots.  3. Determine the influence of spatial
              origin, population density of the local community, and genetic relatedness on
              the potential for inhibition, resistance to inhibition, and antibiotic
              induction among  Streptomycetes.  This will by done by determining whether
              isolates from the same location (soil core), same plot, or same nitrogen
              treatment are more or less likely to inhibit, to resist inhibition by, or to
              induce antibiotic production than isolates from different soil cores, different
              plots, or different nitrogen treatments; determining whether isolates that are
              genetically closely related are more or less likely to inhibit one another, to
              resist inhibition by one another, or to induce antibiotic production in one
              another than isolates that are more distantly related; and determining whether
              isolates from high density locations in soil are more or less likely to inhibit
              other isolates, resist inhibition by others, or induce antibiotic production in
              others than isolates from low density locations.  This information  will
              provide fundamental insight into the  potential significance of antibiotic
              interactions for evolution and microbial population dynamics in soils.
