Title       : Science and Engineering Research Center (SERC) for Durable Miniaturized Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9977830

Award Number: 9977830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ranga Komanduri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Malshe
EPS-9977830
This project will establish a distributed Center of
              Excellence for "Durable Miniaturized Systems."  Research on nano and micro
              systems engineering is leading to fundamental changes in various applications
              that require miniaturized systems such as automobiles, aerospace vehicles,
              bio-medicine, informatics, high performance computing, etc.  Miniaturized
              systems affect important areas such as efficiency, portability, cost
              efficiency, durability, as well as configurability, evolutionary and
              intelligent decision-making abilities, and real-time interacting.  Since
              surface-to-volume ratio increases significantly in miniaturized systems,
              performance of these systems depends in large part, on the integration of
              surfaces and interfaces.  Therefore, the research associated with the
              "durability" of such nano and micro systems is critical insofar as the
              development of durable miniaturized products is concerned in the coming
              century.  The nature of the distributed activity will be to address various
              areas of physics, chemistry and engineering in these systems having to do with
              fabrication processes, systems handling, particulate surface matter, friction
              and wear, encapsulation and aging. Test structures will be designed, as will
              novel prototyping and manufacturing methods related to friction and wear of
              surfaces and interfaces. 

The proposed distributed research Center is a
              collaborative effort in research and education between the University of
              Arkansas, Fayetteville, the University of Nebraska at Lincoln and Oklahoma
              State University in Stillwater, which will serve to broaden opportunities for
              students and researchers to spend time in laboratories and share equipment. 
              Together with establishing a particular research and education program, the
              project also seeks to establish a successful cross campus management scheme,
              and build a critical mass of investigators to establish the Center.  The
              program will also include collaborations with Sandia Labs and members of
              industry.



