Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution, Imaging X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for
               Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977482

Award Number: 9977482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph G. Nuzzo r-nuzzo@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan G. Petrov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Haasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977482
Nuzzo

A state-of-the-art X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) that
              will be capable of collecting high energy resolution spectra as well as
              2-dimensional photoelectron images will be acquired with Major Research
              Instrumentation program funds.  The instrument will be equipped with a
              ultra-high vacuum sample preparation chamber, allowing in-situ experiments of
              film growth and surface treatments.  This instrument will be located at the
              Center for Microanalysis of Materials (CMM)) at the University of
              Illinois-Urbana/Champaign.  Availability of the XPS system is critical to
              several research programs that are currently active at the university. These
              include: 1) self-assembling materials and surface chemical reactions; 2)
              synthesis and characterization of catalytic materials; 3) localized corrosion;
              and 4) electronic materials.  The XPS instrument will also meet the needs of
              users in the expanding research areas of biomaterials who will have a
              particular need for the in-situ sample cooling capabilities of the instrument. 
              In addition to the above programs, the instrument will see widespread use in
              many other graduate research and education programs.  The operating mode of the
              CMM has had a major impact on graduate research and educational programs at
              this and other institutions. Over the past five years, more than 80 graduate
              students, post-docs and visiting research scientists have been educated in the
              theory and operation of X-ray photoelectron spectrometers and nearly 300
              researchers have used CMM XPS systems.  When integrated into the CMM, the
              instrument will see extensive use by a projected 50-60 users annually. 

An
              X-ray photoelectron spectrometer will be acquired with Major Research
              Instrumentation program funds.  This instrument will be used in the projects of
              researchers from a variety of departments at the university.  The instrument
              will have a significant impact on research training due to its availability to
              students, from undergraduates to post-docs, for hands-on training.

