Title       : Acquisition of a High Temperature Gel Permeation Chromatography System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977520

Award Number: 9977520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tobin J. Marks t-marks@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel I. Stupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              SonBinh T. Nguyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977520 
Marks  

Major Research Instrumentation funds will be used to
              acquire instrumentation for polymer analysis: a high temperature gel
              chromatograph (GPC) and a light scattering detector, equipped with an argon ion
              laser, for additional detection capability.  The available GPCs at Northwestern
              University do not have the high temperature capability or the sensitivity
              needed for cutting edge research in polymers.  This new equipment will be
              installed in the Analytical Services Laboratory of the Department of Chemistry
              at Northwestern University. The greatest number of users will come from the
              Department of Chemistry, but the Department of Chemical Engineering and the
              Department of Materials Science and Engineering will also have research
              projects making significant use of this instrumentation.  The equipment will
              address the need of several research groups to characterize polymer samples in
              terms of their molecular weights, molecular weight distributions, and
              hydrodynamic volumes in solution.  This research covers a broad range of topics
              including new catalysts for polymerization, self assembly of supramolecular
              aggregates, thermo-responsive polymers for DNA sequencing, polymer degradation
              mechanisms, interfacial adhesion of semicrystalline polymers, and polymer
              processing.  In addition to the important research that will benefit from the
              new instrumentation, there is a strong educational component. The graduate
              students, postdoctoral fellows, and undergraduate students using the instrument
              for their research will receive substantial benefit from working with a
              state-of-the-art instrument.  In addition, a further benefit will come from a
              formal educational component of the instrument being available for laboratory
              classes.  The combination of research and education applications will allow the
              benefit of this equipment to be felt by an increased number of users. 

Major
              Research Instrumentation program funds will be used to acquire a gel permeation
              chromatograph for use in polymer analysis.  This instrument will be use in a
              variety of projects of researchers in several departments at Northwestern
              University.  The instrument will have a large impact on the research training
              of students, postdoctoral to undergraduate, by allowing them hands-on
              experience on a state-of-the-art instrument.




