Title       : IRCEB: Biological Stoichiometry from Genes to Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9977047

Award Number: 9977047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2842162            (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Elser j.elser@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon F. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Fagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1356      INTEGRATED RSCH CHALL IN ENVIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977047
Elser
The IRC-EB Program seeks to promote research that integrates
              across multiple levels of biological organization and across diverse types of
              habitats and organisms. Such work should articulate general principles that can
              begin to re-unify the increasingly fragmented wealth of biological knowledge
              that this century has generated. This project involves a diverse team of
              researchers that includes a physiologist, a microbial ecologist, theoretical
              biologists, evolutionary biologists, limnologists, and a terrestrial ecosystem
              ecologist. It involves an explicit, conceptually organized, integration from
              genes to ecosystems, from microbes to metazoans, and from lakes to deserts.
              This project will use a framework of biological stoichiometry to assess how the
              fundamental chemical balance required for growth links the genetics and
              physiology of organisms to ecosystem dynamics. Biological stoichiometry is the
              study of the balance of energy and multiple chemical elements in living
              systems. Accumulating research suggests a characteristic biogeochemical
              signature of rapid organism growth, manifested in biomass C:N:P stoichiometry,
              which is driven by the fundamental association of rapid growth with P-rich
              ribosomal RNA. In addition, considerable data are accumulating that indicate
              that organism C:N:P stoichiometry is a key mediator of ecological dynamics,
              including trophic dynamics and biogeochemical cycling in ecosystems. Thus,
              there appears an opportunity to use principles of chemical stoichiometry to
              derive the causal connections between the genetics and cellular physiology of
              growth with major ecological implications. This 4-year project will make this
              attempt via three closely intertwined components. In Component 1 (Organismal
              Biology) the coupling of growth, biochemical composition (RNA concentration),
              and C:N:P will be examined in a suite of organisms whole nutritional physiology
              has not been well studies (bacteria, protozoa, fungi, insects, worms). Patterns
              of C:N:P variation and growth will be assessed in these taxa relative to
              patterns known from better-studied groups. How terrestrial and aquatic metazoan
              herbivores with contrasting C:N:P composition cope with food resources that are
              stoichiometrically imbalanced with respect to their requirements. These studies
              will examine both behavioral and physiological adjustments by animals in
              response to stoichiometric food quality. Component 2 (Evolution) will consider
              organism growth, C:N:P, and biochemical allocation in an evolutionary context
              in both terrestrial (Drosophila) and aquatic (Daphnia) realms. How these
              phenotypic traits, as well as key genotypic features associated with the
              genetics of the ribosome (such as rDNA intergenic spacer length and gene
              dosage) are arrayed on known phylogenetic trees will be investigated.
              Drosophila and Daphnia will be subjected to artificial selection on growth
              rate, and how growth rate, C:N:P, RNA allocation, and ribosomal genotypes
              change in concert will be examined. At the end of these divergent selection
              regimes, the consequences of selection for physiological, behavioral, and
              ecological features will be assessed for each taxon. The implication of
              growth-C:N:P coupling in theoretical studies that permit in situ evolution of
              ecological communities under multiple resource limitations will be determined.
              Finally, Component 3 will place considerations of genetics and physiology of
              C:N:P and growth in an ecological context by sampling a wide range of ecosystem
              types (lake, desert, grassland, forest) for key stoichiometric parameters. The
              main goal in these studies is to determine whether the C:N:P stoichiometry of
              primary producer and detritus biomass is associated with particular patterns of
              primary consumer biomass, C:N:P, and diversity. 

