Title       : Collaborative Research on Bacterioplankton Biology and Biogeochemistry at the
               Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Station: An Oceanic Microbial Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9977930

Award Number: 9977930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni giovanns@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative Microbial Observatory project focuses on one of the largest
              microbial ecosystems on the planet: the ocean surface layer. Microorganisms in
              the ocean surface layer play an integral role in carbon transport from the
              atmosphere to the deep ocean. This "biological carbon pump" has global
              biogeochemical significance. The Bermuda Atlantic Time series study Site (BATS)
              is a subtropical gyre characterized by winter water column mixing events,
              spring phytoplankton blooms, and highly stratified summer periods of extreme
              surface oligotrophy. BATS has been a testbed for the development of advanced
              molecular techniques for measuring microbial diversity, and is the site of the
              longest time-series study of oceanographic variables on the planet.  The
              overall goal of this project is to understand the cell biology and
              biogeochemical activity of seven major uncultured bacterioplankton groups
              -SAR11, SAR86, SAR202 and SAR116, marine actinobacteria, SAR324, and SAR406, by
              applying new technologies that integrate cell culture and environmental
              genomics, and by enhancing technologies for the long term monitoring of these
              species. This program will support the transfer of tested technologies for
              monitoring microbial diversity from Oregon State University (this award) to the
              Bermuda Biological Station for Research (Dr. Craig A. Carlson, Award 9977918),
              and promote the development of new technologies with the goal of defining
              bacterioplankton biology.  The foremost objective of this effort will be to
              grow these microorganisms in culture for the first time by employing novel
              high-throughput detection and genetic screening approaches that were designed
              for exploring a large number of medium variables and for detecting positive and
              negative biological interactions among organisms.  Fundamental questions about
              the genomics and population genetics of these species are being explored by
              linking studies of large-insert genomic DNA libraries with chromosomal painting
              procedures. This approach is designed to establish cellular linkage groups
              among genes that play key roles in biogeochemical processes, and to provide new
              in situ hybridization strategies for detecting and counting cells. These data
              will help us understand how elemental cycling and energy flux have been
              partitioned among species by evolutionary processes. The work will be conducted
              in the context of ongoing biogeochemical studies at the BATS site, and will be
              linked to an annual summer course, Research Experience for Undergraduates
              program, and active World Wide Web activities supported by the Bermuda
              Biological Station for Research.
