Title       : Development of an Integrated Materials Testing and High-Resolution Tomography
               System for Measurement of Three-Dimensional Strain Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9977491

Award Number: 9977491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. Bay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Two-dimensional Digital Image Correlation techniques are invaluable for the
              measurment of strain fields in situations where material characteristics or
              geometric features render traditional experimental mechanics methods unusable
              or impractical.  This project provides support for the development and
              acquisition of an instrument that will provide the same measurement
              characteristics in three-dimensions through the method of Digital Volume
              Correlation.  The instrument is an integrated materials testing system and
              high-resolution x-ray tomographic scanner.  A broad range of complex structural
              materials (composites, cellular solids, natural materials), in virtually any
              geometric configuration, can be studied with this system.  Data generated with
              the instrument will help establish design criteria, reveal basic
              micromechanical phenomena, and provide a basis for verification of models of
              material constitutive behavior.  

It has been demonstrated that the Digital
              Volume Correlation method is capable of sampling the full three-dimensional
              displacement vector field throughout the interior of material samples under
              load to a precision of 0.035 voxels (1.23pm).  Postprocessing of the
              displacement data allows the calculation of the full three-dimensional strain
              tensor field throughout the sample interior to a precision of 0.003 (300
              ustrain).  These measurements are completely nondestructive, and the same
              sample can be studied under multiple loading conditions.  There is no sample
              preparation or marking required.  The methodology is robust even in the
              presence of high strain gradients and material yielding, making it a ideal tool
              for the study of failure and strain localization phenomena.



Under this
              project an integrated materials testing and high resolution x-ray tomographic
              scanner dedicated to the study of complex materials under load will be
              constructed.  Full characterization of Digital Volume Correlation Measurement
              capabilities and further refinement of the methodology will be carried out
              Engineering applications particularly at the high-resolution end of the
              tomographic scanner perating range, in the areas of composite fiber/matrix
              interface strains, crack and notch sensitivities, and interlaminar interface
              strains will be developed.


This is an equipment grant supported under MRI
              program.

