Title       : Linking Resource and Stress Gradients to Microbial Community Composition and
               Function through the Soil Profile of a California Annual Grassland at the
               Sedgwick Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9977874

Award Number: 9977874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $778672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua P. Schimel schimel@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Holden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Despite recent advances in environmental microbiology, our understanding of the
              factors that control microbial community composition and dynamics is still
              limited, and of the links between community composition and functioning not
              well understood. Developments in this direction will come from blending
              top-down (process) and bottom-up (molecular diversity) approaches, and tying
              into existing ecological theory. The intermediate disturbance & resource supply
              hypotheses from plant ecology should apply to microbial communities through the
              soil profile, as both resource availability and stress are high at the soil
              surface but decline with depth. Stress and disturbance may also partially
              explain why linking soil diversity to function has been difficult in studies
              that rarely sample below 10 centimeters.  Soils are much deeper, with
              significant microbial populations at depth accounting for a substantial amount
              of whole-profile activity. The central hypothesis of this Microbial Observatory
              is that the gradients of resources and stress are the primary drivers of the
              size, diversity, dynamics, activity, and growth strategies (biofilm formation)
              of the microbial community throughout the soil profile.  This project will be
              carried out at the Sedgwick Reserve, a site of active collaborative work on
              landscape processes, soil dynamics, plant community structure, and soil
              microbial processes in the California annual grassland/oak savanna ecosystem.
              Work will couple extensive sampling across the reserve to intensive
              manipulative studies at two core sites, where monitoring of soil climate,
              chemistry, and communities down to at least 4 meters depth and manipulative
              studies will be established.  Soil moisture and temperature will be monitored
              to evaluate stress gradients, while substrate gradients will be assayed through
              a combination of physical soil organic matter fractionation and bioassay
              approaches.  Microbial biomass will be measured, as will total and active
              numbers and biovolumes of bacteria and fungi.  Bacterial community structure
              and composition will be assayed by pairing DGGE (denaturing gradient gel
              electrophoresis) and t-RFLP (terminally labeled restriction fragment length
              polymorphism).  DGGE has the advantage that individual bands may be
              characterized and specific probes  developed, while t-RFLPs provides cleaner
              analysis of complex DNA mixes.  These fingerprinting approaches will be
              followed up by developing probes for specific bacteria and quantifying their
              population dynamics through the profile and under experimental manipulations. 
              This project will also examine how the microbial microhabitat changes along the
              stress and resource gradients by examining the extent of biofilm formation and
              extracellular polysaccharide production, which appear to be central components
              of bacterial stress responses. Biofilm extent will be evaluated both by
              environmental electron microscopy and chemical analysis of polysaccharides. 
              Microbial process dynamics will be measured by a suite of C and N turnover
              processes on intact soil samples. These include net and gross N turnover rates,
              maximum consumption rates for a variety of 14 C substrates (a range of
              monomers, cellulose, wood), the substrate use efficiency on those substrates,
              the growth rate of microbes using them, and the biomass of the populations
              capable of using each substrate. This integration of studies on resource and
              stress gradients, community composition, biofilms, and community functioning
              will greatly increase our understanding of microbial community ecology and its
              links to ecosystem processes.
