Title       : Acquisition of an Experimental Survey Research Laboratory in the Social Sciences
               at SUNY, Stony Brook
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9977503

Award Number: 9977503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonie Huddy Leonie.Huddy@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Leonie Huddy and his colleagues
              will establish a central multi-purpose experimental survey research laboratory
              that will serve as both a telephone survey laboratory and an experimental
              attitude research lab. The survey facility will allow access to random samples
              of adults interviewed using up-to-date technology that includes voice recording
              and analysis capabilities, software that builds randomized experiments into the
              survey, and response time measures. Voice recording capabilities will allow
              analysis of a respondent's linguistic and paralinguistic cues such as filled
              pauses and rising intonation that convey information about uncertainty. The
              laboratory will contain state-of-the-art software and hardware for collecting
              survey data over the phone and directly in the laboratory. Computers will be
              equipped with standard Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing software,
              response latency capabilities, voice recording and analysis equipment and
              programmable software that will allow for inclusion of subliminal primes that
              are essential to the measurement of automatic attitudes. The lab will contain
              twelve individual workstations equipped with head sets and separated by office
              panels. Each workstation will operate from a central server.  Of the four
              projects which will provide the core for a first set of initiatives, two are
              directed by political scientists and concern the theory and measurement of
              political attitudes. One will focus on the predictive validity of various
              racial attitudes and touch on a set of central theoretical questions about the
              covert nature of "true" racial attitudes in contemporary US society. A second
              examines the notion than many, if not most, political attitudes are founded on
              ambivalence, an idea which poses serious challenge to contemporary theories of
              public opinion and attitude stability. Other projects address the uncertainty
              that is elicited by many factual survey questions, and on the nature of close
              relationships in adult pairs. The laboratory will play an integral role in both
              undergraduate and graduate research and teaching.
