Title       : Observing Patterns of Prokaryotic Diversity along Land use Gradients of the CAP
               LTER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9977882

Award Number: 9977882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Rainey frainey@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rainey
This Microbial Observatory project involves a study of the patterns of
              prokaryotic diversity along land use gradients in the Central Arizona-Phoenix
              (CAP) Long-Term Ecological Research site. The research site comprises the city
              of Phoenix and surrounding areas, including suburbs, agricultural regions and
              undeveloped natural environments. The effect of urbanization on prokaryotic
              community composition and function will be investigated. The project addresses
              the following research objectives: (1) to discover representatives of new
              prokaryotic taxa, (2) to determine patterns of cultured, non-cultured and
              metabolic prokaryotic diversity and their relationship to land use, which
              exhibits both temporal and spatial variation in this urban environment, (3) to
              determine whether certain components of the prokaryotic community are
              ubiquitous irrespective of land usage and the taxonomic level of this ubiquity,
              (4) to add a prokaryotic component to an ongoing CAP LTER research project, to
              better understand the structure and function of urban ecosystems, and (5) to
              provide training and research experience for graduate and undergraduate
              students in the areas of prokaryotic diversity, ecology and taxonomy. The
              methods used in the project, encompassing culturing and non-culturing
              approaches, have been chosen to allow detection of as much as possible of the
              prokaryotic diversity present in a given sample. Sampling will be performed
              according to a design which will include both intensive investigation of a
              small number of sites, and a broader study of a large number of sites. The
              project will comprise the first investigation of prokaryotic community
              composition within a relatively small geographical space containing various
              land use types. It will add a prokaryotic component to the understanding of the
              biodiversity of urban ecosystems and complement the current investigations at
              the CAP-LTER site.
