Title       : Acquisition of X-ray Diffraction Instrumentation for Materials Science Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977193

Award Number: 9977193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Burns burns@me.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Kadin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Lambropoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan N. Houde-Walter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977193
Burns

Funds from the Major Research Instrumentation program will be
              used to acquire x-ray diffraction instrumentation consisting of an analytic
              materials research grade diffractometer fitted with primary beam optics and a
              lower resolution diffractometer outfitted with a dual furnace-cryostat
              attachment and a grazing incidence thin-film stage.  This x-ray instrumentation
              will be used to characterize advanced imaging materials, including optical and
              electronic materials, thin films, coatings, and surface-polished or ground
              crystalline materials. The diffractometers are the Philips Materials Research
              Diffractometer and Multi-Purpose Diffractometer instruments.  A materials
              research diffractometer with a very high resolution, horizontal goniometer and
              a heavy duty Eulerian cradle with capability for texture analysis, high-angle
              residual-stress analysis, layered and in-plane MBE strain and structure
              analysis are proposed.  The key aspect of this equipment will be the capability
              to obtain structure sensitive data on thin-films, MBE layers,
              residual-stresses, ground and polished crystalline surfaces and texture
              analyses which can not be conducted at the University of Rochester today
              because of lack of instrumentation.  Data obtained from these analyses is
              essential for understanding and controlling the microstructure, properties and
              performance of existing materials and to design new materials and processes. 
              The research conducted on this instrument will be performed by investigators in
              several departments.  Students working on these project will be exposed to
              cutting-edge research in materials of great technological importance.

X-ray
              diffraction instrumentation for materials research will be acquired with funds
              from the Major Research Instrumentation program.  The impact on the research
              infrastructure at the University of Rochester will be great not only on the
              types of projects that will use the instrument, but also on the research
              training of students on this state-of-the-art system.




