Title       : GOALI: NMR Spectroscopy of Methylaluminoxane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a9977124

Award Number: 9977124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Hall rhall@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie G. Butler  (Principal Investigator former)
              Larry A. Simeral  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project, carried out by Professors Leslie  Butler and Randall Hall of
              Louisiana State University and their students, and Dr. Larry Simeral of the
              Albemarle Corporation, and supported by Analytical and Surface Chemistry, uses
              nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry based on the nuclei  2H, 17O, and 27Al
              to characterize the active catalytic site of methylaluminoxane, a co-catalyst
              used in new generation Ziegler-Natta catalysis for olefin polymerization.  The
              27Al sites exhibit large quadrupolar interactions that require special methods
              developed in the PI's laboratory for successful measurement of the NMR spectra.
               Density functional and molecular orbital calculations are used to model the
              observed quadrupolar interactions, and then the observed NMR spectra are
              correlated with the calculated structures.  This GOALI project contains an
              academic and industrial collaboration between the PIs at Louisiana State
              University and scientists at Albemarle Corporation.

Ziegler Natta catalysts
              are used in industrially important reactions that produce polymers and
              plastics.  A catalyst involves a specific site on a molecule where the reaction
              occurs.  Despite the wide use of the Ziegler Natta catalyst based on a compound
              called methylaluminoxane, the nature of the catalytic site is unknown.  Small
              differences in catalyst preparation lead to large differences in catalytic
              efficiency, and there is therefore much interest in determining the nature of
              that site.  Professors Leslie Butler and Randall Hall of Louisiana State
              University and their students will use unique spectroscopic techniques to
              establish the nature of that site, in collaborative work with scientists at
              Albemarle Corporation, a producer and user of the catalytic material.

