Title       : Development and Pre-Clinical Testing of an Endoscopic Fluorescence Spectrometer
               with Simultaneous Temporal and Spectral Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9977982

Award Number: 9977982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary-Ann Mycek Mary-Ann.Mycek@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan Dmitrovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977982
Mycek
In the body, pre-disease manifests itself through both
              biochemical and morphological changes in tissue.  These microscopic alterations
              may be probed optically for spectroscopic signatures of pre-disease,
              potentially leading to non-invasive diagnosis in vivo.  Because these optical
              techniques do not require the removal of tissue, they represent a tremendous
              advance over the current invasive practice of tissue biopsy.  When tissue
              biopsy is required to confirm disease staging, these optical techniques may be
              employed as an adjunct to conventional biopsy, by providing real-time guidance
              to the physician during clinical procedures.  Once diagnosed, pre-diseased
              tissue may be treated, effectively ridding the body of the risk of developing
              potentially deadly diseases, such as cancer.  The project described herein will
              develop technological innovations in the emerging practice of laser-based
              disease diagnosis by tissue fluorescence spectroscopy, and will advance the
              understanding of this method in a range of future clinical
              applications.

Tissue fluorescence spectroscopy has been explored as a
              non-invasive means of detecting both cancers and pre-cancers in vivo.  Previous
              endoscopic studies in the gastrointestinal tract, cervix, lungs, and bladder
              have obtained diagnostic information from the spectral characteristics of the
              fluorescence emission.  To exploit the distinct advantages of fluorescence
              lifetime spectroscopy, this Principal Investigator recently developed and
              applied a fluorescence instrument providing simultaneous spectral and temporal
              resolution in vivo.  When used to detect colonic pre-cancers in vivo, the new
              technique revealed a high diagnostic accuracy comparable to that of routine
              clinical pathology.  It is thought that this new method may similarly improve
              the accuracy of pre-cancer diagnosis outside the colon, where time-resolved
              endoscopic measurements have not yet been reported.  The objective of the
              proposed work is both to further advance the technology of such an endoscopic
              fluorescence spectrometer and to pre-clinically test the innovative device on
              pre-cancerous cells from other organs, specifically the bronchial epithelial
              cells involved in lung cancer.

The project will develop an endoscopy
              compatible fluorescence spectrometer with simultaneous spectral and temporal
              resolution, based upon the designs of devices previously constructed by this
              Principal Investigator.  The biomedical instrument will be optimized for future
              use in clinical bronchoscopy procedures for lung cancer screening via a series
              of comprehensive pre-clinical experiments.  Pre-clinical testing will include
              an in vitro optical study on both primary cell cultures and unique
              immortalized, transformed (pre-cancerous), and chemoprevented bronchial
              epithelial cell lines, which the Co-Investigator (a clinical researcher from
              Dartmouth Medical School) has made available exclusively for this purpose. 
              Because these cells are derived from a unique cell line, characterizing their
              fluorescence emission properties represents a research opportunity available
              only to this team of investigators.  These in vitro experiments will thus serve
              both to advance understanding of the biophysical origins of the spectroscopic
              signatures of pre-cancer and to define the instrument parameters for future
              clinical application.  An additional objective of the pre-clinical testing is
              to explore data analysis techniques and computational models of tissue optical
              response to further develop viable diagnostic algorithms to be employed for
              clinical pre-cancer discrimination.

Early detection and resection of
              pre-cancers are critical to lowering cancer mortality rates.  The clinical
              device developed and pre-clinically tested in this project will offer
              physicians a non-invasive method of screening patients during endoscopy.  As a
              longer term goal, these studies may also serve as the basis for an endoscopic
              spectroscopic imaging device, coupling spectroscopic sensitivity with imaging
              technology, and allowing physicians to "see" otherwise invisible areas of
              pre-disease during endoscopic procedures.

