Title       : Investigations on Normal and Paracompact Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a9977099

Award Number: 9977099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. Burke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zoltan T. Balogh  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS9977099

PI: Zoltan Balogh

Title: Investigations on normal
              and paracompact spaces


Abstract: This project involves applications of the
              technique of constructing topological spaces using diagonalizations through
              elementary submodels. Applications of this technique to the fundamental classes
              of normal to paracompact spaces were pioneered by M.E.Rudin. It has been
              refined and expanded by the Principal Investigator during the previous grant
              period to get answers to some of the questions left undecided in this
              area.
Specific improvements include the technique of complete neighborhoods,
              reflection tricks as well as new applications. Such constructions are
              laborious, and so the problems targeted need to be  (a) well-known, preferably
              old and considered basic;  (b) have no known ad hoc solutions; (c) lend
              themselves to some "natural" inductive construction. Examples of such problems
              are abundant in the classes of spaces ranging from normal to paracompact. It is
              expected that the applications will reach into other areas of topology,
              analysis and infinite combinatorics.
 
Research in set-theoretic topology is
              aimed at finding out the properties of abstract topological spaces using
              methods of set theory and model theory. Such research builds, in the setting of
              a concrete mathematical discipline, concrete techniques of handling infinite
              objects and processes. It is expected that the techniques will be applicable in
              other areas of mathematics and interactions with set theory and model theory
              will be enriched.  



