Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) on Development of Nanoparticle
               Visualization Techniques for Tribological Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9977314

Award Number: 9977314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minami Yoda minami.yoda@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9977314
Yoda
Under an SGER award experimental techniques will be developed for
              visualizing the mechanical and chemical interactions of nano-scale particles
              with solid surfaces in the soft elastohydrodynamic tribological regime.  The
              approach uses particles dyed with fluorescent indicators to directly visualize
              particle mechanics and chemistry.  A variant of this technique, "particle
              proximity sensing," will visualize only particles which are within 0.1-1 mm of
              the surface-i.e., the particles which actually interact with the surface. 
              

These techniques will be used to study three-body interactions once
              appropriate methods for "marking" sub-micron indicator particles have been
              developed.   The visualizations will be used to investigate how particles
              suspended in a fluid at the interface between a smooth, rigid surface and a
              rough, elastomeric surface are transported into the interface and interact with
              both surfaces.  The study will help resolve issues such as how surface adhesion
              forces and Brownian motion affect three-body interaction, what the time scales
              of third body interaction are, and what fraction of the abrasive particles
              actually interact with both surfaces.

The techniques and experiments
              developed during this research will contribute to a fundamental understanding
              of three-body interactions.  This understanding will impact a wide range of
              applications ranging from solid contaminants in fluid films to particle
              additives used in lubricants and surface treatments.  Physically based models
              of the dynamics of the particles which wear solid surfaces will be of
              particular importance for understanding degradation of seals and bearings and
              for optimizing processes such as polishing.
*** 



