Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Dual Ion-Beam Deposition and Analysis of
               Carbon Nitride Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9977316

Award Number: 9977316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olusegun J. Ilegbusi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chung Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for
              acquisition of equipment to synthesize and characterize wide-area carbon
              nitride thin films of tetrahedral structure.  The major equipment is comprised
              of:   (1) a dual ion-source deposition system with accessories including a
              vacuum chamber, vacuum generator and a power control unit, (2) a x-ray
              diffractometer, (3) a micro-hardness tester; and (4) a four-point resistivity
              and conductivity probe.  A high-performance computer workstation is also
              required for preliminary development of the complementary theoretical model
              needed to optimize the system.  The dual ion-source system will be assembled
              in-house while the other pieces of equipment will be purchased directly from
              vendors.
     This instrumentation will have major impact on the research and
              educational goals of the Northeastern University in several ways:  (1) The
              research to be conducted with the instrumentation will build upon the existing
              activities of the investigators  on thin film growth and plasma processing of
              materials and additional faculty have also expressed interest in using the
              equipment for their research.  (2) The instrumentation allows for collaboration
              between two faculty in different disciplines, Mechanical Engineering and
              Electrical Engineering, and will promote interdisciplinary and
              multi-disciplinary projects and problem solution. This is a major goal of the
              Academic Common Experience (ACE) initiative of the University, which is to
              encourage faculty and students to appreciate the interconnectedness of various
              academic programs and to apply this understanding to solving complex problems. 
              (3) Acquiring this equipment will advance the Cooperative Education Program of
              the University.  Specifically, it will allow projects to be developed in
              collaboration with local companies for the cooperative education of
              undergraduate students.  By the same token, this equipment will enhance the
              outreach programs of the investigators by providing the opportunity to design
              simple scientific projects for demonstration to underrepresented high school
              students.  The research advances made with the equipment will also be
              incorporated into the materials processing and plasma processing curriculum in
              the University.


