Title       : IRCEB: Host-Pathogen Biology and the Global Decline of Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9977063

Award Number: 9977063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2975822            (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Collins jcollins@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew T. Storfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce E. Longcore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth W. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977063
Collins et al.

	We propose an IRCEB in host-pathogen biology with a
              strong problem-solving focus designed to enhance collaboration and encourage
              pursuit of answers beyond the boundaries of traditional scientific disciplines.
               Host-pathogen interactions alternately fascinate and frustrate biologists. 
              The fascination stems from the opportunities these systems offer as models for
              understanding at a basic level the complex mechanisms underlying organismal
              relationships.  The frustration stems from not understanding these interactions
              sufficiently well to anticipate or react to epidemics or epizootics. 
              Ecologists increasingly acknowledge a role for pathogens in population dynamics
              and in maintaining diverse communities and ecosystems.  We have a poor
              understanding, however, of how pathogens alter host population dynamics, how
              pathogens infect hosts in a population, and how host and pathogen populations
              coevolve.
	In many populations, hosts and pathogens coexist and each shows
              regular increases and decreases in population size.  At times, however, a
              pathogen nearly or completely decimates its host population.  We propose
              testing the basic mechanisms underlying each of these patterns using amphibians
              as a model system.  Most amphibian populations regularly fluctuate in numbers
              of individuals, but beginning about 1989 herpetologists became alarmed by
              reports that populations and even species were persistently declining, some to
              extinction.  Extreme population fluctuations and declines are centered on a
              broad region of the Cordilleras of western North America from southern
              Saskatchewan south to Costa Rica and northern Panama, and the higher elevations
              of Australia from southeastern to north Queensland.  Four main causes seem to
              be acting alone, sequentially, or synergistically: habitat destruction, exotic
              species, disease, and anthropogeneic environmental change due to toxic
              chemicals, UB radiation, or global climate change.  Many regions with declines
              are conservation areas protected from exotic species and habitat destruction
              suggesting subtle, complex causes like environmental change or pathogens are at
              work.
	We have assembled an international research team to answer the
              question: Why are pathogens causing some amphibian populations to decline, even
              to extinction?  The evidence suggests a pathogenic chytrid fungus causes
              populations to plummet, while another pathogen, an iridovirus causes amphibian
              populations to fluctuate.  The proposed research will address the questions:
              How do pathogens influence host population dynamics?  Are these
              newly-introduced amphibian pathogens, or has the virulence of historically
              benign amphibian associates changed?  Have recent environmental changes altered
              amphibian-pathogen interactions?  Except for some cases involving humans as
              hosts (e.g., cholera, malaria), few host-pathogen interactions have been
              dissected from molecular biology to population dynamics.  Our team will do just
              that to advance basic host-pathogen biology with the goal of applying our
              findings to one of the most significant global biodiversity problems facing us
              today: Why are amphibian populations declining?
	Metaphorically, the declining
              amphibian problem is like a prism in reverse: instead of dispersing colors, it
              focuses research disciplines - ecology, evolution, organismal biology,
              genetics, pathology, and immunology - so that they no longer appear
              individually.  Understanding the basic mechanisms of host-pathogen interactions
              is central to our proposal and essential for answering the question of why
              amphibians are declining.  The point of this metaphor is that while a spectrum
              can be "divided" into its colors, the variation is continuous - "divisions" are
              artificial and at the origin they disappear.  Amphibians are integral parts of
              ecosystems in ways that place them at this metaphorical core.  Therefore, we
              need a diversity of disciplines and a diversity of investigators willing to
              collaborate on integrative research projects.  The declining amphibian case in
              an exciting, but unfortunate, opportunity to explore the boundaries of
              host-pathogen biology, and the time is now to understand why amphibians are
              declining.  The point of our IRCEB research program is to meld diverse
              disciplinary concepts, methods, and traditions in ways that advance our
              understanding of pathogens as a factor in amphibian declines, a key example of
              the general loss of biodiversity.

