Title       : Development of a Low-Power, RF Integrated Circuit R&D Infrastructure in Idaho
               for the Rapid Commercialization of Wireless, Personal Communication Consumer
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9977454

Award Number: 9977454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Parke sparke@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EPS 9977454
Parke
Idaho is poised to become a major player in the next
              revolution in consumer electronics.  Using the base of "Integrated Circuits" or
              "IC" companies already based in the state, together with the development of a
              more sophisticated low-power, RF Integrated Circuit research and development
              infrastructure as proposed in this activity, it can capture a share of the
              low-power, RF- Complementary Metal-Oxide-Silicon or CMOS communications market.
               By scaling CMOS transistors to lengths near a tenth of a micron, maximum
              switching frequencies exceeding 100GHz have recently been achieved.  Because
              this high-performance can be achieved using a relatively low-cost manufacturing
              process, CMOS is rapidly becoming a serious option for many wireless Radio
              Frequency (RF) applications that were previously considered to be the exclusive
              domain of more expensive bipolar and gallium arsenide technologies.  This new
              technology will allow for affordable, wireless personal communicators that can
              provide instant audio, video, and data communications from any location on
              Earth.

In order for the cost advantage of RF-CMOS to be realized, it is
              critical that new ultra-low-power RF-CMOS transistors and circuits be
              developed.  This project proposes to improve SPICE models needed for RF-CMOS
              devices, which will enable IC designers to have successful, first-pass designs
              of chips which operate in the GHz regime.  It will also build and test a
              prototype single-chip, low power SOI RF-CMOS, CDMA spread-spectrum transceiver
              chip suitable for handheld applications.  In 1997, Boise State opened a new
              Semiconductor Device Characterization Lab in which CMOS devices on 6-8' silicon
              wafers are electrically measured and modeled.  This new equipment was obtained
              as part of a $2 million grant from Hewlett-Packard.  In September 1998, Boise
              State also opened the new Idaho Microfabrication Laboratory, a Class 1000
              cleanroom for both teaching and research, funded by the State.  Together with
              an extensive CAD lab, these lab facilities will be used to accomplish the
              proposed research and to assist companies in commercializing the
              results.





