Title       : Nanotechnology Research at Towson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9977530

Award Number: 9977530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Schaefer dschaefer@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Wubah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Gasparich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-9977530
D. Schaefer, Towson State University


The necessary
              equipment to develop a Nanotechnology facility at Towson State University will
              be purchased.  The goals of this facility include (1) to provide the necessary
              equipment, space and expertise to assist researchers at Towson University in
              performing cutting edge research, (2) to provide the facilities necessary to
              promote collaborations with other university and industrial researchers, and
              (3) to provide a facility which educates students (both undergraduate and
              graduate), and faculty in the use of nanotechnology.  Several key components
              have been assembled for such a laboratory, including space, personnel, and a
              scanning probe microscope dedicated for undergraduate and graduate classes at
              Towson.  There does not exist a research quality scanning probe microscope that
              is necessary for the achievement of the first two goals.

The major piece of
              instrumentation needed for the Nanotechnology Laboratory is a Digital
              Instruments Multimode TM Atomic Force Microscope (AFM).  In the AFM, a flexible
              cantilever is used to probe the surface of materials.  By monitoring the
              deflection of the cantilever as it is moves across the surface, the Atomic
              Force Microscope is capable of imaging the surface topography of conducting and
              insulating materials in three dimensions, in real space, and in real time with
              sub-nanometer resolution.  Additionally, it has the capability of operating in
              a variety of environments, including air, vacuum, and under liquid media.  The
              AFM has also demonstrated the ability to quantitatively measure the interaction
              force between two materials








