Title       : Synthesis, Characterization and Modification of Hyperbranched Ultrathin Grafts
               on Polymer Films, Fibers and Powders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9977911

Award Number: 9977911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Bergbreiter bergbreiter@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977911
Bergbreiter

The chemistry in this project will lead to new methods
              for polymer surface modification using hyperbranched grafts.  Condensation
              polymerization chemistry will be used to attach copolymers, dendrimers and
              functional colloids to carboxylic acid containing substrates.  Hyperbranched
              grafts completely attached via carbon-carbon bonds will also be prepared using
              a combination of Heck and Wittig chemistry.  These hyberbranched grafts will be
              prepared on polyolefin films, powders, colloidal particles and fibers.  The
              resulting grafts will be designed to be responsive to pH and temperature. 
              Further modification of the thin film interfaces formed by hyperbranched
              grafting will be accomplished by covalent and ionic modification chemistry. 
              Covalent modification by "living" radial polymerization will be compared to
              "simple" covalent grafting on hyperbranched grafts.  Ionic modification of
              hyperbranched grafts with polyelectolyte dendrimers, biological polymers and
              block copolymers will also be studied and compared with similar ionic assembly
              processes on neutral substrates containing monolayers of functional groups. 
              Physical and spectroscopic studies will probe the extent of coverage of these
              grafts, their responsiveness to various external stimuli and their reactivity. 
              Such studies will primarily use fluorescence, UV-visible, ESR and XPS
              spectroscopy.  The result of these studies will be improved general synthetic
              routes to functional thin films on various substrates.  

This surface
              modification chemistry will lead to new methods to improve the surface
              properties of commonly used polymers.  Such improved surface properties should
              lead to materials with better printability, adhesion and biocompatibility -
              properties that are important as existing materials are modified to be of
              increased utility in biotechnology and materials science.

