Title       : Acquisition of Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Biological and Materials
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9977643

Award Number: 9977643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shaler steve@wood.aewc.umaine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol H. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seth Tyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Millard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan H. Brawley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9150,9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract 9977643

Biological and Materials research at the University of
              Maine will be strongly impacted by the acquisition of a Laser Scanning Electron
              Microscope as a result of this NSF-MRI award. The Leica confocal unit, along
              with an upright and inverted microscope and digital camera will form a
              multi-user facility for campus researchers working with a range of biological
              and materials problems. Initially, 13 faculty members from 8 academic
              departments have projects planned for the instrument. The microscope will be
              the first of its kind on the University of Maine campus.

A wide range of
              research problems will be attacked through use of this instrument in
              conjunction with existing instrumentation. Examples include: Biological
              research projects involve understanding the maintenance of bone structure
              through mapping of the distribution of proteins, the reproduction of algae in
              troubled marine ecosystems, and bacterial or viral diseases of fish. 
              Additionally, improved understanding of fundamental microbe-plant symbiosis and
              wood decay processes will allow for future applied research to attack
              economically and socially important problems.

The development of biofilms
              for sensors of biological and chemical warfare agents will be aided through
              film characterization using this instrument.  This $10 million effort is a
              University/private industry/Department of Defense
              partnership.

Materials-related research includes determination of morphology
              and fracture of wood-based composite material, microfracture characterization
              of cement-based materials, and characterization of paper roughness. This work,
              along with environmental scanning electron microscopy and X-ray
              microtomography, is focused on the measurement of microstructural mechanisms of
              material behavior and its improvement through subsequent processing changes. 
              The ultimate benefit will include more efficient use of natural resources,
              better performance and lowered product costs.


