Title       : Nanofabrication Equipment to Support Microfluidics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9977111

Award Number: 9977111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alton H. Clark clark@cnf.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Proposal Number:  CTS 9977111

Principal investigators:  A.
              Clark

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the
              acquisition of a nanofabrication aligner/bonder and hot embosser for the
              Cornell Nanofabrication Facility  (CNF) to support the needs of present and
              future users in the area of microfluidics.

Microfluidic systems are
              miniature devices or networks of devices, which can pump, mix, monitor or
              control very small quantities of liquids. As the integrated circuit
              revolutionized the electronics industry it is anticipated that integrated
              microfluidic systems can revolutionize the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
              industries, particularly in areas such as combinatorial chemistry, drug
              discovery, genomics, and proteomics. In particular, applications of 
              microfluidics devices span activities in chemistry, biology, biomedicine,
              biophysics, and micromechanics. Microfluidic fabrication itself is an exciting
              blend of MEMS, biology, chemistry and microelectronics.  

The most pressing
              need in microfluidics is to develop capabilities to fabricate a large variety
              of microchannel networks in a wide range of materials, especially optically
              transparent materials such as glass and polystyrene. The fabrication of
              "biochips" is one rapidly developing area of microfluidics application.
              Biochips automate highly repetitive laboratory tasks by replacing cumbersome
              equipment with miniaturized, microfluidic assay chemistries integrated onto a
              single platform. Biochip technologies are becoming increasingly important in
              drug discovery and development applications. Another area is the fabrication of
              increasingly complex synthetic gels for DNA analysis. The fabrication of neuron
              circuits with the appropriate ancillary cells to support viability is also a
              promising application of microfluidics. To meet the promise of microfluidics,
              many of these structures will have to be fabricated inexpensively and used
              essentially disposably. This is difficult with current fabrication
              techniques.

Microfluidic structures present several challenges to
              traditional microfabrication, including demands for new materials and the need
              for deep 3-dimensional structures and networks. Some of these can be addressed
              by extensions of common thin film technology. Several new fabrication
              technologies, however, are available which can have a significant impact on the
              area of microfluidics. The equipment supported by this grant will significantly
              enhance the capabilities of CNF and strengthen the CNF Users Program. 

