Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Ultrafast Laser Processing and Diagnostic System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9977632

Award Number: 9977632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mool C. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amin N. Dharamsi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl Schoenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abhijit Sengupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hani E. Elsayed-Ali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Major Research Instrumentation MRI) award will support the acquisition
              of an ultrafast (Femtosecond) laser processing and diagnostic system for
              research, research training and education in the area of materials processing
              and diagnostics.  This equipment will enable research and education in the
              areas of:  (1) ultrafast laser micromachining of metals, alloys, ceramics,
              polymers, composites and electronic materials; (2) ultrafast laser deposition
              of thin films of various materials; and (3) development of ultrafast imaging
              and diagnostics techniques and their applications.  The equipment facility will
              be a shared resource for various faculty members and graduate students located
              in various engineering and science departments and the newly formed Applied
              Research Center of the Old Dominion University.  This will develop new
              interactions between faculty members who are experts in various materials and
              processing technology with the faculty whose expertise is more towards optics
              and lasers as well as new industrial interactions.
    Laser processing of
              materials is considered a manufacturing technology for the 21st century, and
              part of the worldwide effort to enhance and expand the current "state of the
              art".  Current laser processing occurs by thermal processes and is not very
              energy efficient.  Ultrafast laser technology provides a non-thermal method for
              materials processing such as micromachining and coating of films of various
              types of materials.  The research thrusts based on the supported ultrafast
              laser facility will have significant impact on the current advancement of the
              knowledge on laser matter interaction, imaging, spectroscopy and on various
              manufacturing technologies.


