Title       : Improvement in Biological Research and Education: Expanding Access to Scanning
               Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9977929

Award Number: 9977929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojciech J. Pulawski wpulawski@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Kociolek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah A. Spaulding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Gosliner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94118    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract - 9977929

This award will be used to purchase a Leo 435VP
              scanning electron microscope (SEM) and associated computer equipment for the
              California Academy of Sciences.  The microscope will replace an older,
              extensively used SEM to conduct research on systematics, evolutionary biology,
              biodiversity, ecology, and conservation.  The SEM is invaluable in revealing,
              quantifying, and diagnosing internal and external structures of organisms. 
              Work of the SEM provides the fundamental data for building an understanding of
              phylogenetic and evolutionary relationships of protists, plants and animals. 
              The knowledge and understanding gained by researchers at the California Academy
              of Sciences is shared with the scientific community through peer-reviewed
              publications.
The existing SEM needed to be replaced in order to fulfill the
              research and educational goals of the Academy.  First, the resolution on the
              new microscope will be much greater.  Second, the variable pressure available
              on the new SEM will allow for the examination of specimens without conductive
              coating, allowing researchers to examine the many unique and rare museum
              specimens at the Academy.  Third, the new SEM reduces electron charging,
              allowing higher quality images of delicate structures.  Fourth, the new SEM
              will be fitted with a digital camera for the production of images.
As a
              nonprofit research institution that disseminates scientific information through
              scientific publications and its public museum, the California Academy of
              Sciences has a strong commitment to education at all levels.  Upon installation
              of the new SEM, the old SEM will be relocated onto the public floor of the
              museum.  Trained volunteers and interns will introduce visitors to microscopic
              organisms and their structures through the SEM.  The new instrument will
              continue to be used in training the next generation of taxonomists and
              systematists.  

