Title       : IRCEB: Biological Control of Terrestrial Carbon Fluxes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9977066

Award Number: 9977066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999978            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis S. Ojima dennis@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1356      INTEGRATED RSCH CHALL IN ENVIO
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,1356,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977066
Ojima
From a global perspective, understanding the role of terrestrial
              ecosystems in the carbon cycle is crucial to quantifying carbon storage.  
              Great progress has been made in recent years in measurement networks (LTER and
              AmeriFLUX), in the re-analysis of inventory data, and in modeling relevant to
              carbon budgets at large spatial scales.  In addition, 'inverse' analyses of
              atmospheric data are beginning to provide information on continental scales. 
              In this IRCEB research project, we will develop an integrated data-model system
              to analyze consequences of different assumptions about biology and land
              management on patterns of  CO2  in the atmosphere.  This is a powerful
              complement to traditional model testing against site-specific data, but the
              development of measurement networks and gradient studies greatly improves the
              power of in situ data-model comparisons.  The time is ripe for an ambitious,
              integrated, analysis of terrestrial ecosystems and the carbon cycle. This
              project focuses on the conterminous US, an area where data resources and
              validation information are unparalleled, and an area diverse enough to
              seriously challenge our understanding while remaining tractable. This project
              has three integrated components: (1) The implementation of a new framework to
              analyze processes controlling net carbon exchange based on recent advances of
              ecosystem models, process studies, and analytical technologies.  The project
              will develop a modular framework linking disturbance and land use to life form
              distribution and biogeochemistry, in order to provide a comprehensive way to
              examine and estimate terrestrial net carbon exchanges.  This framework will be
              developed by our team, but with input from colleagues and potential users on a
              regular basis.  The model will be a 'community' model designed to be operated
              on multiple platforms and remotely.  Both the model code and large output data
              sets from important experiments will be made available, with documentation and
              metadata.  This model will take advantage of lessons learned by the
              participants and will use science from extant models.  However, rather than
              simply 'linking' extant models, we will integrate key components and processes
              to evaluate changes in terrestrial carbon fluxes. (2) The development of the
              data sets needed to operate the model.  These will include soils, meteorology
              and land use histories. The main emphasis in the data activity will be the
              development of spatial land use histories containing sufficient information to
              operate the model.  This activity will draw on existing efforts and, as a huge
              task, will be progressively improved over time.  (3) The analysis of the US
              carbon budget. We will begin by evaluating our model system against
              'traditional' in situ  observations such as NPP, soil carbon/biomass data.  We
              will then integrate the continental model and compare the simulated patterns of
              atmospheric  CO2  against observations.  This will require coupling the
              terrestrial model and estimated spatial/seasonal fossil fuel fluxes to an
              atmospheric model.  We will used a well-tested model (RAMS) operated in a 'data
              assimilation mode', a mathematical approach where the model is continuously
              adjusted to observations of key variables widely used in forecast studies. 
              Data assimilation is a mature technology in the atmospheric sciences and will
              permit the model to produce transport winds, turbulent fluxes, and weather
              close to observed conditions.  This will make both the weather used as input to
              the ecosystem model and the transport used to compare simulated to observed 
              CO2  consistent and close to reality.  

