Title       : Development of a Large Experimental Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9977244

Award Number: 9977244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $823125             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Levine david@dklevine.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Palfrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. David Levine and Thomas Palfrey
              will create a large social science laboratory located at UCLA and jointly
              operated by UCLA and the California Institute of Technology. It will contain 80
              linked workstations which will permit a like number of subjects to interact in
              carefully designed social science experiments. This California Social Science
              Experimental Laboratory (CASSELL) will be cross-disciplinary, impacting
              economics, political science, sociology, anthropology and other disciplines
              such as marketing. Its unique facilities will be available to researchers from
              all institutions. Because of current limitations on laboratories, subject pools
              and networks, computerized experimental research has been done on a relatively
              modest scale. Previous research has been colored by reservations about number
              of participants. CASSEL will do experimentation on a large scale, incorporating
              physical space, state-of-the-art software and a large subject pool. It will
              also expand the potential experimental base by using the Internet and will be
              large enough for social scientists on a national scale to participate both in
              the laboratory and through the World Wide Web. The experimental protocols and
              computer programs developed will be made publicly available.

One of the most
              exciting and significant developments in the social sciences in recent years
              has been the successful use of laboratory experiments to verify and refine
              theories and models through controlled experimentation. With the advent of the
              computer and computing networks, social science experimentation is undergoing a
              revolution allowing more frequent and more elaborate experiments while at the
              same time improving experimental control and replicability. The result has been
              advances in our understanding of voting behavior, human interaction, financial
              markets, auctions, environmental regulations and many other areas of social
              behavior. This UCLA/CalTech project takes advantage of these recent innovations
              and will push the field to a higher order of effectiveness by creating a
              laboratory whose size and scope will allow for more complex and realistic
              environments than have been studied before. It will move such research a
              quantum step forward and, in effect, create a national laboratory.

