Title       : Acquisition of NMR Spectrometer, Ultralow Temperature Cryostats, and Active
               Shielding for a 16 Tesla/120 mm RT Bore Superconducting Magnet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977656

Award Number: 9977656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean E. Barrett sean.barrett@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977656
Barrett 

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a powerful
              local probe of the electronic and structural properties of matter, with
              applications in physics, materials science, geology, chemistry, biology, and
              medicine.  With Major Research Instrumentation program funding, the PI will
              create a unique nuclear magnetic resonance system, capable of producing both
              extremely high magnetic fields and ultralow temperatures.  The foundation of
              the proposed system is a 15.8 Tesla / 120 mm room temperature bore
              superconducting NMR magnet, recently purchased by Yale University.  The
              NMR-quality specifications of this magnet, combined with its super-wide bore
              diameter and its strong field, open up entirely new experimental frontiers. 
              The Major Research Instrumentation funds will be used to acquire the other
              components necessary to complete the system: an active shielding upgrade, a
              custom NMR spectrometer, and ultralow temperature experimental cryostats.  The
              research activities that will be conducted with this system span several
              different fields, academic departments, as well as two universities, Yale and
              Columbia. These projects include:  1) the study of nanoscale materials, e.g.,
              epitaxial thin films of GaN, GaAs quantum wells; 2) magnetic resonance
              microscopy of small biological samples (such as mice and rats); 3) the effect
              of optical pumping on the spectra of certain biological samples, to address
              long-standing questions about the efficiency and specificity of photoreactions
              in the photosynthetic reaction center; 4) extending a wide-variety of
              solid-state NMR measurements down to ultralow temperatures, to boost
              sensitivity and to simplify spectra.  The improved instrumentation will enhance
              research training experiences for students, postdoctoral, graduate, and
              undergraduate, in several ways, including hand-on training on state-of-the-art
              instrumentation and the results of research projects carried out with this
              instrument finding its way into the classroom.

Funds from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will be used to acquire components that will be used to
              complete the state-of-the-art NMR system.  The system will be used by a range
              of researchers within the university as well as at nearby universities.  It
              will also have an impact on the research training of students, from post
              doctoral to undergraduates

