Title       : MRI: Development of an Intense Table-Top Soft X-Ray Laser Source of Picosecond
               Pulses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9977677

Award Number: 9977677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge J. Rocca rocca@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977677
Rocca

This project will develop a table-top soft x-ray laser source
              of very intense pulses of picosecond duration.  The important enabling role of
              intense soft x-ray coherent radiation in science and technology is well
              recognized, and has motivated the development of large modem synchrotron
              radiation facilities.  Very recent advances now allow the possibility to
              develop compact table-top sources of soft x-ray laser radiation with a
              spatially coherent average power similar to that of a synchrotron beam line,
              and with more that five orders of magnitude larger peak power.  Such table-top
              sources could greatly impact the national research infrastructure by making
              intense beams of soft x-ray radiation more widely available, and by enabling
              new science with the access to a regime of very high soft x-ray peak
              intensities not presently available.

The project will develop a new kind of
              powerful table-top soft x-ray laser based in the combination of capillary
              discharges developed in our laboratory with high intensity ultrashort pulse
              optical laser technology.  The combination of these two relatively new but
              proven technologies should allow the efficient generation of multi-Megawatt
              picosecond pulses of highly coherent soft x-ray radiation at a variety of soft
              x-ray wavelengths.  The use of a capillary discharge plasma waveguide will
              allow the PI to make very efficient use of the laser pump radiation,
              potentially improving the efficiency of laser pumped collisional soft x-ray
              lasers by one to two orders of magnitude.  The major concepts that will enable
              the proposed research development have been tested experimentally.  The
              proposed development has potential, in collaboration with industry, to make
              these table-top lasers accessible to a broad community of scientists and
              engineers nationwide.
***



