Title       : Acquisition of a High Resolution TEM Equipped with GIF and EDS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9977391

Award Number: 9977391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $695972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pulickel M. Ajayan ajayan@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna Rajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977391
Ajayan

Using Major Research Instrumentation funds, a
              state-of-the-art complete analytical high resolution transmission electron
              microscope (HRTEM) with nano-analytical capabilities will be acquired.  The
              instrument will include a basic 200 keV TEM machine, energy dispersive X-ray
              analyzer (EDS), Gatan Imaging Filter (GIF) for electron energy loss
              spectroscopy (EELS) and chemical mapping and a heating stage.  The new
              instrument will modernize the electron microscopy facility on campus and will
              have a large impact on the research capabilities. It will be housed in the
              Materials Research Center of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  There are new
              strategic research and academic initiatives, for example on nanostructured
              materials and electronic interconnects, that suffer from the lack of such
              modern instrumentation on campus.  The impact of this HRTEM will be tremendous
              as it will allow the atomic scale observation of material structures,
              qualitative and quantitative analysis using EDS, and the bonding state and
              chemical analysis using EELS.  Faculty from the Departments of Materials
              Science and Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Bio-medical Engineering,
              Electrical and Computer Science Engineering, Chemistry, Physics and Earth and
              Environmental Sciences will use this instrument in their research projects to
              examine a wide range of materials and structures that include carbon nanotubes,
              nanocomposites, metal and ceramic nanostructures, semiconductor materials and
              thin films, electrodeposited coatings, fiber-matrix composite interfaces,
              tissue-biomaterial interfaces, protein structures, glasses and complex
              minerals.   In addition, this instrument will have a significant impact on
              graduate and undergraduate training and course development.  Hands on training,
              real-time demonstrations on the new microscope, on-line broadcasting of some of
              the experiments to class-rooms, and HRTEM projects for graduate students will
              take place.  Undergraduate students who are part of the university
              undergraduate research program and the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              site at RPI will benefit from this modern facility. 

Acquisition of a high
              resolution transmission electron microscope with funds from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will have a large impact on the research and training
              infrastructure at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  This instrument will be
              used by investigators in seven departments that are working on advanced
              materials.  Students, ranging from post doctoral to undergraduates, will be
              trained in its use.

