Title       : Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer in the Kansas State
               University-Kansas University-Creighton University Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9977699

Award Number: 9977699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loretta C. Johnson johnson@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter K. Dodds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valery J. Terwilliger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gwendolyn L. Macpherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project involves the acquisition and installation of a stable isotope ratio
              mass spectrometer (SIRMS) at Kansas State University.  This instrumentation
              will be used to address fundamental and applied ecological and geological
              questions.  The acquisition of a dual inlet continuous flow SIRMS for the
              KSU-KU-Creighton Consortium will permit greater research productivity within
              the Kansas region through cooperative use of facilities, by providing regional
              infrastructure for more innovative research and overall, will greatly hasten
              the pace of present isotope based research.  A total of 14 faculty at KSU, KU
              and Creighton University will use these facilities in their research.  The
              instrument will serve three important functions: It will enhance and strengthen
              the existing active and growing isotope-based research programs and serve as a
              regional center for stable isotope analyses.  It will broaden training for
              graduate students and promising undergraduates in table isotopic methods
              through a specialty course.  And it will serve as an attraction to recruit and
              train the best women and minorities at the undergraduate, graduate and
              post-graduate level in state of the art techniques.
