Title       : A Deterministic Model for Semistructured and Structured Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9977408

Award Number: 9977408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: O. Peter Buneman peter@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the development of the Internet, databases are being copied, transformed,
              and corrected on an unprecedented scale. With this comes the need to annotate
              data: for correcting it, commenting on it, or for recording its provenance.
              However, conventional databases have a regular structure and provide no "room"
              for annotations which are typically irregular and required at all levels of
              granularity. Annotations require some form of semistructured representation.
              This investigation centers on a new model for structured and semistructured
              data which is intended to facilitate the process of data annotation. The usual
              models of semistructured data are based on an edge-labeled graph and are
              "nondeterministic" in that a given vertex may have several out-edges with the
              same label. The model proposed here is more restrictive in that these labels
              must all be different. It is less restrictive because the labels themselves may
              themselves carry data. In fact a label may itself be a small piece of
              semistructured data. A number of advantages are claimed for this model. Like
              XML, the data representation is entirely syntactic. All operations are
              syntactic,, and serialization of data is immediate. Object identifiers in
              particular are syntactic constructs, they have structure, and certain database
              transformations may be achieved by manipulation of this structure. The goal of
              the investigation is to develop the model and associated interfaces so that it
              can be used as a common representation for both semistructured and structured
              data. A second goal is to develop tools for data annotation.
              
http://db.cis.upenn.edu/Research/


