Title       : PEET: Monographic and Phylogenetic Studies of Simple Thalloid Hepatics
               (Jungermanniopsida, Metzgeriidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9977961

Award Number: 9977961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Stotler stotler@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Crandall-Stotler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977961
Raymond Stotler and Barbara Crandall-Stotler
	The two goals of this
              project in the Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy are to
resolve
              the taxonomic perplexities of the Metzgeriidae, a plant group commonly referred
              to as the simple thalloid liverworts, and in the process to train a new
              generation of skilled experts in hepaticology, i. e., the
study of liverworts.
               The Metzgeriidae are the geologically oldest group of bryophytes, with fossil
              representatives dating back to the beginning of terrestrial plant colonization,
              about 400 million years ago.  Today, they are cosmopolitan in distribution but
              with their greatest diversification in the tropics.  In addition to playing a
              major role in the nutrient cycles of tropical ecosystems, liverworts synthesize
              a myriad of biologically active compounds that have pharmaceutical potential. 
              Tapping this potential,
however, necessitates that the diversity of these
              poorly known, understudied plants be inventoried and classified and that
              fundamental features of their reproductive biology be elucidated.  To this end,
              the research plan of this project includes the following: a taxonomic survey of
              the morphological diversity of the suborders Pelliineae and Pallaviciniineae,
              represented in existing herbarium collections; field investigations of
              population structure of select taxa of these suborders in North America and
              Puerto
Rico; a collecting expedition to New Zealand and Tasmania;
              electron-microscopic anatomical studies of conducting strand differentiation
              within plants of these suborders; and the generation of nuclear and chloroplast
              DNA sequences for phylogenetic analyses of the Metzgeriidae.  
	Monographic
              studies of the Pelliineae and Pallaviciniineae are an expansion of the
              monographic and phylogenetic studies of a current PEET project focused on the
              Fossombroniineae, another basal suborder of the Metzgeriidae.  In the
              production of the monograph, nomenclatural type specimens will be located and
              verified, based on their protologues, specimen loans will be arranged with all
              major herbaria, worldwide, and a combination of quantitative and qualitative
              characters will be assessed, using both SEM and optical photomicroscopy. 
              Additional data from morphometric analyses  of variation patterns, field
              studies, molecular sampling and anatomical studies will then be used to refine
              species definition.  In addition, a robust molecular phylogeny of the entire
              Metzgeriidae will be produced.  Through a combination of formal courses in
              systematics, seminars, workshops, and involvement in project research, a
              minimum of three doctoral students and one postdoctoral fellow will be trained
              in modern monography.  Research responsibilities will be partitioned according
              to taxa, rather than technique, so each trainee will learn all of the methods
              being applied to the monograph.  Research training opportunities will also be
              provided for two undergraduate students per year.  Computer-assisted methods of
              data storage and retrieval, image processing, data analysis and information
              dissemination will be used at all stages in the project, with electronic access
              to project results provided through the World Wide Web.  Electronic products
              will include an illustrated nomenclator, web-accessible specimen and literature
              databases, and interactive keys. The completed monographs will be archived on
              CD-ROM disks.  



