Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope and
               Micromanipulation/Microinjection Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9977158

Award Number: 9977158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prudence Talbot talbot@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn I. Hatton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarjeet S. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Y. Lytle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margarita C. Curras-Collazo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1228,9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977158

Abstract

This award will be used to acquire an advanced light
              microscope laboratory that will enable new research projects to be undertaken
              in the biological sciences at the University of California, Riverside (UCR).
              This laboratory will consist of an upright confocal scanning laser microscope,
              an inverted microscope for micromanipulation/injection, and a computer
              workstation for advanced image data analysis in a mult-user, state-of-the-art
              facility. These light microscopes will be housed in the currently existing
              centralized electron microscopy laboratory, thereby creating a Centralized
              Laboratory for Advanced Microscopy. The light microscopes will service over 30
              well established research programs in 12 departments in the College of Natural
              and Agricultural Sciences. The users in this proposal specifically need this
              instrumentation for studies of fertilization, oocyte transport, angiogenesis,
              cell receptors, cell adhesion and dye transfer, cell junctions in
              neurosecretory cells, molecular motors, ion transport, plant pollination,
              trafficking of viral proteins in plants, and transcytosis. The equipment will
              allow Principle Investigators at UCR to extend their current research programsm
              and will enable initiation of many new projects not currently possible on the
              UCR campus. The light microscope laboratory has been carefully integrated and
              designed to be flexible, thereby meeting the broad range of needs of a core
              facility. The centralized laboratory where the light microscope will be housed
              is currently staffed by a full-time manager, and the university will provide an
              additional 50% Staff Research Associate for daily operation and maintainance of
              the light microscopes and workstation.  Training on the light microscopes will
              be provided in an undergraduate course in Cell Biology, a graduate level class
              in microscopy, and by one-on-one interaction with the Staff  Research
              Associate. UCR has the highest percentage of minority students of any UC campus
              and one of the highest nationally. Many students receiving training will be
              minority students.
