Title       : Acquisition of a Facility for Electrical and Optical Characterization of
               Nanoscale Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9977617

Award Number: 9977617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis J. Rothberg LJR@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977617
Rothberg

Using support from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program, instrumentation will be acquired to study the electronic properties of
              nanoscale materials and devices based upon these materials.   The
              instrumentation will consist enhancements to an existing step-scan Fourier
              transform infrared spectrometer unit (an infrared microscope, a fast HgCdTe
              detector, holographic notch filters, and a cryostat) and a state-of-the-art
              semiconductor parameter analyzer.  This instrumentation when incorporated into
              the exisiting Fourier transform infrared spectrometer and pulsed laser, will
              provide good spatial resolution (10 - 20 mm) consistent with mid-infrared (3 -
              15 mm) and Raman spectral studies, the ability to study steady state and
              transient photo- and electroluminescence, cryogenic capabilities, and
              state-of-the-art electrical characterization. The enhanced instrument will be
              capable of doing time-resolved studies with better than 100 ns resolution. The
              materials research to be done with this instrument includes work on conjugated
              polymers that can be utilized to make light-emitting diodes and thin-film
              transistors, and the growth, characterization and application of nanostructured
              silicon materials that have potential applications as emissive devices, arrays
              of one-electron transistor based memories, mid-infrared detectors based on
              intersubband transitions, and chemical/environmental sensors.   The instrument
              will be used by students from three degree programs (Chemistry, Electrical
              Engineering, and Materials Science), and usage by researchers and students in
              several other programs is foreseen.  In addition, it is anticipated that
              undergraduate students will be exposed to research involving this instrument. 
              

Enhancements to existing equipment, using funds from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program, will provide a unique instrument to study the science
              and operating characteristics of novel devices that exploit mesoscopic
              materials.  This instrument will have an impact on both the research and
              education infrastructure at the university.

