Title       : Acquisition of Polymer Characterization Equipment for Research and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977729

Award Number: 9977729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight J. Patterson dpatters@mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha R. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrienne C. Friedli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977729
Patterson

Major Research Instrumentation support will be use to
              acquire an atomic force microscope and a rheometer that are critical to
              developing research capability in polymer and surface characterization in the
              Departments of Chemistry and Physics/Astronomy at Middle Tennessee State
              University.   The research to be carried out using these instruments include
              investigations of structure-viscoelastic property relationships of
              melt-transesterified engineering resins, and value-added composites, morphology
              of polyelectrolyte membranes, imaging of patterned organosiloxane films, and
              structure in metal and dielectric films.  The equipment will complement
              existing instrumentation for quantification of bulk polymer thermal properties
              and molecular weights in the Department of Chemistry, surface analytical
              instrumentation in the Department of Physics/Astronomy and in Chemistry, and
              imaging instrumentation for morphology in the Department of Biology and also in
              Physics.  Because of the overlap in interdisciplinary investigations, the
              beneficial impact of the equipment will extend beyond the graduate and advanced
              undergraduate students and faculty within each department.  

The acquisition
              of an atomic force microscope and a rheometer will be important additions to
              the materials analysis instrumentation collection and will provide increased
              opportunities for research carried out at Middle Tennessee State University, as
              well as for student training and introduction to skills relevant to jobs in the
              polymer industry.  Though collaborations, training seminars, and community
              outreach, the equipment will be used as a vehicle for increased interaction
              with regional industry. 

