Title       : Values, Knowledge and Practice in Plant Breeding for Sustainable Agriculture:
               Differences Among Breeders and the Possibility for Collaboration with Farmers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9977996

Award Number: 9977996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149826             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Cleveland clevelan@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The general goal of scientific plant breeding has been development of modern
              crop varieties that have high yield in high-input, low stress environments, and
              are geographically widely adapted. This strategy has been successful in
              replacing farmers' traditional varieties and increasing yields to keep up with
              growing human consumption. However, plant breeding today is addressing major
              problems in making agriculture more sustainable. Modern farms are subjected to
              increasing stresses; inputs are being reduced in environments that have been
              high-yielding; many of the world's poorer farmers in high-stress environments
              have not and cannot adopt modern varieties and face increasingly inadequate
              yields; and the need to conserve the base of genetic diversity on which all
              plant breeding depends is threatened by the loss of farmers'
              varieties.

There are, however, major differences among plant breeders in the
              way these problems are understood, and thus the solutions sought, including the
              role of plant genome research and biotechnology, and the currently popular
              attempt to bring together scientific and farmer plant breeding (known as
              participatory plant breeding). A major objective of this research is to
              understand the causes for these differences by documenting and analyzing the
              interacting roles of values, knowledge and data in the understanding of key
              components in plant breeding theory: the relationship between yield and yield
              stability, and the role of genetic diversity in local adaptation. Methods for
              collecting qualitative and quantitative data will include an analysis of plant
              breeding literature, in-depth interviews with plant breeders at international
              breeding programs and affiliated national programs and at participatory plant
              breeding programs, and a world-wide internet/mail survey of breeders.

The
              two major broad approaches within plant breeding to the problems of
              sustainability will be analyzed in terms of differences in understanding of
              these key components. The conventional approach sees refinements of modern
              plant breeding as it has been widely practiced as adequate for increasing both
              yield and stability - maintaining crop genetic diversity through time in the
              form of modern varieties replacing one another, while conserving farmers'
              varieties ex situ in gene banks, and developing more widely adapted varieties
              by ignoring or avoiding the problems caused by the trade-offs between yields
              and stability. The alternative approach sees the potential for a negative
              relationship between yield and stability, influenced by genetic and
              environmental variances - it advocates increasing the genetic diversity within
              and between crop varieties, and by developing varieties specifically adapted to
              high stress environments.

The project will set the current debate about
              problems of sustainability in plant breeding, including the relationship
              between scientists and farmers, and the role of biotechnology, in cultural,
              social, historical and geographic perspective. It will help participants to
              discriminate values and empirical data in the development and testing of
              theory, and contribute to constructive discussion and policy making within
              plant breeding and society that will help achieve more sustainable
              agriculture.


