Title       : Nitrogen Fixation in the Open Ocean: Assessing the Role of Recently Discovered
               Diazotrophs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2000   
File        : a9977528

Award Number: 9977528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Montoya j.montoya@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Zehr 9977460 and Montoya 9977528

The availability of nutrients, primarily
              phosphorus, nitrogen and iron, limits the productivity of the oceans. Nitrogen
              is often believed to be an important, if not limiting, nutrient in oligotrophic
              oceans. Nitrogen, in the form of dinitrogen gas, is a major component of the
              Earth's atmosphere and is abundant in seawater as dissolved gas. However, most
              organisms can use nitrogen in the form of nitrate, ammonium, or organic
              nitrogen, but cannot directly use dinitrogen. This form of nitrogen can be used
              only by diazotrophs, which can "fix" nitrogen into ammonium through the action
              of the enzyme nitrogenase. Diverse prokaryotic taxa have the ability to fix
              nitrogen, including heterotrophic bacteria, cyanobacteria and Archaea. Despite
              the diversity of types of microorganisms that can fix nitrogen, very few
              nitrogen--fixing taxa have previously been reported from the open ocean. 
              Recent studies in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans indicate that nitrogen
              fixation is more important in nitrogen dynamics than previously believed, and
              that there may be a large, unaccounted for flux of nitrogen into the mixed
              layer, which may be due to nitrogen fixation. Estimates of the nitrogen
              fixation by known diazotrophs, the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium and
              endosymbiont Richelia, cannot account for this estimated N flux.

Using a
              molecular approach, it has very recently been shown that there are diverse
              microorganisms in the open ocean environment, which have the genetic capacity
              for nitrogen fixation.   In this project, the ecological and biological
              significance of these microorganisms will be examined using molecular
              approaches, cultivation efforts, nitrogen fixation rate measurements, and
              stable isotope measurements. Recent developments in RNA technology (nifH
              reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, RT-PCR) make it possible to
              examine the expression of the unique nitrogenase phylotypes in seasonal
              studies, and in experimental manipulations. These studies will focus at the HOT
              site in order to identify and characterize the novel nitrogen-fixing
              cyanobacterium, to determine the factors controlling its growth and activity,
              and to quantify its contribution to the local nitrogen budget using stable
              isotope techniques. In parallel, experiments on nitrogen-fixation activity
              associated with invertebrates will be investigated by N-15 tracer measurements
              and RT-PCR to identify the types of nitrogen-fixing microorganisms responsible
              for observed nitrogen fixation activity. Finally, the novel diazotroph will be
              characterized by examining the nitrogen fixation apparatus (nitrogenase genes
              other than nifH) to determine whether the nitrogen fixation apparatus of these
              organisms is unusual, which may have biotechnological applications as well as
              evolutionary implications.  The identification and characterization of these
              novel nitrogen-fixing microorganisms in the open ocean is timely and
              potentially important for evaluating the nitrogen budget of the sea.

