Title       : Acquisition of a Spectrofluorometer for Faculty-Mentored Student Research in
               Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9977518

Award Number: 9977518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry V. Jakubowski hjakubowski@csbsju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manuel J. Campos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Saint Benedict
	      
	      Saint Joseph, MN  56374    612/363-5407

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977518

Abstract

	This project involves the acquisition of a
              spectrofluorometer that will be used by undergraduates in biochemistry course
              laboratory research and in individual faculty mentored research.  The
              instrument will allow students to measure fluorescent properties of biological
              molecules.  Both excitation and emission monochromators can be scanned
              independently or synchronously. The specificity and sensitivity offered by
              fluorescence spectroscopy will provide advantages over radioisotope use without
              the cost or infrastructure required for their use.  Students will use the
              spectrofluorometer to investigate membrane structure and dynamics, protein
              structure and stability, protein folding and unfolding, binding interactions
              between macromolecules and ligands, facilitated diffusion and cell involvement
              in ligand recognition and signal transduction.  Individual research projects
              will include characterization of serine protease and acid phosphatase
              inhibitors which can be used to probe structural changes in the enzyme
              associated with expression and regulation of enzyme activity.  In addition
              fluorescence spectroscopy will be used to characterize the binding,
              internalization and intracellular changes in metabolism on binding of normal
              and oxidized low density lipoprotein to endothelial cells.  These changes
              include detection of reactive oxygen species, oxidatively-modified proteins and
              lipids and activation/inhibition of specific genes.  

