Title       : Development of a Geotechnical Centrifuge Facility for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9977740

Award Number: 9977740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Bardet bardet@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1189,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
This instrumentation project is to develop a centrifuge facility at the
              University of Southern California (USC) which uses the centrifuge currently at
              the California Institute of Technology (Caltech).  During the transplantation
              of the Caltech facility to USC, the centrifuge will be equipped with new data
              acquisition and transmission systems, and will use new image-processing
              techniques to display and measure displacement patterns.  Compared to larger
              centrifuge facilities, the upgraded centrifuge facility will have a moderate
              maintenance and running cost.  It will be devoted mainly to conducting
              innovative and fundamental research in applied geosciences and engineering. 
              The centrifuge facility will be made accessible to other universities in the
              Southern California area.  Training materials and research results will be
              disseminated in digital format and video clips on the Internet.

The facility
              will be used to study problems in physical sciences that cannot be modeled
              mathematically and explained completely.  In many cases, analytical methods
              fail to yield a through and clear picture of complex problems.  Experimental
              techniques have been regularly employed to elucidate the complexity of physical
              processes.  Experiments on reduced-scale models using facility such as
              centrifuge have been extensively used in engineering to give information on the
              behavior of complex structures because of the expense and difficulty of testing
              the full-size structures.

This is an equipment grant supported under MRI
              program.

