Title       : Electromechanical Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9977661

Award Number: 9977661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $616285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Haskew thaskew@coe.eng.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Cuttino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Mark Nelms  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale E. Schinstock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EPS 9977661
Haskew	
This activity will fund development of the
              Electromechanical Systems Laboratory (EMSyL), a collaborative effort between
              three universities and one community college in two EPSCoR states.  Partners
              include the University of Alabama, Auburn University, the University of Tulsa,
              and Shelton State Community College (HBCU).  This shared effort will offer an
              opportunity to study issues and problems associated with the proliferation of
              electromechanical mechanisms in industry for motion control and other
              applications including refrigeration systems for superconducting devices. 
              Presently, no institution or facility in the U.S. is addressing system level
              issues in this growing field.  This laboratory will allow for immediate and
              productive research to lay the infrastructure for a larger, center-based effort
              already being planned.  It will also fill a technological void in
              electromechanical technology, bridging a science and technology gap to enable
              widespread adoption of emerging disciplines.  Specific research objectives of
              the laboratory are: 1) Develop industry electromechanical systems to replace
              present motion control systems; 2) Provide integrated basic research in the
              critical technologies for electromechanical systems; and, 3) Develop
              electromechanical systems to serve new industrial applications.  Sample
              research topics include: softswitching inverters for industrial applications,
              detailed industrial application studies, regeneration processes and control,
              and dual sensor control of electromechanical systems.  

Continuing education
              in manufacturing issues will be addressed through a distance learning activity
              conducted between one of the partner universities and a community college. 
              EMSyL will also provide Internet access to a variety of technical briefs,
              application notes, and product briefs to help facilitate tech transfer for
              industry engineers in the adoption and implementation of emerging
              electromechanical technologies.  



