Title       : VIGRE - An Integrated Program of Mathematics Research and Education at The
               University of Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9977371

Award Number: 9977371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4795501            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Lazarsfeld rlaz@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Hanlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Alan Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Fulton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Doering  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
University of Michigan 

The University of Michigan VIGRE program
              aims to accelerate the evolution of an integrated program of education and
              research in the setting of a highly rated research program at a large state
              university with a long tradition of concern for education at all levels. In
              order to make maximal use of the great diversity of strengths and interests in
              our department, we have designed a decentralized program consisting of a
              network of interconnected smaller scale activities. Our plans are informed by
              the belief that close contact among different groups in the department-
              particularly with senior faculty-is the most effective catalyst for the
              intellectual and professional development of our students and junior
              colleagues, and we attempt to foster and maximize these contacts at all levels.
               Our VIGRE program connects with and augments several existing departmental
              initiatives and activities, notably a new doctoral program in Applied and
              Interdisciplinary Mathematics, and flourishing actuarial and REU programs. 


              At the undergraduate level, we plan first to extend and unify the existing REU
              program through the appointment of several REU Integrators to bring students
              together during the summer, and to provide greater opportunities for students
              to continue their projects during term time.  Extended possibilities for
              teaching apprenticeships and internships are also part of the program.

At
              the graduate level, our goal is to immerse students more quickly and fully in
              the mathematical culture of the department, and to expand their view of the
              mathematical profession. We intend to accomplish this through three mechanisms:
               Pro-Seminars, Teaching or Research Apprenticeships, and Non-Traditional
              Experiences in Mathematics Communication, Teaching or Research.  The
              pro-seminars will involve informal weekly meetings of first and second year
              graduate students with a spectrum of senior faculty.  Incoming VIGRE Trainees
              will complete teaching or research apprenticeships, again overseen by senior
              faculty. The research apprenticeships will involve participating in integrated
              research groups consisting of students, postdocs and faculty working together
              on related problems with a common focus. Finally, advanced VIGRE Trainees will
              complete a non-traditional project in mathematical communication, teaching or
              research.  For example, students can fulfill this requirement by preparing a
              significant piece of written or oral mathematical exposition, or by serving as
              REU Integrators. We also intend to institute a weekly VIGRE seminar aimed at
              advanced undergraduate and graduate students.
At the postdoctoral level, VIGRE
              will enhance an already very active program of postdoctoral scholars in the
              department. Modest and varied teaching duties will give our junior colleagues
              experience in a variety of classroom situations, while leaving ample time to
              focus on research and to benefit maximally from the very active mathematical
              life of the department. VIGRE Fellows will participate in a series of
              Pro-Seminars, led by senior faculty, designed to help them "learn the ropes" of
              the profession. As a mechanism to help postdocs develop independent research
              programs, senior faculty will direct participating seminars focusing on open
              problems. 


