Title       : Research Equipment Grant for Development of a High-Speed Ultra-Accurate Six DOF
               Manipulator Based on Two-Dimensional Linear Motors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9977693

Award Number: 9977693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148452             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farshad Khorrami khorrami@smart.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977693
Khorrami

This project will develop a new type of robot arm for a
              High-Speed Ultra-Accurate Six DOF Manipulator Based on Two-Dimensional Linear
              Motors  to enhance and complement and current research efforts.  Planar
              multi-robot systems based on commercial Sawyer motors provide uniform
              performance over their entire workspace, offering high speeds, accelerations,
              and precision. They also offer mechanical and kinematic simplicity, modularity,
              large motion ranges, and a short path to mechanical ground. In fact such a
              system can provide a multiple robot table top manufacturing system. These
              systems are now commercially available from multiple manufactures and are used
              for a range of applications from wafer probing to circuit board assembly.
              Planar robot systems use has increased tremendously because of the current
              trend to smaller devices and the requirement for higher accuracy placement.
              Unfortunately, primarily because Sawyer motors are operated as open-loop
              micro-step motors, they can miss steps, have long settle times, and are
              operated short of their potential capabilities due to loss of synchrony between
              motor and platen teeth. These limitations can be overcome using a new novel,
              very high resolution (0.12um; microns), 2D position sensor that was developed
              by Dr. Ish-Shalom and patented by IBM.  The PI has fabricated sensors to his
              motor. Not only this sensor provides a means for closed-loop control of this
              motor and therefore higher resolution, but also the point-to-point move time of
              the motor may be decreased through active damping to achieve better settling
              times. Furthermore, a higher stiffness may also be achieved. Through the NSF
              support of previous effort, the PI has fabricated sensors, designed housing for
              them, and have attached the sensors to the motors for feedback purposes.	This
              grant will provide for additional equipment to develop a six degree-of-freedom
              manipulator based on two-dimensional Sawyer motors. The manipulator is direct
              drive and actuated by three Sawyer motors. The manipulator mechanism is
              basically a tripod with Sawyer motors at its base to provide linear motions of
              the tripod legs. By properly coordinating the motors, three-axis of
              translations and three-axis of rotations are produced at the top of the tripod.
              By proper design of the tripod and a good design of its kinematic parameters,
              large translations (unlimited X and Y depending on the size of platen used and
              a few inches of Z movement) and rotations (possibly up to 160 degrees) at the
              end-effector can, be generated. This equipment will provide an excellent basis
              to complement the PI's current research efforts and to develop the
              aforementioned six DOF manipulator.

