Title       : Development of a Whole Organism Micro-Respirometry System to Enhance
               Environmental Toxicology Studies in Coastal Ecosystems at the Chesapeake
               Biological Laboratory (CBL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9977441

Award Number: 9977441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. R. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward D. Houde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Rowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract 9977441

Development of a whole organism micro-respirometry
              system to enhance toxicology studies in coastal ecosystems at the Chesapeake
              Biological Laboratory (CBL). (Principle Investigators: Tenore, Miller, Rowe,
              Paynter, Houde)

Ongoing research in fisheries, environmental chemistry,
              toxicology, and ecology in the environmental sciences at CBL span cellular
              through ecosystem levels of biological organization.  This transdisciplinary
              approach attracts visiting scientists to work with CBL faculty and insures
              graduate students in the education program a sound exposure to research across
              the broad spectrum of scientific questions and methodologies of environmental
              research. The acquisition of a whole organism micro-respirometry system that
              enables extremely accurate measurements of changes in oxygen and carbon dioxide
              of individual aquatic animals will strengthen research abilities in linking
              cellular to ecosystem biological processes to bioenergetic effects and provide
              graduate students access to training and availability for planning such
              research in planning their dissertation research project.

One frontier of
              environmental research is combining ecological and toxicological approaches in
              linking sub-lethal effects of stress to population effects that ultimately
              affect biotic community composition/survival and ecosystem production.  These
              sub-lethal effects can be caused by extremes in environmental factors such as
              water temperature or food quality/quantity or exposure to contaminants.  If the
              effects of such sub-lethal stress on population dynamics, survival, and
              production are to be predicted, it is necessary to understand, quantify, and
              predict the causal link between exposure to stress and organismal bioenergetics
              and resultant effects on population dynamics. Such studies can be used to
              examine energy budgets during embryonic, larval, and juvenile life stages of
              fish and invertebrates.  The early life stages are frequently the most
              sensitive stages to sub-lethal stresses.  Documenting changes in energy
              allocation between the  metabolic costs of reproduction and body somatic growth
              in the early life stages, as well as reproductive effort of adults in producing
              egg and sperm will provide critical information for understanding: population
              level changes in larval survival and growth (recruitment success); species
              survival; and population and system production in response to variability,
              cycles, and eutrophication events in marine environments.

