Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Origins of Population Structure in Modern Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9977905

Award Number: 9977905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Harpending henry.harpending@anthro.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Compared to other species, humans have low levels of genetic diversity and a
              small amount of differences among populations.  Investigators have proposed a
              variety of demographic models to explain the origins of differences among human
              populations but no one has systematically tested them.  For example, the
              Multiregional model of modern human origins explicitly invokes gene flow as a
              way to unite populations occupying parts of the tropical and temperate Old
              World, but it cannot account for the low genetic diversity unless there was a
              bottleneck that reduced genetic diversity or low genetic diversity was
              maintained by successive population extinctions and recolonizations at the
              local level.  In contrast, the Recent African Origin model of modern human
              origins can account for the low genetic genetic diversity observed in modern
              humans, but traditionally the model has not incorporated population structure. 
              Two variations of the Recent African Origin model that assume a small effective
              population size but propose mechanisms by which population structure can arise
              are the Divided Eden model and the Babel model.  In the Divided Eden model,
              population division preceded a dramatic population expansion in the Upper
              Pleistocene.  The Babel model hypothesizes that population structure in modern
              humans is the result of successive colonization bottlenecks.
	All three of
              these models have potential.  However, no one has systematically tested them
              with available genetic data.  The purpose of this project is to test
              systematically demographic models using computer simulations based on
              coalescence theory.  Simulation results will be compared to five datasets
              consisting of multiple loci to determine which parameter values for each type
              of demographic model fit the observed data.  These results will not only reveal
              which models explain the origins of population structure in modern humans but
              also provide information on human demographic history.  A power analysis will
              also be performed to determine how many more loci will be necessary to further
              refine the demographic models.  

