Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Elemental and Isotopic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9977873

Award Number: 9977873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1049251            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Rucker rbrucker@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick H. Brown  (Principal Investigator former)
              Peter Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. G. Flocchini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Lesher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris van Kessel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa W. Fan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Isabel P. Montanez  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas M. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977873
Patrick Brown
UC Davis



Abstract


	This project involves the
              acquisition of instrumentation in support of the establishment of a Center for
              Elemental mass spectrometry at the University of California, Davis.  The
              instrumentation to be purchased will be capable of isotope ratio and
              quantitative determination of elements.  The proposed center, in combination
              with the recently NSF-funded facility for H, C, N and O isotope determination
              will provide a world-class facility for inorganic mass spectrometry.  The
              instruments to be purchased include a normal resolution, inductively coupled
              plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS); an ICP-MS equipped with magnetic sector MS
              and multi-collector detection system (MC-ICP-MS); and an ICP optical emission
              spectrometer (ICP-OES).  These instruments will have a broad user base that
              will make optimal use of their varied capabilities.  

	Many disciplines in
              the fields of biological, environmental , geological and engineering sciences
              require detailed knowledge of the chemical and isotopic compositions of
              naturally occurring and laboratory-synthesized materials.  Of special interest
              to the biological and environmental sciences are, for example, the pathways of
              trace constituents in the food web, biological complexation and transformations
              of trace elements in plants, animals and aquatic organisms; the fate of
              contaminants in surface and sub-surface environments, and modeling of watershed
              dynamics.  In the geological and engineering sciences knowledge of element
              abundance and isotopic composition are used to establish evolutionary trends
              from rock successions/suites; to constrain paleoenvironmental parameters and
              paleoclimates and characterize material properties.  What is common among these
              diverse applications of trace elements and isotope systems is the requirement
              of analytical instrumentation capable of measuring elements and individual
              isotopes in samples with high precision and accuracy.

	The requested
              instruments and sample introduction systems will provide analytical
              capabilities to characterize the chemical composition of high solute-containing
              samples and solute concentrations at extreme dilutions with high precision and
              accuracy.  

	Sixteen PIs and senior personnel associated with 9 campus
              departments, 15 graduate programs and three colleges directly support this
              proposal and a significant number of additional faculty will benefit directly. 
              A large number of graduate and undergraduate students will also benefit from
              the proposed center through course work and individual research projects.


