Title       : Acquisition of a High Density EEG Recording System for Research in Cognitive
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9977628

Award Number: 9977628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104475             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Hoffman hoffman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Whalen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Landau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colin Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. James Hoffman and his
              colleagues will purchase a 128 channel Event Related Potential (ERP) recording
              system from Electrical Geodesics Inc. The 128 channels provide a sufficient
              sampling density to accurately characterize voltage fields on the scalp. ERPs
              provide high temporal resolution in measuring the electrical activity of the
              brain, much higher than alternative methods such as PET or fMRI and the dense
              measuring field of the requested instrumentation will help to bring spatial
              resolution to a high standard. This system will be used by a number of
              researchers to pursue a variety of linguistic and cognitive studies. Three main
              lines of experiments will be pursued. The first is designed to illuminate the
              nature of spatial organization in children with William's syndrome, a rare
              genetic defect which results in profound spatial deficits together with spared
              language ability. This unique cognitive profile is of great interest because it
              offers the possibility of understanding the brain mechanisms underlying
              breakdown and sparing in the development of different knowledge systems. ERPs
              recorded in conjunction with behavioral measures will help determine whether
              the spatial deficits in Williams syndrome are due to early attentional
              processes or deficits in working memory that are specific to spatial location.
              Related experiments will explore the interaction of deficits in spatial
              representation with relatively spared comprehension of spatial language. The
              second line of experiments will provide information on the brain mechanisms
              responsible for different aspects of language comprehension in normal adults,
              in particular, the brain's ability to extract phonological features and combine
              them into well-formed syllables. A third line of experiments will examine the
              nature of numerical representations in the brain, including the representation
              of magnitudes and their mapping to symbolic representations among normal adults
              and children. In each of these cases, ERP methodology will allow better
              understanding of the localization and time course of brain processes underlying
              cognitive abilities and thus advance current theories of cognition. The
              researchers will also use the system to train undergraduate and graduate
              students and will make the instrumentation available to a wide range of
              researchers.
