Title       : Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Facility to Study Earth and Environmental
               Systems and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9977209

Award Number: 9977209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg B. Arehart arehart@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Regina N. Tempel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Karlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon R. Poulson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Shevenell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977209
Arehart

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides partial support of the costs of acquiring a stable
              isotope facility to study Earth and environmental processes at the University
              of Nevada, Reno.  The facility will be composed of two major components, which
              have been selected based on the large numbers of analyses anticipated for the
              facility, and the diverse nature of the studies to be supported by this
              instrumentation, requiring analysis of a broad range of sample types (liquids,
              solids, gases, dissolved components).  First, a dual inlet stable isotope ratio
              mass spectrometer with H/D collectors and a multi-sample manifold, which will
              be used for the analysis of various samples prepared off-line (e.g. silicates,
              carbonates, waters).  Second, a single inlet - continuous flow stable isotope
              mass spectrometer equipped with H/D collectors, a gas chromatography -
              combustion/pyrolysis unit, and an elemental analyzer.  This will be used for
              studies requiring high sample throughput (e.g. ecological studies), and for
              studies requiring C and H isotope analysis of individual organic compounds
              within a complex mixture. Specific examples of ongoing and planned research
              activities that will benefit from this instrumentation include the study of:
              the origin of Carlin-type sedimentary hosted gold deposits; the geochemistry
              and geothermometry of active and fossil geothermal systems; the geochemical
              behavior of sulfur in ore-related igneous rocks; the stable isotope
              geochemistry of organic contaminants in ground water; the biogeochemical
              behavior of nitrogen in forested ecosystems as recorded in tree rings; the
              magnetite - water fractionation factor at low temperature; early diagenesis and
              paleoceanography in the Black Sea; biogeochemical cycling of nutrients at Lake
              Tahoe; dolomitization events in the Great Basin; and continental paleoclimate
              in western North America.
*** 

