Title       : Acquisition of a Spectral Confocal Microscope: Teaching and Research
               Explorations in Biological Sciences in an Undergraduate College Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9977366

Award Number: 9977366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Beltz bbeltz@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9155,9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract
9977366
Barbara Beltz
Wellesley College
Acquisition of a
              Spectral Confocal Microscope: Teaching and Research Explorations in Biological
              Sciences in an Undergraduate College setting
Confocal Microscopy is poised at
              the interface between anatomical, physiological, biochemical, and molecular
              techniques.  The laser microscope therefore is rapidly becoming a centerpiece
              in biological technology, and instrument that should be included as standard
              equipment for departments striving toward excellent teaching and research
              facilities.  With this award, a Leica TCS SP Spectral Confocal Microscope will
              be purchased for the Biological Sciences Department at Wellesley College.  This
              microscope is a critical investment in our next generation of students. 
              Wellesley's productive record in education of women scientists, along with its
              recent progress in attracting more underrepresented minorities to the sciences,
              bodes well for the sustained impact on this instrument on research
              training.
The primary mission at Wellesley College is the undergraduate
              education of women.  This commitment has taken on a special meaning in the
              sciences where women have traditionally been underrepresented.  In the
              Biological Sciences Department, the permanent full-time faculty of 12 members
              maintains high standards for both teaching and research.  The vast majority of
              faculty has extramural funding that supports productive research programs that
              also are focused on training undergraduate students.  Therefore, the confocal
              microscope will not only have an impact on research training, but will also
              enhance the research environment for a high proportion of our faculty.
The 7
              projects that are described in this application represent a wide variety of
              approaches to biological research: studies of prokaryotic systems; cell
              physiology (apoptosis in mammalian cell cultures); neurosciences in both
              vertebrate and invertebrate systems; cell physiology in plants (Arabidopsis
              cytoskeleton).  The acquisition of the confocal microscope will therefore
              impact a broad base of faculty and undergraduate research students in the
              department, as well as specific courses in the curriculum at Wellesley College
              Biological Sciences Department.






