Title       : Development of a Joint UC Berkeley/UCSF X-Ray Crystallography Beamline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9977768

Award Number: 9977768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $792000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Alber tom@ucxray6.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Glaeser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977768

Alber


Abstract


	Synchrotron sources are playing an
              increasing role in solving the most difficult and important problems in
              structural biology.  However, x-ray beamlines are oversubscribed by over
              three-fold worldwide, leading to long delays in data collection , prohibiting
              exploratory experiments and slowing the pace of research.  More beam lines are
              necessary to meet current demand.  This project involves the construction of a
              bright, medium energy, tunable x-ray beamline at the Advanced Light Source
              (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) using an ALS x.1 bend
              magnet source.  Favorable characteristics of the ALS and x-ray optics developed
              at LBNL will allow adjustment of the x-ray beam dimensions to match
              conventional samples as well as microcrystals.  As a result of the high
              intensity of the beam, reading out the detector will be a rate limiting step in
              many experiments.  The endstation will match the capabilities of the x-ray beam
              and meet the technical requirements for most crystallographic work.  Key
              features include a CCD detector, two-theta adjustment, accurate crystal
              positioning optics, cryogenic sample cooling , beam collimation, high-end
              computational resources and suitable safety systems.  A user-friendly facility,
              incorporating new automated methods for data processing, structure
              determination, model building and refinement will make the beam line ideal for
              expert and novice users alike and provide an excellent training setting. 
              

	The participating faculty at UCB and UCSF have a strong record of
              leadership in structural biology.  Current focus areas include gene regulation,
              signal transduction, DNA replication and repair, HIV physiology, enzymes, drug
              targets and complexes, membrane proteins, structural genomics, molecular
              motors, splicing, translational regulation protein folding and design, RNA
              recognition, and protein secretion.  Regular, rapid access to x-ray beam lines
              will expedite these projects.  

	The intensity and capability for
              multiwavelength anomalous diffraction (MAD) experiments will make the beamline
              suitable for the vast majority of crystallographic projects.  The ability to
              analyze microcrystals will accelerate conventional, functionally motivated
              studies and reduce the current requirements for crystal optimization. 
              Together, these features will advance even extremely difficult projects that
              generally require extensive screening to find suitable, strongly-diffracting
              crystals.  

	The beam line is designed to be a low cost, facility suitable
              for all but the most demanding studies.  It will represent a prototype for a
              work-horse facility.  This development strategy will allow relieve pressure at
              the very high intensity beam lines at the Advanced Photon Source, leaving those
              facilities open for projects that require the most intense source of x-rays.
              The beam line will be jointly funded and operated by the UCSF and UCB
              investigators who will utilize 75% of the beam time.  At least 25% of the beam
              time will be made available to worldwide users on a competitive basis.  An
              advisory committee of eminent structural biologists will help make global
              decisions about operations.

