Title       : VIGRE: Department-Wide Infrastructure: Widening the Pipeline for Mathematical
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9977354

Award Number: 9977354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2308198            (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Boggess   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Rundell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Harold P. Boas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Sanchez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9977354

The department's primary goal in implementing a VIGRE program is to
              broaden the training of our mathematics undergraduate and graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows to enable them (a) to carry out mathematical research at
              the highest levels; (b) to communicate effectively with a broad community; and
              (c) to use modern computational techniques in their teaching and
              research.

Expected measurable outcomes include (1) a substantial increase in
              the number of well-trained undergraduate students who will seek further study
              in the mathematical sciences; (2) a significant decrease in the time graduate
              students take to complete a Ph.D. degree in mathematics; (3) an increase in the
              number of first-class research mathematicians produced through our postdoctoral
              training program.

Top European universities have a stratified seminar system
              that encourages active participation from undergraduate students, graduate
              students, postdoctoral fellows, and professorial faculty.  Our proposal for the
              vertical integration of research is a modification of this model, with research
              seminars playing a key role.

Each of our six core research groups currently
              runs a dedicated seminar; approximately half of the speakers are from outside
              the department.  These "upper" seminars are attended by regular faculty,
              postdoctoral faculty, and senior graduate students.  We propose that each
              participating research group run a new "lower" seminar in conjunction with the
              upper one. Participants in the lower seminar will be undergraduate and
              beginning graduate students, who will receive course credit, as well as senior
              graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and permanent faculty.  Students
              will work collaboratively on projects, and they will use the seminar as the
              reporting mechanism for their results.  

To expand the number of
              participants in the lower seminar, we are introducing an accelerated option in
              our undergraduate program to encourage strong sophomore students to enroll in
              upper-level courses, traditionally taken by juniors and seniors, that form a
              prerequisite to beginning research.  Students involved in this research track
              will also enroll in the lower seminar for at least three semesters during their
              junior and senior years.  The most able students will be invited to participate
              in the more intensive summer research seminar; the VIGRE award will allow us to
              pay these undergraduate students a research stipend.  In a related initiative,
              the department has developed a five year combined B.S.-M.S. degree program,
              which will begin in Fall 1999.

The lower seminar is a key feature of our
              plan to broaden the exposure of undergraduate students to mathematical
              research.  Senior graduate students and postdoctoral faculty will help the
              students enrolled in the lower seminar with research projects; and at the same
              time, they themselves will be mentored by senior faculty through the upper
              seminar. We view this interaction of researchers at different levels as an
              important learning experience for all parties.

The Department of Mathematics
              is heavily involved in interdisciplinary research and educational activities
              around the campus.  These are fostered through established interdisciplinary
              programs, joint appointments, joint seminars, collaborative research, and
              co-advising of students.  Scientific areas involved include materials science,
              distributed parameter control, robotic control, and large-scale scientific
              computation.  We envision that the VIGRE award will allow us to expand these
              important activities through our seminar system, which is highly conducive to
              interdisciplinary research.

Texas A&M University in College Station has the
              largest undergraduate enrollment of any single-campus university in the United
              States.  The Department of Mathematics, which teaches over 25,000 students
              annually, has a considerable responsibility.  Developing and maintaining a
              diverse student population is a priority of both the Department of Mathematics
              and Texas A&M University.  Demographic projections indicate that the school-age
              population in Texas will consist of a majority of non-white children by early
              in the 21st century.  There is a critical and urgent need to tap into the
              talent pool among the various ethnic groups within Texas that are historically
              under-represented among mathematics majors and graduates.  We propose to
              greatly expand existing cooperative arrangements with sister universities in
              the Texas A&M University system whereby they can act as "feeder" schools for
              our graduate programs.  Students from these institutions will come to the
              College Station campus after obtaining a bachelor's degree or in some cases a
              master's degree at a regional university.  We will work with faculty at these
              sister institutions to help them structure their curricula to better prepare
              their students to succeed in our Ph.D. program.

Through the VIGRE
              initiative, the Department of Mathematics at Texas A&M University will address
              a national need by increasing the quality and quantity of students who choose
              to pursue a career in mathematical research.


