Title       : Fundamentals of Retention and Transport in Protein Ion-Exchange Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9977120

Award Number: 9977120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham M. Lenhoff lenhoff@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates how protein ion-exchange behavior is related to the
              structure of the proteins and of the stationary phase.  A quantitative
              mechanistic understanding is sought to facilitate the development of more
              systematic chromatographic design procedures than are currently possible.  The
              goal is to aid in design of new sorbent materials, which may ultimately result
              in stationary phases custom-designed for particular separations.
The research
              covers several aspects of preaparative protein ion-exchange chromatography.  It
              extends prior measurements of both linear retention and full isotherms,
              including measurements on closely related protein mutants to probe effects of
              protein structure and of multicomponent isotherms to investigate the role of
              protein-protein interactions.  Uptake experiments employ scanning confocal
              microscopy to monitor intraparticle concentration profiles in real time.  These
              observations of uptake and retention are analyzed in terms of stationary-phase
              structure, which is characterized in terms of both pore-size distribution and
              internal topography, determined respectively by inverse size-exclusion
              chromatography and atomic force microscopy.

These various measurements are
              used to construct mechanistic models of transport and retention within
              
chromatographic particles, and hence of column performance.  Thus, by
              measuring and modelling quantitatively the key mechanisms underlying protein
              chromatography in real commercial stationary phases, this work may be applied
              to industrial bioprocessing and can facilitate improving current procedures.
