Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution ICP-MS for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9977237

Award Number: 9977237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff neffh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Glascock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Michael Glascock and Hector Neff
              will purchase a VG Axiom single collector high resolution ICP-Mass Spectrometer
              system and related components as well as a VG MicroProbe II laser ablation
              system. Like INAA which the laboratory now employs, inductively-coupled mass
              spectroscopy is capable of high-sensitivity, high-resolution multi-element
              characterization of geological materials including glass, metal, lithics and
              ceramics which are often the focus of archaeological provenance investigations.
              ICP-MS also permits the direct determination of isotope ratios which will
              further enhance the provenance determination capabilities of the
              laboratory.

Since 1988 the University of Missouri Archaeometry Lab directed
              by Drs. Glascock and Neff has received NSF funding to subsidize the cost of
              INAA for archaeological applications by researchers at US universities and
              research institutes. This has allowed involvement in approximately 200
              collaborative research projects with archaeologists and  completion of over
              40,000 neutron activation analyses of a range of archaeological materials. In
              the process over 80 students from multiple institutions have been trained and
              this has led to 28 graduate degrees. Provenience determination of materials
              from archaeological sites permits insight into prehistoric mobility and trade
              networks. On the basis of such information it is often possible to reconstruct
              subsistence, economic and political systems. Therefore a wide range of
              archeologists who work with different materials from multiple time periods in
              many parts of the world have relied on the Missouri laboratory for sourcing
              data. ICP-MS provides a less expensive approach to trace element analysis; an
              additional advantage is the ability to determine isotope ratios. With an ICP-MS
              the range of archaeological services provided by the laboratory will be
              increased.

