Title       : Analysis of a Eukaryotic Microbial Mat Community Across Environmental Gradients
               in a Thermal, Acidic Stream
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9977922

Award Number: 9977922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $860454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Henson jhenson@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Ferris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977922

The eukaryotic microbial mat at Nymph Creek in Yellowstone National
              Park is an ideal natural laboratory for a Microbial Observatory designed to
              increase our understanding of eukaryotic microbial genetic diversity,
              ecophysiology, and behavior.  The thermal (50 degrees C), acidic (pH 2.7) water
              near the stream's source creates stable environmental gradients in temperature,
              pH, and light over which changes in microbial populations will be monitored. 
              The mat's biocomplexity is limited near the stream's source but includes the
              red alga Cyanidium caldarium, the most thermophilic alga known, and the
              thermophilic, filamentous fungus Dactylaria constricta var. gallopava. As
              downstream pH and water flow increase and temperatures decline, a concomitant
              expansion of microbial species, including slime molds, protozoa, green algae,
              and diatoms, is expected. Two Nymph Creek sites, defined in terms of differing
              light, pH, and temperature, will be extensively monitored over diurnal and
              seasonal time periods. Contemporary analyses, including microscopic methods and
              rRNA sequencing, will be used to document microbial diversity and analyze the
              mat's microstructure at both sites. Changes in macro- and micro-scale
              environmental conditions in the bulk water and through the vertical aspect of
              the mats will be recorded.  Nucleic acid sequence-based techniques will be used
              to monitor microbial population changes in situ under environmental conditions
              that vary in space and time. Ribosomal RNA sequence-based technologies greatly
              facilitate the study of microbes in natural environments and provide a rational
              platform on which to base phylogeny. However, while these methods are used
              routinely to study uncultivated bacterial populations, the same approaches have
              not been rigorously applied to studies of eukaryotic microbial communities. As
              a result, the discovery of new eukaryotic species and an understanding of the
              diversity and ecophysiologies of eukaryotic microorganisms are largely
              restricted to descriptions of cultivated strains. It is clear that uncultivated
              eukaryotic microorganisms exist and their discovery may represent a vast
              untapped source of new microbial products. Therefore, an in-depth study,
              focused on the ecology of a eukaryotic microbial community, augmented by
              nucleic acid sequence-based methods of detection and classification, cannot
              fail to fundamentally advance current knowledge in this field. Information
              gained from this study will include descriptions of new species, novel strains
              in axenic culture, and measurements of genetic diversity and its relationship
              to the ecophysiologies of indigenous microorganisms.  Of particular interest is
              the interaction between C. caldarium and D. constricta, first described in the
              1970's by Brock and his coworkers, who found that the alga and the fungus
              always cohabit.   However, they did not elaborate on this interaction, which
              could be  symbiotic, parasitic, or merely coincidental.  This pair of organisms
              may represent a primitive ancestor to modern-day lichens, which are usually
              composed of a filamentous fungus and a green alga.  In-depth studies will
              explore possible features of the D. constricta-C. caldarium association,
              including whether the alga provides nutrients for the fungus, whether the
              fungus parasitizes the alga, and whether the fungal hyphae provide a matrix
              that anchors the unicellular algae and stabilizes stream sediment. Melanin of
              fungal hyphae may also protect algae from the harmful effects of intense light.
              In addition, new genotypes of the fungus or alga detected by rRNA sequencing
              across environmental gradients will be cultured. The distributions of fungal
              and algal 18S rRNA genotypes will determine whether unique genotypes correlate
              with ecological niches.  Nymph Creek provides an accessible outdoor laboratory
              where microbes that form luxuriant  bright green microbial mats can be observed
              by researchers, students and the public. Knowledge from the Nymph Creek
              observatory will be shared via outreach and internet activities. These
              activities should increase public awareness and appreciation of microbial
              diversity, biochemical microbial activities, and their influences on
              ecosystems.
