Title       : Collaborative Research: Microbial Observatory at an Alkaline, Hypersaline,
               Meromictic Lake (Mono Lake, California)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9977901

Award Number: 9977901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Jellison jellison@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Microbial Observatory focuses on the microbes found in Mono Lake, an
              alkaline, hypersaline, currently meromictic (lighter, less saline water
              overlies heavier, more saline water throughout the year) lake located east of
              the Sierra Nevada in California. There are a number of reasons why Mono Lake is
              an ideal site for a Microbial Observatory. It is a well-defined, ecologically
              simple, microbially dominated ecosystem for which long-term ecological and
              limnological data exist. Mono Lake is a hydrologically simple system, which
              makes modeling tractable, yet it contains complex gradients of chemical and
              physical variables as a result of meromixis. The lake is located close to a
              major field station (the Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory,
              administered by the University of California, Santa Barbara). There are ongoing
              studies of the lake's physics, plankton ecology and biogeochemistry that
              provide a comprehensive framework for the microbial studies. Mono Lake is
              currently undergoing a human-induced (and thus predictable) limnological
              transition which imparts a predictable temporal trajectory to physical,
              biogeochemical and ecological processes. This change mirrors past, natural
              events in Great Basin lakes resulting from climate oscillations and similar, if
              less extreme, changes in physical limnology might be expected in other lakes. 
              Mono Lake represents an extreme environment that is likely to harbor unique
              microbes. However, relatively little is known about the types of microorganisms
              dwelling in Mono Lake, their phylogenetic diversity, taxonomy, ecology or
              ecophysiology. For example, recent phylogenetic analysis of an important
              phytoplankton demonstrates it to be a new class of algae with unusual
              physiological properties and biochemical composition. While abundant bacterial
              populations and the existence of pronounced bacterial plates have been noted
              before in Mono Lake, the temporal and spatial variation in diversity of the
              bacterial community has only recently begun to be investigated. The primary
              goal of this research is to examine the distributions of Mono Lake microbes and
              to understand the response of microbial assemblages to the gradients of
              physical and chemical variables in relation to temporal changes driven by
              hydrodynamics. The specific objectives of the project are to: 1) Identify and
              characterize the microbial assemblages in the unique Mono Lake ecosystem. 2)
              Determine the spatial and temporal variation of the Mono Lake microbial
              assemblage, particularly in reference to evolving meromixis. 3) Determine the
              response of the microbial community to physical processes, especially
              short-term and small-scale variation in mixing (for example, enhanced vertical
              diffusion as a result of  boundary mixing or localized gravitational
              circulation). 4) Provide a mechanistic understanding of the interactions
              between the physical/chemical structure and microbial assemblages as the basis
              for predictive (long-term) modeling of the relationship between microbial
              processes, lake biogeochemistry
and primary production. This project provides
              a unique opportunity to identify novel microorganisms and define interactions
              among microorganisms in complex gradients of physical/chemical conditions
              usually only encountered at sediment-water interfaces. This is a collaborative
              project involving Drs. James Hollibaugh and Samantha Joye, University of
              Georgia, award #9977886, Dr. Robert Jellison, University of California, Santa
              Barbara (#9977901) and Dr. Jonathan Zehr, University of California, Santa Cruz
              (#9977892).


