Title       : Development of SQUID NQDR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9977438

Award Number: 9977438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $522053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund P. Day phsepd@physics.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Warncke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale E. Edmondson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              and Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Edmund P. Day of Emory
              University will develop a  Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID)
              Nuclear Quadrupole Double Resonance (NQDR) Spectrometer.  This state-of-the-art
              spectrometer will have sufficient sensitivity to detect quadrupolar nuclei at
              the active sites of proteins.  Day and colleagues will then exploit this new
              spectrometer in several metallo-enzyme and model metallo-enzyme studies.  The
              new spectrometer will have the following capabilities:  1) a superconducting
              quantum interference device as a detector; 2) adiabatic fast passage detection
              of the longitudinal magnetization of the solvent protons; 3) a very low sample
              temperature; 4) a very low detection field; 5) rapid polarization of the proton
              magnetization; 6) two quenchable superconducting magnets; and 7) a mu-metal
              shield.  

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful
              tool available to chemists and biochemists for the elucidation of the structure
              of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, characterize specific
              arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
              interactions between molecules in solution.  The significance of this new
              instrument is that it will directly study the isotopes that NMR spectroscopy
              can only study indirectly.  In combination, then, SQUID NQDR and conventional
              NMR will cover essentially all of the elements in biology.  
