Title       : Acquisition of High-Density EEG/ERP Equipment for Cognitive Psychology and
               Cognitive Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9977198

Award Number: 9977198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279635             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Richards richards-john@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon C. Baylis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Schatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. John Richards and his collaborators
              at the University of South Carolina will purchase instrumentation necessary to
              establish a high-density EEG/ERP recording laboratory in the Department of
              Psychology. High-density EEG/ERP recording is a recently developed technique in
              which 128 electrodes are used to record scalp electrical potentials. These
              changes are hypothesized to be related to specific events in the cortex that in
              turn are closely related to psychological processes. The instrumentation allows
              the testing of cortical source generators and will be used for research and
              research training in cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience. The
              System has three components: 1. A NetAmps recording system and ancillary
              equipment made by Electrical Geodesics Inc. for high-density acquisition of EEG
              and ERP; 2. Software for source modeling of the cortical potentials; 3 related
              equipment including a computer for experimental testing, network switches to
              provide a virtual laboratory to allow access to the EEG/ERP equipment. Support
              is also provided to personnel to aid in the installation and maintenance of the
              equipment and laboratory.

The scientists with primary access to the
              instrumentation are involved in research and research training in the study of
              the neural basis of behavior and cognition and engage in hypothesis driven
              basic scientific research. Topics include reading, attention and perception,
              the development of the brain and brain control of attention and object
              cognition. It will be possible for example to study the psychophysiology of
              attention in infants aged 2 to 6 months and gain insight into the cortical
              processing involved in reading. The University of South Carolina Department of
              Psychology currently runs an NSF Summer Research Institute for Undergraduates
              and students will be permitted to participate in experiments which utilize this
              instrumentation. It will also be available for teaching and research purposes
              to both graduates and undergraduates.

