Title       : MRI: Development of Instrumentation for Direct Measurement of Forces Between a
               Colloidal Particle and a Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9977459

Award Number: 9977459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Dickinson dickinso@che.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9977459
Dickinson, Richard B

Abstract

Development of Instrumentation
              for Direct Measurement of Forces Between a Colloidal Particle and a
              Surface

	The interaction forces between particles and surfaces are of
              central importance to several current industry and biomedically relevant
              research projects at the University of Florida (UF).  These include research
              efforts in the NSF Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and
              Technology (ERC) that focus on relating interparticle forces to dispersion and
              flocculation of particle suspensions.  Of particular interest in this ERC is
              the role of polymer-induced colloidal forces such as steric and bridging
              interactions.  The ERC is also investigating the role of particle surface
              properties in particle flocculation and deposition to surfaces in efforts to
              develop new and enhance existing particle separation processes.  In other
              efforts at UF, the mechanism of bacterial attachment to biomaterial surfaces
              are being investigated in order to develop fundamental understanding the role
              of specific binding of cell surface macromolecule in the process of attachment.
               In other cell adhesion research, a collaborative seed project in the
              Biomedical Engineering Program funded by the Whitaker Foundation is
              investigating the physicochemical basis for specific cell adhesion to
              engineered biomaterial surfaces.  Each of these current projects and similar
              envisioned projects would be greatly aided by the ability to directly measure
              the dynamic interaction forces between colloidal particle and a test surface. 
              Furthermore, successful development of instrumentation to do so would have a
              broad impact on similar efforts elsewhere.
An instrument that is capable of
              directly measuring static and dynamic forces between a single colloidal
              particle and a test surface.  The instrument consists of a single-beam gradient
              laser trap (optical trap), which is used to micromanipulate the colloidal
              particle near the test surface.  The particle position is precisely measured
              from the light scattered from an evanescent wave at the test surface.  The
              force between the particle and the surface is measured from the deflection of
              the particle from the trap center.  Scanning the trap position toward the
              surface allows measurement of the static interaction force as a function of
              separation distance.  Furthermore, by analyzing the Brownian fluctuations of
              the particle position, more complex dynamic forces such asviscoelastic
              polymer-induced forces can be measured as a function of separation distance. 
              To enhance this capability, a piezoelectric device will oscillate the optical
              trap at desired waveforms to allow analysis of the forces in response to an
              applied forcing function.  The main novelty of this approach is to use the
              single beam gradient trap as a force transducer, analogous to a cantilever in
              atomic force microscopy, in combination with evanescent wave light scattering,
              which precisely measures the particle separation distance form the surface.
A
              prototype of the instrument has been developed and has successfully
              demonstrated the proof-of-concept.  The prototype is capable of simultaneously
              and accurately measuring static and dynamic forces vs. separation distance
              between an approximately one-micron colloidal particle and a transparent,
              optically flat surface.  The sensitivity of the prototype ranges between 0.01
              and ~5picoNewtons at ~ 1-3 nm spatial resolution.  In terms of sensitivity,
              measurable particle sizes, and spatial resolution, this instrument has
              significant advantages over other available techniques for direct force
              measurement on colloidal particles.
	Based on the successful performance of
              the prototype, it is planned to develop a more sophisticated instrument for
              ultimate systematic use by multiple investigators in multidisciplinary research
              projects at UF.  The proposed instrument will include a much more powerful
              trapping laser and a piezoelectric position device for more dynamic control on
              the position of the optical trap.  Also, it will be capable of measuring
              backscattered light form the trapping laser, which will allow detection of
              submicroscopic particles in the trap and a means to calibrate the trap far from
              the surface.  Cooled photomultiplier tubes will enhance the signal-to-noise
              ratio and provide more precise measurements.  These features will greatly
              enhance the performance capabilities over the prototype.

