Title       : Collaborative Research: Partial Melting of the Shallow Mantle from Thermodynamic
               Modeling of Minerals and Melt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9977416

Award Number: 9977416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Ghiorso ghiorso@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor C. Kress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant is to refine and improve the MELTS program for application to
              problems related to partial melting of the mantle.  MELTS is a versatile
              package of thermodynamic algorithms that allows forward modeling of magmatic
              processes.  Application of MELTS to mantle melting problems has yielded
              considerable new insight into processes of partial melting and melt transport,
              particularly related to sub-ridge processes, but imperfections in MELTS have
              hampered applications to these problems.  During the proposed grant period, we
              will address these defects by increasing the sophistication of the
              thermodynamic models of silicate liquids and pyroxenes and by binding the
              resulting model more strongly to high pressure mineral-melt phase equilibria.
              We will also extend MELTS' capabilities to allow application to depths and
              conditions where important outstanding problems related to mantle melting
              processes remain.  These include (1) the deeper regions beneath ridges (4-6
              GPa), where small quantities of volatiles are believed to generate small-degree
              melts that have great significance to the geodynamics of sub-ridge processes
              and to the geochemistry of erupted MORB, and (2) the mantle wedge above
              subduction zones, where H2O and/or H2O+CO2 play a significant role in
              determining the locus and style of melting, and the composition and volume of
              melts.  Proposed improvements in MELTS will include (1) changing the model for
              the entropy of mixing of the liquid from one of molecular mixing of
              mineral-like components to one of mixing of temperature, pressure and
              compositionally dependent polymeric units of variable stoichiometry. (2)
              Completing our already-initiated work of expanding pyroxenes to incorporate Cr
              and recalibrating the thermodynamic model for pyroxenes with an emphasis on
              matching high pressure pyroxene-liquid phase equilibria (3) Adding complex
              C-O-H fluids, both as a distinct phase and dissolved in silicate liquids, as
              well as associated carbonaceous minerals (carbonates, graphite, diamond). (4)
              Continuing expansion of the database of mineral-melt phase equilibria
              experiments used in calibration. (5) Conducting "ground-truthing" phase
              equilibria experiments to test and improve prototype models.
