Title       : Acquisition of an Automated DNA Sequencing and Sample Prep Core Unit for
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9977691

Award Number: 9977691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip B. Danielson pdaniels@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Bowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Dores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Fogleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1228,9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              AWARD ABSTRACT - 9977691

	This award will fund the purchase of a Beckman
              Coulter CEQ 2000
Automated DNA Sequencing and Sample Prep Core Unit. Based
              on
well-established DNA sequencing technology, this system will provide for
              a
significant increase in the productivity and cost effectiveness
              of
undergraduate/graduate research and education in molecular biology at
              the
University of Denver. Specific research programs that will
              benefit
immediately include National Science Foundation-funded studies on:
              the
molecular evolution of endocrine neuropeptide hormones, avian
              sex
chromosomes, and insect steroidogenesis; the population genetics
              of
endangered species; the use of  site-directed mutagenesis to delineate
              the
structural properties of proteins; and the regulation and
              ecological
significance of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of
              toxin-metabolizing
enzymes. Additionally, use of the automated sequencer in
              collaborative
work in conservation genetics with researchers from the Denver
              zoological
gardens, will further studies of the genetic diversity of
              endangered and
threatened species. 
	Beyond the in-depth training of
              undergraduate and graduate
students in the research laboratory setting, a
              broad range of
classroom-oriented educational goals will be advanced. Benefits
              will be
particularly evident in the molecular-oriented laboratory courses that
              are
at the heart of the new Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Arts
              degrees
in Molecular Biology offered by the Department of Biological
              Sciences.
Department-sponsored biotechnology classes offered to high school
              students
and teacher-training workshops that promote hands-on science
              education at
the secondary school level will also be greatly enhanced. The
              benefit to
high school outreach efforts is immeasurable given that these
              programs
target students in urban and low-income school districts who
              have
traditionally been underrepresented in the natural sciences.
	In short,
              acquisition of the CEQ 2000 DNA Sequencing and Sample
Prep Core Unit will
              provide significant and immediate benefits to
education at the secondary,
              undergraduate and graduate levels, while
providing a cost-efficient means of
              satisfying the growing DNA sequencing
needs of researchers funded by the
              National Science Foundation in both the
Department of Biological Sciences and
              the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry.

