Title       : Consortium for the Development of a Trigger Processor for a High-Energy Physics
               Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9977659

Award Number: 9977659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1082844            (Estimated)
Investigator: Meenakshi Narain narain@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Heintz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9977659
Narain
This proposal requests equipment and engineering support for
              the development of fast digital electronics for the event selection of an
              accelerator-based high-energy physics experiment; the D0 experiment at
              Fermilab.
The D0 experiment is one of two large international collaborations
              at the Fermilab Tevatron collider which are expected to be the flagship of the
              US effort in particle physics until the start of the LHC collider at the CERN
              Laboratory in Geneva Switzerland, expected after year 2005.  In its first run,
              the D0 experiment has
produced results on the discovery of the top quark, a
              measurement of its mass, precise measurements of standard model parameters such
              as the mass of the W boson, and new constraints on phenomena beyond the
              standard model.
With the upgraded Tevatron collider, the D0 experiment is
              expected to study further the properties of the electroweak force and the top
              quark.  Thousands of top quarks are expected to be produced in a search for new
              particles in its decay and new forces in its production.  There will be direct
              searches for the Higgs boson and other signatures of electroweak symmetry
              breaking.  The key experimental signature of these processes is the presence of
              b quarks, which are sufficiently long-lived and sufficiently energetic on
              average to travel a few millimeters from the primary collision point before
              they decay.
The proposers intend to design and build a fast processor to
              identify hit patterns consistent with charged particles from the slightly
              displaced secondary vertex characteristic of a b-quark decay.  This must be
              accomplished in approximately 50 microseconds while the data are being read out
              of the detector.  To achieve the required speed, the device will employ highly
              parallel processing of the data from the silicon microstrip tracker.  It will
              allow efficient isolation of the relatively rare signal events from the much
              more copious background.  Detecting such secondary vertices during detector
              readout would be a new advance for experimental high energy physics.  It opens
              dramatic new possibilities for selecting events with heavy quarks.

