Title       : Algorithms to Improve the Efficiency of Data Compression and Caching on
               Wide-Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a9977336

Award Number: 9977336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amar Mukherjee amar@eola.cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to develop new lossless text compression
              algorithms and software tools to incorporate compression in MIME/HTML
              standards. The approach consists of encoding the text to exploit the natural
              redundancy of a language via the use of a dictionary and then compressing it
              using a pre-existing compression algorithm. The encoding scheme depends on the
              specific characteristics of the compression algorithm and the Bzip2 algorithm
              based on Burrows-Wheeler transform is used as the main backend compression
              algorithm. A basic understanding of the interaction of the encoding schemes and
              the compression algorithms is developed in this research project. The
              performance of the algorithms is measured taking into account both compression
              and communication metrics. Infrastructure tools are developed using dynamic
              caching of dictionaries to embed compression into MIME/HTML standards. This
              research will have impact on the future of information technology by providing
              methods for data delivery systems where communication bandwidth is at a premium
              and archival storage is an exponentially costly endeavor. It is expected that
              the new lossless text compression algorithms will have 5 to 10% improved
              compression ratio over the best known pre-existing compression algorithms which
              might translate into a reduction of more than 50% of the text traffic on the
              Internet. The experimental research is linked to educational goals via rapid
              dissemination of results via reports, conference and journal papers, doctoral
              dissertations and masters theses, and transferring the research knowledge into
              the graduate curriculum. Software tools developed under this grant will be
              shared via a web site. 



