Title       : Acquisition of an Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometer for the Shared
               Instruments Facility of the Johns Hopkins University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9977581

Award Number: 9977581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Meyer Meyer@JHUVMS.HCF.JHU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Lectka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Townsend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Karlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bertrand Garcia-Moreno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977581
Meyer

Support from the Major Research Instrumentation program will
              be used to acquire an ion trap electrospray ionization mass spectrometer
              equipped with a high-pressure liquid chromatograph. Both instruments will be
              housed in the Instruments Facility, a shared core resource for major
              instrumentation located in the Department of Chemistry.  The requested
              spectrometer will be the only instrument of its kind at the Homewood Campus of
              the Johns Hopkins University.  The spectrometer will allow high molecular
              weight determinations, in situ analysis of complex mixtures, liquid
              chromatography-mass spectrometry, structural determination, and
              characterization of weakly bound molecular or biological assemblies. 
              Investigators from chemistry or biophysical chemistry will be major users of
              this instrumentation, and nine other Hopkins faculty members will be minor
              users.  The research projects range from supramolecular inorganic coordination
              compounds, coordination complexes of copper and heme/copper, to folding of
              staphococcal nuclease protein.  The spectrometer will be fully accessible to
              research groups in all divisions of the University.  Significantly, the
              instrumentation will be shared with researchers at sister institutions in the
              Baltimore area who greatly rely on the Instruments Facility at Hopkins for
              support.  

Major Research Instrumentation funds will be used to acquire an
              ion trap electrospray ionization mass spectrometer that will be used in a
              variety of research projects that involve large molecules.  The instrumentation
              will be used by a large group of researchers, within all the divisions of
              university, as well as by researchers at sister institutions.  The
              instrumentation will impact students in research training as it will give them
              valuable hands-on experience in mass spectroscopic techniques.

