Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Analysis of Materials and Energy Flux in
               Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9977494

Award Number: 9977494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188721             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford A. Ochs byochs@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Secor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie M. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Stephen Brewer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Threlkeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9155,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9977494

Abstract

Examination of the ways organisms acquire, utilize, and
              transform energy and materials is at the core of many fields in the biological
              sciences including plant and animal physiology, ecology, and biogeochemistry. A
              new laboratory is to be constructed in the University of Mississippi Department
              of Biology that will specialize in such measurements, the University of
              Mississippi Laboratory for Analysis of Energy and Materials Flux in Biological
              Systems. The laboratory will be equipped with instrumentation for examination
              of fluxes of energy and materials through and between biological systems at
              levels of complexity ranging from cells to ecosystems. Precise, real-time, and
              long-term measurements of rates of biological productivity and respiration,
              assimilation efficiencies of enery and materials, and transformations of
              inorganic and organic materials across a heirarchy of biological organization
              will be possible using the instrumentationavailable in the laboratory. The
              laboratory is intended to be a catalyst for collaborative studies between
              researchers and students in other departments at the University of Mississippi,
              and at other institutions. Training of students in research methodologies will
              be accomplished through individual faculty-supervised undergraduate and
              graduate research projects, and through established laboratory courses
              including botany, ecology, microbiology, limnology, and physiology. Instruments
              to be included in the new laboratory include, (1) a Carlo Erba
              carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen-sulfur analyzer, (2) a Shimadzu total organic carbon
              analyzer, (3) two Hewlett-Packard gas chromatographs, (4) a Li-Cor
              Photosynthesis System, (5) a Parr 1266 oxygen bomb calorimeter, and (6)a
              Technicon continuous-flow autoanalyzer. The UM Laboratory for Analysis of
              Energy and Materials Flux in Biological Systems will provide a unique center
              for studies of biologically-mediated energy and materials transformations,
              helping to attract talented individuals of all backgrounds to careers in
              biological science.
