Title       : MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Multiprocessors for Computational Research
               in Sciences and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9977352

Award Number: 9977352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $593435             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shih-I Chu sichu@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Byers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karan S. Surana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chuan-Tau E. Lan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Cravens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
This award will permit the acquisition of a top-of-the-line
              multiprocessor computing facility to support a broad range of cutting-edge
              computational researches in sciences and engineering at the University of
              Kansas (KU). This planned facility is an upgrade of the current facility and
              will be a part of the Center for Advanced Scientific Computing (CASC) at
              KU.

The facility will be managed by a system manager, with technical support
              provided by a group of highly experienced technical personnel. A Supercomputing
              Steering Committee consisting of the PI, Co-PIs, and institutional
              representatives will be responsible for determining system resource allocations
              and establishing a facility expansion policy for accommodating new
              computational research projects.


The facility will serve as a
              multidisciplinary computing platform dedicated to high-performance
              supercomputing. It will be used by the participating faculty and their student
              groups (from 12 different disciplines in physical sciences, biosciences,
              mathematics, and engineering), who have strong needs for a state-of-the-art
              supercomputing facility that provides both a large memory and a high level of
              parallelism. The research projects can be grouped into four major areas, each
              with relevance to national goals: (a) computational mechanics in sciences and
              engineering (Cravens, Bishop, Lan, Roddis, Surana, Tucker), (b) development and
              scientific applications of advanced numerical algorithms (Byers, Chu, Huang,
              Kong, Leimkuhler), (c) nonlinear dynamics and chaos (Chu, Gavosto, Lai, Lan,
              Shi), and (d) simulations of macromolecules, novel material, and biosciences
              (Hanzlik, Kuczera, Laird, Prum, Takusagawa, Torres). 

