Title       : Multi-agent Instructional Communities: A Computational and Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9977960

Award Number: 9977960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly P. Woolf bev@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor R. Lesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Web provides thousands of resources for thousands of communities. However,
              these resources are difficult to locate and do not coordinate, resulting in
              unproductive experiences for users. The PIs propose an agent-based framework to
              reason about and retrieve appropriate materials, providing meaningful user
              guidance. These agents will be in the area of instructional technology and will
              employ user modeling and planning to provide robust performance despite
              changing availability of resources, modifications in the network configuration
              and variable user needs. Agents will communicate and select specialized
              learning resources to solve aspects of larger learning problems. They will
              negotiate distribution of learning tasks among available resources ensuring
              that all aspects of the total problem are addressed in a coordinated manner. A
              simulated large-scale on-line learning community will be constsructed to
              demonstrate the intended behavior. The simulation will simplify learning and
              tutoring yet will include conflict resolution and propose methods to avoid
              failure. It will illustrate qualitative, quantitative and visual benefits of
              the integrated community and explore the properties of on-line communities,
              anticipating and avoiding problems that arise as massive on-line learning
              communities develop. The PIs will demonstrate which techniques are productive,
              which impractical and which are scaleable in a massive network.


