Title       : RUI: Regulation of Inflorescence Architecture in Pea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a9977087

Award Number: 9977087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Singer ssinger@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norris A. Armstrong  (Principal Investigator former)
              Philip Camill  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9141,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Inflorescence architecture, the patterning of reproductive branches, affects
              fruit and seed yield in natural and agricultural settings.  The diversity of
              architectural patterns contrasted with the highly conserved nature of essential
              flowering genes provides an intriguing puzzle for developmental and
              evolutionary biologists.  Multiple pathways lead to inflorescence development. 
              An in-depth comparative analysis of several model systems with distinct
              inflorescence typologies will lead to an understanding of the shared pathways
              in inflorescence development, as well as the genetic modifications resulting in
              diversification of inflorescence types.  Pea (Pisum sativum) is a good model
              system for the comparative analysis of inflorescence development because it has
              a one-step more complex inflorescence (compound vs. simple raceme) than the
              extensively studied Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum systems.  Also, homologs of two
              key flowering genes in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum have been cloned and have a
              mutant phenotype in pea:  PFLO[unifoliata (uni)] and PSQUA [proliferating
              inflorescence meristem (pim-1].  The mutant phenotypes are similar to those in
              the other systems, but have distinctive effects on the overall architecture of
              the plant.  Ten genes have been identified that have a primary role in specific
              regions of the inflorescence.  A model will be constructed explaining how these
              genes interact with themselves, the environment, and genes that regulate
              flowering time through the production or control of transport of a floral
              inhibitor and a floral promoter.  Two genes that regulate inflorescence
              development will be investigated.  Mutants of COCHLEATA (COCH) affect both
              vegetative and reproductive growth.  A subtle asymmetry in size and shape of
              stipule pairs is greatly enhanced in each of the four coch alleles being
              investigated.  This results in a 'front-back' asymmetry that is inconsistent
              with a model of leaves being initiated spirally.  COCH is responsible for a
              graft transmissible factor.  Wild-type scions grafted onto coch mutants develop
              aberrant flowers similar to those found in the mutants.  Sepal number varies
              and secondary flowers often form in the axil of the first sepal initiated.  The
              double mutant coch pim-1 does not flower which is indicative of two partially
              redundant pathways of flowering.  The role of COCH in regulating shoot
              architecture will be analyzed by: 1) developmental morphological studies; 2)
              grafting and tissue culture experiments; 3) investigation of interactions of
              coch with other flowering mutants and environmental factors; 4) genetic and
              histological comparisons of the stipules and sepals in coch and COCH plants to
              assess the relationships between leaves and sepals; 5) investigations of the
              expression patterns of the PFLO and PSQUA in coch; and 6) testing of the
              hypothesis that COCH is the homolog of FRUITFULL (FUL) in Arabidopsis, since
              ful-1 has many phenotypic similarities to coch.  Genes that regulate the number
              of pods produced by an axillary inflorescence branch will also be
              characterized.
  Understanding how inflorescence development is regulated has
              the potential to increase crop yield.

