Title       : PEET: A World Monograph of the Therevidae (Insecta: Diptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a9977958

Award Number: 9977958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Irwin m-irwin2@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Yeates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Wiegmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9977958
Irwin, Wiegmann, and Yeates
	In a renewal of their productive and
              ambitious study of the world's therevid flies (some known as stiletto flies),
              presently with 4,000 or so described species, the team of Michael Irwin
              (University of Illinois), Brian Wiegmann (North Carolina State University), and
              David Yeates (University of Queensland, Australia) continues a program of
              taxonomic monography, student training, and computer databasing, toward the
              goal of a comprehensive understanding of the biological diversity, evolution,
              and biogeography of this primitive group of dipteran insects. This is one of
              three active projects on dipteran diversity supported through the PEET
              activity, Partnerships for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy. Museum collections
              of these insects, not especially abundant because of the rarity of adults, have
              been greatly augmented through field expeditions in several countries, with an
              emphasis on collecting immature stages to acquire a complete description of
              life cycles from larvae to adults of as many species as possible. Larvae of
              these flies usually live belowground, and feed upon other insects or soil
              organisms; their predaceous habits are thought to have ecological effects in
              the plant-root zone, but unreliable taxonomic identification impedes the study
              of these and other interesting biological problems. Databasing of the specimens
              now encompasses over 60,000 collections, and continues with new material from
              understudied arid regions in Australasia, India, and South America. The
              acquisition of taxonomically informative morphological characters, including
              micro-morphological features observed by scanning electron microscopy, will be
              augmented with molecular-systematic analyses of nuclear and mitochondrial
              genes, to construct a framework phylogeny for the generic and tribal
              classification of the group. Clades with a manageable number of species then
              become the focus of intensive revisionary and monographic analysis, with
              research products including interactive identification keys, images and
              illustrations, geographic distribution maps, and nomenclators of valid
              scientific names and taxonomic synonyms. 
	Training of specialists in the
              classification, biology, and evolution of diptera continues during the renewal
              project, and involves students at undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate
              levels. As well, retired taxonomic specialists in Denmark and Russia have been
              welcomed onto the team, and will help mentor students in the study of
              particular regional groups of therevids. Database development continues on
              MANDALA, the specimen database created for this project, which has proved
              useful to several other PEET projects focused on other organisms. Work
              continues on this, and on related identification software, to make these
              available over the web as tools for taxonomic analysis in entomology and other
              disciplines. The project benefits from significant and commendable support from
              private sources like the Schlinger Foundation, which has made possible a
              world-wide perspective in the conduct of the research and training.


