Title       : Magnetic Correlations and Quantum Critical Points
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a9977300

Award Number: 9977300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meigan C. Aronson maronson@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977300
Aronson

This is an experimental condensed matter physics project
              that will investigate the novel T=0 magnetic phase transitions in several rare
              earth and actinide intermetallic compounds. The magnetic phase transition in
              these materials occurs below any experimentally accessible temperature or
              energy scale so the time and length scales of magnetic correlations are coupled
              in an unusual way. The research will investigate these correlations in an
              integral fashion. Their time decay will be studied using inelastic neutron
              scattering, AC susceptibility, and direct measurements of the time dependence
              of the magnetization. The objective of the measurements is to identify the
              region of the temperature-composition or temperature-pressure phase diagram on
              which magnetic correlations develop freely, and regions in which disorder or
              other intrinsic effects the scale for correlations. By comparing systems in
              which disorder is minimal or profound, and those in which the disorder involves
              moment dilution or disorder n the chemical environments of the magnetic
              moments, a microscopic criterion will be developed fot he extend of the truly
              critical regime of these unusual magnets. The effects of moment disorder will
              be studied in Ce1-xLaxRu2Si2, U1-xThxPdxAl3, while ligand disorder is varied in
              CeRu2(Si1-xGex)2 and Ce(Ru1-xTx)2Si2, (T=Fe or Ni).
%%%
This experimental
              condensed matter physics project investigates the unusual magnetic behavior in
              structurally complex rare earth and actinide intermetallic compounds. The
              magnets in these materials are thought to order only at absolute zero, which is
              not experimentally obtainable. As an alternative, information about the
              magnetic behavior is sought by studying the fluctuations in the magnetic
              properties over temperature intervals down to the lowest temperatures
              available. An analysis of the fluctuating magnetic behavior sheds light on the
              mechanisms tending to correlate the motions of the atomic moments in the
              compounds. The correlations also reflect the influence of defects and chemical
              disorder in the crystal lattices. All these effects must be sorted out to get
              to the fundamental magnetism in these materials. The results are of interest
              from both fundamental and technical viewpoints. The research provides excellent
              training in the state of the art experimental methods. The female professor in
              charge of this project is noted for her educational contributions.

