Title       : Plant Centromere Functions Defined by Tetrad Analysis and Artificial Chromosomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9872641

Award Number: 9872641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2274211            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne K. Preuss dpreuss@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurens J. Mets  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The chromosomes of higher organisms contain centromeres -- highly specialized
              regions that are essential for chromosome inheritance during cell division.
              Through the assembly of a unique structure, the kinetochore, centromeres form
              attachments to the spindle fibers and direct chromosomes to each daughter cell.
              Centromeres undergo dramatic changes in morphology through the cell cycle,
              alternating between an extended conformation during cell growth and a condensed
              form incorporating millions of base pairs during mitosis and meiosis. Despite
              their fundamental role in chromosome inheritance, the DNA sequences that are
              necessary for centromere function are understood only in single-celled
              organisms, such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The long term goal of
              this research is to identify and characterize the DNA sequences required for
              centromere functions in plants.

To dissect the function of centromeric DNA
              sequences, two plant species will be examined --Arabidopsis thaliana and
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Importantly, the unique genetic properties of these
              plants make it feasible to precisely delineate chromosomal regions that have
              centromere activity. The complete DNA sequence of all five Arabidopsis
              centromere regions will be obtained, and the key centromere elements will be
              identified by using genetic techniques that monitor their function. Comparisons
              ofArabidopsis centromere sequences with each other will allow evolutionarily
              conserved domains to be identified. In addition, comparisons with centromere
              sequences from Chlamydomonas will reveal critical components that are broadly
              shared among many plant species. By combining a genetic and evolutionary
              approach, these studies represent a unique opportunity to describe the
              chromosomal elements that are critical for partitioning genetic material in
              many multicellular organisms.

The information obtained from this work will
              form a foundation for the understanding of the fundamental controls that
              regulate chromosome distribution, the assembly of specific chromosome
              structures through the cell cycle, and the binding of unique proteins near the
              centromere. Moreover, the work will tremendously improve genetic technology in
              plants, including crop species. The centromeres identified in this study will
              enable the construction of artificial chromosomes, making it possible to move
              genes in and out of cells more easily and to control the context and level of
              gene expression. Thus, this system provides an opportunity to impact
              biotechnology broadly while investigating a fundamentally important biological
              process.

