Title       : An Event-driven Programmable Network Architecture for the Next Generation
               Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9872785

Award Number: 9872785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $965906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharghavan Vaduvur bharghav@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent years have witnessed an explosive growth in the volume and the diversity
              of applications that use the Internet.  IN the past, most of the data traffic
              traversing the Internet was reliable, sequenced, non real-time, and between a
              stationary pair of hosts.  However, the next generation Internet will need to
              support very diverse environments (e.g., heterogeneous wireline/wireless and
              mobile networks), applications (e.g., multimedia, WWW, telnet), and services
              (multicast, different classes of quality of service, etc.).    Because
              applications with diverse requirements need to react differently to the
              dynamics of the network, the next generation Internet protocols will, of
              necessity, have to be more proactive in the way they deal with
              application-specific requirements.  Additionally, new services will need to be
              developed and rapidly deployed for emerging applications. 

In this project,
              we propose a novel event-drive programmable network architecture that is
              scalable, robust, flexible, extensible, and simple to program.  Our
              architecture enables on-the-fly instantiation of new network services both by
              users and service providers, dynamic creation of virtual networks, quality of
              service, service advertisement, flexible network resource management, and
              resource arbitration among contending applications.  Our goal is to make
              programming the network almost as simple as programming a stand-alone computer.
              

Our approach is to provide an event-drive view of the network.  A 'virtual
              network' is defined by a set of services, each of which is an <event,
              event-handler> pair.   The network provides a default set of services.   Each
              service provider can create its own 'virtual network context', which is an
              instantiation of a virtual network.  Virtual network contexts have a
              hierarchical structure, i.e., a service provide may allow users or applications
              to create their own virtual network contexts within the context of the service
              provide.  Each virtual network context inherits the services of its parent
              context, but can customize these services or create new ones.  Services can be
              customized either by binding an event to a different event-handler, or by
              creating new events (which can be triggered by other event-handlers).   A
              network-wide 'distributed services directory' maintains a (partial) library of
              available and publicly disseminated services.  In this model, a virtual network
              context can be easily customized piecemeal by changing only a few of the
              services relevant to a user.     At the same time, it is easy to compose new
              services and build entire virtual networks by mixing and matching from a menu
              of publicly available services. 

In order to make programming services
              simple, our architecture provides a simple programming abstraction of the
              distributed network state to applications, thereby reducing the complexity of
              developing services.  A distributed network manager provides simple mechanisms
              for accessing, updating, caching, and locking both local and non-local network
              state belonging to multiple nodes in potentially heterogeneous networks.  The
              network manager is a self-configuring distributed software based on the 'spine'
              infrastructure that we have developed in the past, and also provides resource
              management, resource allocation, and resource arbitration among top-level
              virtual network contexts.   We believe that our combined service model and
              network management architecture is unique in contemporary research, and may
              prove to be an appropriate architecture for the next generation Internet.
              

In order to better understand the subtleties of the architecture and
              service requirements in a real environment, we will build a four cluster
              testbed consisting of heterogeneous wireline/wireless networks spanning the
              country, with clusters located in Champaign, Chicago, Boston, and San Jose.  
              We will build hte infrastructure in collaboration iwth Motorola, TranSwitch,
              and Maverick Semiconductor.   The goal of htis evnvironment is to provide
              quality of service for unicast and multicast flows in a mobile computing
              environment.  We choose this application environment because of its comcplexity
              and our previous expertise in building such environments in the context of hte
              traditional Internet.  We believe that at the ned of this project, we iwll be
              able to develop an architecture that can effectively address the diverse and
              complex requirements of hte next generation Internet. 


