Title       : MetaComputing with the IceT System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9872167

Award Number: 9872167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaidy S. Sunderam sunderam@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Metacomputing with the IceT System

The focus of this project are novel
              methodologies for concurrent and distributed computing on heterogeneous
              networks. The proposed IceT system builds upon prior work in metacomputing
              technologies and extends this mode of high performance computing to incorporate
              cooperative resource sharing, process mobility, and agent technologies. IceT
              facilitates the development of portable software modules and application
              sub-components that are freely exchangeable among users; these modules may also
              be used as vehicles for modifying or enhancing virtual machine (VM)
              characteristics. Such a cooperative metacomputing environment facilitated by
              IceT will provide the traditional benefits of high performance computing on
              networked systems while enabling significant new and emerging distributed
              applications. A core activity of our proposed project will be to investigate
              issues in dynamic merging and splitting of virtual machines and developing
              mechanisms to allocate pooled resources in accordance with owners' constraints.
              

The second major portion of the proposed work involves the creation of a
              computational infrastructure in which processes may be uploaded and
              soft-installed at remote locations, migrated during execution, or travel as an
              agent to several parts of the VM. The basis for this model in IceT is the Java
              language. IceT builds a complete runtime system upon Java facilities to allow
              movement not only of bytecode, but also natively compiled relocatable object
              modules, thereby enabling high efficiencies for compute-intensive applications.
              A major portion of our effort will be devoted to designing and constructing the
              mobile process infrastructure in IceT, with particular focus on resource
              management and security issues inherent in merged virtual machines. 

