Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food-Associated Calls in the Tufted Capuchin
               Monkey (Cebus apella)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9872138

Award Number: 9872138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Food associated calls have been described in several species of primates. 
              These vocalizations serve to attract other group members to the food source but
              their informational content, adaptive significance, and consequences for
              foraging animals are poorly understood.  The ecological factors and
              evolutionary forces that led to the important role of intra-group exchange and
              cooperative foraging activities in human hunter-gatherer societies have been
              amply discussed, but few data from other primate species exist to provide a
              comparative framework.  Understanding the adaptive significance of apparently
              cooperative foraging behaviors in non-human primates and other vertebrates will
              help to address these questions.   This proposal is aimed at understanding the
              informational content and adaptive significance of food associated calls of
              tufted capuchin monkeys.  The vocal repertoire of this species, in terms of
              acoustic structure and socioecological context of vocalizations, will be
              obtained from tape recordings of the animals' vocalizations in Iguazu National
              Park, Argentina.  Field playback experiments will be used to understand the
              informational content of these vocalizations.  Food discovery experiments using
              feeding platforms will be used to evaluate how the food-associated calls are
              affected by different socioecological contexts, and to explore the possibility
              of deceptive use of these signals by capuchins.  Field experiments with models
              of predators also will be performed to test the hypothesis that food associated
              calls are given to reduce predation risk by attracting other groups members to
              the food source.  The predictions of eight different hypotheses on the adaptive
              significance of these calls will be tested using the tape-recordings of
              vocalizations and the results of field experiments.  The results obtained from
              this project will help to understand the origin of apparently altruistic
              behaviors that play an important role in the foraging activities of humans and
              non-human primates.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
