Title       : Evaluating the Impact of Demand Data and Demand Forecasting on Costs in a Supply
               Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9872483

Award Number: 9872483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101392             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer K. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9872483
Ryan
     This grant provides funding for an analysis of the impact of
              demand data, demand forecasting and coordination on costs in a supply chain.
              Unlike most previous work, this research assumes that the distribution of
              customer demand is unknown and that forecasting is used to estimate the shape
              and parameters of the distribution.  Given the forecasting technique, bounds or
              approximations for the expected costs in the supply chain will be determined. 
              These costs will be compared with the expected costs under the assumption of
              known demand distribution.  The difference between these costs will be used as
              a measure of the value of demand data and the impact of forecasting.  The
              impact of the quantity of data, the forecasting technique, and the form of the
              demand process will also be evaluated. This research will also look at the
              impact of coordinated inventory control.  Three levels of coordination will be
              modeled:  (1) no information sharing and no coordination, (2) information
              sharing but no coordination, and (3) information sharing and coordination. The
              expected costs for these three models will be compared to evaluate the impact
              of information sharing and coordination efforts on costs in the supply chain.
              In addition, these costs will be used to determine which stages of the supply
              chain benefit most from coordination.
     The results of this analysis will
              provide useful insights on the value of demand information and the impact of
              demand forecasting on costs in the supply chain.  These models are particularly
              applicable to new products or fashion items, i.e., items for which there is
              little demand information available, and thus the traditional assumption of
              known demand distribution is inappropriate.  In addition, the analysis will
              evaluate the value of supply chain coordination and provide methods in which
              members of the supply chain can be induced to participate in coordination
              efforts.  Given the increasing popularity of coordination initiatives between
              retailers and manufacturers, this research will provide important insights into
              the real benefits of information and coordination.



