Title       : Optoelectronics M.Sc. Specialization at Washington State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9872423

Award Number: 9872423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Hudson scott hudson@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Torruellas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mark G. Kuzyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Trevisan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shira Lynn Broschat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond S. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Physics, the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
              Science and the College of Education at Washington State University (W. S. U.)
              are developing a new educational/training paradigm that prepares students for
              high-technology careers in the area of optoelectronics.  In particular, a new
              M.S. degree specialization that draws on the strengths of these two units.  The
              M.S. is designed to fill the need for educating and training students for an
              industry that requires more preparation than a traditional bachelor's degree,
              yet does not require the theoretical rigor of Ph.D.  The proposed program will
              provide an accelerated curriculum that will train the next generation of
              scientists and engineers who will play a significant role in the
              optoelectronics revolution.
	The high-tech industry, particularly small- and
              medium-sized companies, has realized that the new global environment demands
              that scientists/engineers easily adapt to rapid technological changes by
              drawing on a solid problem-solving-oriented educational background.  The main
              objective of the proposed work is to integrate cutting edge research and
              technology into the education of young scientists and engineers by exposing
              them to real hands-on problems.  The overall philosophy of the new M.S. is to
              educate and train students through a series of laboratory-based research
              experiences in which the student will be required to participate actively as a
              member of a team.
	The planned curriculum combines courses in basic science
              and technology including Electromagnetism, Quantum Mechanics, Quantum
              Electronics, Nonlinear optics (which are taught in the Physics Department),
              Optical Signal Processing, and Optoelectronics (which are taught in the
              Department of Electrical Engineering).  In addition to these traditional
              courses, students will have a two-semester hands-on laboratory course that will
              include peer instruction and team work.  The laboratory course is designed to
              give students a solid introduction to optics and experimental techniques in
              followed by challenging laboratory projects. 

