Title       : A Functional Genomics Program for Soybean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a9872565

Award Number: 9872565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4460359            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lila O. Vodkin l-vodkin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Keim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nevin D. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest F. Retzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Polacco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randy C. Shoemaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative and coordinated effort to provide the tools and the
              scientific knowledge base that will allow a rapid expansion of basic and
              applied research in functional genomics for the entire community of soybean
              researchers, and consequently those interested in all legumes. Soybean has many
              biological and economic features that make it attractive for moving rapidly
              with the application of functional genomics. Soybean is the third most
              economically valuable crop to the U.S. agricultural economy. Soybean accounts
              for over 80% of the edible consumption of fats and oils in the U.S. The U.S.
              accounts for fully 69% of the world soybean trade. Annual production value is
              approximately 17 billion ($U.S.) and the value of exports exceeds 6 billion
              ($U.S.). This project builds on an existing partnership with the soybean grower
              associations, who are funding the creation of a soybean expressed sequence tag
              (EST) database that forms the foundation of this project. The specific
              objectives and approaches are:

1. To develop the tools of functional
              genomics for use in soybean. These will include testing of the feasibility of
              high-density arrays, DNA microarrays, and SAGE (serial analysis of gene
              expression) techniques with appropriate tools for data analysis.

2. To apply
              the tools of functional genomics to develop baseline, global expression data
              for certain tissues and stages of development to aid in identification of
              useful promoters and genes and to test these approaches for selected biological
              questions. Identification of genes involved in biological pathways unique to
              plants including cell wall synthesis and flavonoid metabolism, is a specific
              focus as is developing detailed expression pattems in root development under
              different stress conditions.

3. To create a framework for physical mapping
              and comparative genomics of soybean with other plants by isolation and end
              sequence analysis of bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) that represent
              loci identified and mapped by simple sequence repeats (SSRs) and restriction
              fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) that are dispersed throughout the
              genome.

4. To host workshops on functional genomics approaches in order to
              stimulate transfer of the technology to other soybean researchers and thus
              enhance application of these approaches to a wide range of biological
              problems.

The proposed research will result in development and distribution
              of tools for global gene expression and physical mapping. Public information to
              be derived from the project includes release of: (a) baseline global expression
              data for different organ systems in soybean; (b) a set of 3' sequences from
              30,000 unique soybean cDNAs; and (c) genomic sequence data that will mark over
              1000 positions on the soybean genetic map. Many questions of biological
              importance can be gleaned from the development and wide distribution of these
              tools to be used for global analysis of gene expression and organization by any
              researchers who address fundamental problems on the organization and expression
              of plant genes.

