Title       : Engineering Education: Assessment Methodologies and Curricula Innovations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a9872498

Award Number: 9872498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $922790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry J. Shuman shuman@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey J. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-72498  Shuman    University of Pittsburgh - Engineering Education: 
              Assessment Methodologies and Curricula Innovations    This project addressees
              the crucial problem of how to best assure the engineering students receive a
              quality education, one that will enable them to make important contributions as
              professionals and citizens.  In particular, the PI's will study how to evaluate
              engineering education programs, both for accreditation and to assess the
              increasing number of innovations that have resulted from almost a decade of NSF
              and private foundation funding.  With the introduction of the "EC-2000"
              accreditation criteria, engineering programs now must develop and implement
              systems for continuous improvement.  Faculty must demonstrate that the outcomes
              important to the mission of the institution and the objectives of the program
              are being met via sound measurement, and must give evidence that these results
              are applied to the further development and improvement of the program.    It is
              proposed that many of these "improvements" can be adapted from the large volume
              of curricula innovations that have resulted from NSF sponsorship during the
              current decade.  Consequently, it is equally important to assess a set of these
              innovations, particularly in terms of their educational value, reliability,
              implementation and maintenance costs, and ease of transportability to other
              institutional and/or programmatic settings.    Thus the project focus is on the
              two areas of assessment:  that of measuring outcomes and innovation.  This will
              be done through a highly integrated effort involving a team of experienced
              engineering education researchers from six universities spanning four
              Coalitions (Foundation, Gateway, ESCEL, and SUCCEED).  It also involves one
              NSF/NASA sponsored Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE) program (UTEP), a
              comprehensive, nationwide effort to upgrade the quality of science, engineering
              and mathematics (SEM) education.  The multi-disciplinary team of Principal
              Investigators is collecti vely involved in engineering curricula innovation,
              assessment, and educational research.  The results of the investigations in
              this project will be pooled.    The project objectives are to:  - Examine a
              comprehensive spectrum of assessment methodologies;  - Better  understand what
              each can offer engineering educators for outcome assessment;  - Learn how each
              can best be adapted by the country's 1538 engineering programs; and  - Apply
              these methodologies to certain educational innovations in order to both test
              their power as assessment tools and provide more insight into the efficacy of
              the assessed innovations.
