Title       : Maize Gene Discovery, Sequencing and Phenotypic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a9872657

Award Number: 9872657
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14966782           (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Walbot walbot@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A virtual center will be established, comprising 10 investigators at 6
              universities (Virginia Walbot, Stanford University; Vicky Chandler, David
              Galbraith, and Brian Larkins, University of Arizona; Sarah Hake and Mike
              Freeling, University of California at Berkeley; Robert Schmidt and Laurie
              Smith, University of California at San Diego; Martin M. Sachs, University of
              Illinois; and Volker Brendel, Iowa State University). These investigators will
              identify, sequence, and determine the effects of mutating every gene in
              maize.

Dr. Walbot, the PI, has studied the regulation of a mobile genetic
              element, the Mu transposon, for many years. Transposons are pieces of DNA that
              replicate and insert themselves at other sites in the genome. Mu inserts
              preferentially within genes, which causes mutations. Dr. Walbot has developed a
              version of Mu, called RescueMu, which will allow the DNA that flanks the
              insertion site to be cloned in a simple, one-step procedure. This approach
              allows a very powerful strategy for elucidating gene sequence and
              function.

A population of maize plants will be generated that together
              contain RescueMu insertions in every maize gene. These plants will be screened
              for morphological abnormalities. The DNA flanking the inserted RescueMu
              elements will be isolated and sequenced. Overall, this approach allows maize
              genes to be identified and sequenced, and the consequence of disrupting their
              function to be tested. As a second approach to identify genes that are
              expressed in maize, this project will determine partial and complete sequences
              for more than 50,000 cDNAs; (cDNAs are DNA copies of mRNAs). The investigators
              will fabricate microarrays (arrays of immobilized DNAs) which will be used to
              survey expression of each gene in different maize lines and tissues. Finally, a
              simple method will be developed to map these genes to the appropriate maize
              chromosome in a single step. All information and biological materials developed
              during the project will be made available to the maize community in a timely
              fashion.

Maize is the most important crop plant in the U.S., and is a
              distant cousin of Arabidopsis. Consequently, many new genes remain to be
              discovered in maize. It is clear that genes discovered through this project
              will affect agronomically important traits. The information and experimental
              tools developed in the course of the project will be valuable to researchers
              who study not only maize, but rice, sorghum, and other crops. The RescueMu
              technology that will be developed during this project will likely be
              transferable to other important model and crop plants.

