Title       : KDI: Towards Ideal Data Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9872890

Award Number: 9872890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Amos Ron amos@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Donoho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. DeVore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Schroder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid Daubechies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1338,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9872890
Ron
     Advances in communication, sensing, and  computational
              power
have led to an explosion of data.  The size and varied formats
              for
these datasets challenge existing techniques for transmission,
storage,  
              querying, display,  and numerical manipulation,  to
the point where limits on
              their accessibility and portability may
severely restrict their usefulness for
              human knowledge.  This
often leads to the paradoxical situation where
              experiments or
numerical computations produce rich, exquisitely
              detailed
information, for which, at this point,  no adequate analysis
tools
              exist.    In order to address this challenge, the
investigator and his
              colleagues develop a new technology for data
representation based on the two 
              basic principles of   multiscale
decompositions and redundant representations.
                Multiscale
decompositions arrange data into strata reflecting their
              relative
importance.  This allows for rapid access to good coarse
resolution
              of the data while retaining the flexibility for
increasingly fine
              representations.  Redundant representations
allow for a multitude of data
              decompositions.  While this on the
surface appears contrary to the need for
              efficiency, the
redundancy gives the flexibility of choosing
              `best
representations'   from a unified family of representers and
thereby
              provides efficiency and robustness.  The proposed
research is expected to
              deliver major results for: (i) accurate
representation of image and acoustic
              data, (ii) parsimonious
representation of high dimensional data, (iii)
              parsimonious
representation of images and volumetric objects
              with
singularities along curves and surfaces, (iv) acceleration
              of
scientific/engineering computations.
     The KDI initiative takes place
              at a time when intellectual
and commercial life are beginning to feel the
              effects of a
revolutionary combination: sensor ubiquity,
              computational
ubiquity, and internet connectivity.  A clear priority in
              all
fields of commercial, engineering, and scientific endeavor must
be to
              identify and exploit the opportunities available in this
new era.  The center
              of the effort  should be the intensive
development of new schemes for
              representing digitally acquired
data, and for rapidly manipulating those
              representations.  In
fact, advances in this central area have
              tremendous
repercussions, accelerating progress in every other area. 
              For
astronomers straining to detect faint gravitational signals
coming from
              the farthest reaches of the universe, or looking back
in time to the earliest
              moments after creation, searching for
temperature fluctuations that would give
              clues about the central
theories of physics; for geophysicists looking for
              subtle
deformations in the earth's inner structure for clues about
              our
seismic future; for engineers developing new medical imaging
devices; 
              even for Hollywood entrepreneurs wanting more realistic
computer graphic
              simulations for mass entertainment -- data
representation plays a key role. 
              To this end, this project
assembles a team of experts to address issues of
              developing new
data representations and new methods of analysis
              and
manipulation.  The premise of this venture is that significant
advances
              in data representation  require an interdisciplinary
effort, meshing the
              skills and knowledge of theoreticians and
practitioners from varied fields of
              research that involve large
datasets.  Thus, the proposed research team
              consists of
mathematicians, statisticians, computer scientists, and
              engineers
with extensive skills and experience in  the development and use
of
              representations for datasets.  A primary component of the
project is the  set
              of application areas in image and signal
processing, large scale computation,
              and computer graphics.  The
project produces conceptual deliverables in the
              form of new
methods for storing, compressing, denoising, and querying
              data.
It also produces concrete deliverables in the form of algorithms
and
              software for use in the scientific and commercial sector.  The
project serves
              as a national center for data representation.
Interaction between the project
              and other national and
international centers treating datasets is cultivated. 
              The
project also provides a national resource for theoretical
advances,
              techniques of implementation, and software development.


