Title       : Redesigning Engineering Education with Active Learning and Integration Through
               the Engineering Enterprise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9872533

Award Number: 9872533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Plichta mrplich@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Barna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl A. Sorby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl L. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Patrick Joyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-72533  Plichta    Michigan Technological University - Redesigning Engineering
              Education with Active Learning and Integration Through the Engineering
              Enterprise    Michigan Technological University (MTU) has one of the largest
              undergraduate engineering programs in the nation with a major emphasis on
              undergraduate engineering, science  and technology education.  MTU is reported
              to be the 15th largest undergraduate engineering college in the country.  The
              college of engineering offers 10 ABET accredited programs.  Of these programs
              several are also among the largest in the nation, including Mechanical
              Engineering (3rd), Civil and Environmental Engineering (5th), Chemical
              Engineering (7th), and Metallurgical and Materials Engineering (7th).  Of the
              remaining 2000 undergraduate students, well over 95% are enrolled in
              baccalaureate degree programs in science, technology, business and forestry.   
              This project describes the implementation of a major engineering curriculum
              redesign at Michigan Technological University.  The new curricular structure of
              the engineering programs incorporates innovations in completely implemented,
              the new curriculum will impact every engineering student at MTU as well as many
              non-engineering students.  There are five major thrust areas of the project: 
              1) development of a common, first year engineering program, 2) integration of
              math, science, communication and engineering during the first and second years,
              3) development of an interdisciplinary design experience in the 4th year, 4)
              implementation of a interdisciplinary engineering experience for students
              during the 2nd through 4th years, and 5) establishment of a program for
              secondary teachers that will ultimately lead to greater participation of
              underrepresented groups in the engineering profession.  The project will
              involve faculty in every engineering program at MTU, as well as faculty from
              business, economics, physical sciences, mathematics, and communications.  Key
              and unique ingredients of this project are the dev elopment  of personal and
              professional behaviors/skills as an integral part of the student's education
              while at the same time allowing the students to explore their technical
              interest and apply their technical background to 'real world' problems.   
              Faculty and administrators from MTU have been interacting with faculty from
              Coalition schools, including SUCEED, FOUNDATION, and ECSEL, over the past two
              years in an order to identify "best practices" and innovations in engineering. 
              Many of the ideas presented in this project draw on experiences with these
              educational leaders.  However, this project contains a component, the
              Engineering Enterprise, which is a revolutionary concept in undergraduate
              education.  The Engineering Enterprise concept developed by faculty and
              administrators at MTU, working in conjunction with industrial leaders, will
              provide our students an environment in which they can develop professional as
              well as technical skills.  Industrial reaction to the proposed Engineering
              Enterprise initiative has been enthusiastic.
