Title       : Collaboratives to Integrate Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9872731

Award Number: 9872731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal L. Mandock rmandock@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Stephenson-Hawk  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lonzy J. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald W. Grams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick H. Carr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 1081      CIRE OPPORTUNITY FUND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Collaborative to Integrate Research and Education (CIRE)  in  Earth  Systems
               Science (ESS) builds  upon  an  existing  partnership between Clark Atlanta
              University (CAU)  and  the  School  of  Meteorology (SoM) at the University of 
              Oklahoma  (OU).   Formalized through a signed agreement in 1997,  this 
              partnership  has resulted in the establishment  of  a  five-  year, dual
              bachelor of science degree program in physics and  meteorology  at  CAU  and 
              OU.   This  partnership  will  be  strengthened  through the collaboration with
              the  OU  Center  for  the Analysis and Prediction of Storms (CAPS), Talladega 
              College and Atlanta Metropolitan College.    The  strategic goal of the CIRE
              program builds upon that  of  the    CAU   ESS   program.    The   CIRE   goal 
               is    the  institutionalization of initiatives that  allow  students  -  high 
              school, undergraduate, and graduate - the  opportunity  to     understand   
              and    engage    in    cutting    edge,  meteorological/earth systems science
              education, research and  outreach  experiences.  This goal will be  achieved 
              through  the  partnership  between CAU and CAPS by accomplishment  of  the
              following six strategic objectives:    1.    Adapt and develop four (4)
              instructional modules  that    will be infused into existing mathematics,
              physics, computer    science  and  ESS  courses at CAU.  Currently,  over  four
                 hundred (400) students are enrolled per academic year in the    targeted
              courses.    2.    Develop research initiatives at CAU, involving fifteen   
              (15) students and ten (10) faculty, needed to improve  the    predictive 
              capabilities of existing and future generation    mesoscale computer models.   
              3.    Retool  an  existing Weather Analysis  and  Prediction    course and
              associated laboratory at CAU, to allow students    the opportunity to analyze
              meteorological case histories and    to use state-of-the-art analysis and
              prediction tools within    the classroom.    4.    Use  existing 
              state-of-the-art videoconferencing  and     distance learning capabilities to
              allow faculty and students    to collaborate, and to attend courses and
              lectures without    leaving their environments.    5.    Integrate  remote 
              sensing technology  and  Geographic    Information System (GIS) applications
              into its existing ESS    education, research and outreach initiatives.    6.   
              Strengthen  an existing Environmental Data  Management    and  Analysis  Center
              (EDMAC) at CAU that will  result  in    providing  the  resources needed to
              sustain the  developed    initiatives when CIRE funding has ended.    The CIRE
              in ESS will advance the objectives of Georgia's NSF  sponsored Alliance for
              Minority Participation program;  will  further  assist  OU with its efforts to
              recruit  and  retain  Native  American  students in areas of ESS; will 
              strengthen  the  NSF  institution-wide reform of undergraduate education 
              agenda at CAU, and will serve as a model program that can be  sustained at CAU
              and replicated at colleges and universities  throughout the nation.  Through
              broad dissemination  of  the  ESS  CIRE framework and achievement of its
              objectives it  is  expected  that  the current underrepresentation  of  African
               American students in the areas of ESS will be lessened.
