Title       : Comparative Functional Genomics of the CelA Gene Family in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2001  
File        : a9872627

Award Number: 9872627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $819818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah P. Delmer ddelmer@rockfound.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. Spicer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Higher plants are virtual factories for the synthesis of polysaccharides. For
              the major reserve polysaccharide, starch, considerable information exists
              concerning the genes involved as well as the mechanism and regulation of
              synthesis. However, for the major polysaccharides involved in the synthesis of
              plant cell walls, very little similar information exists.  However, for the
              most abundant of all plant polysaccharides,  cellulose, a breakthrough recently
              has occurred in identification of a class of genes called CelA that encodes the
              catalytic subunit of the cellulose synthase. Preliminary analyses indicate that
              the CelA genes comprise a large gene family in plants, and, furthermore, there
              are now indications that other glycosyltransferases that synthesize related
              beta-glycans in plants may share sequence homology and that an even larger
              "superfamily" of CelA-like genes exists in plants. 

The overall objective is
              to carry out an extensive analysis of the large CelA superfamily of genes in
              plants with initial concentration on the specific class of CelAs, that encode
              the catalytic subunit of the cellulose synthase. Efforts will be concentrated
              on the important crop plants corn and cotton, but comparisons will also be made
              with genes from the model plant Arabidopsis.  Specific questions to be answered
               include: How many distinct CelA genes can be identified? What is the
              chromosomal location of the genes, are there indications of gene clustering,
              and do these genes show similarities in genomic organization in different
              plants?  What are the intron/exon relationships among the genes, and can this
              information provide clues as to how the genes function, how they evolved, and
              their relationship to other glycosyltransferases? What is the pattern of
              expression and function of each of the members of the gene family and what is
              the consequence to the plant of mutating individual members of the gene family?
              These latter studies will use three approaches: i) characterization of corn and
              Arabidopsis mutants which have a specific CelA gene disrupted by insertion of a
              foreign piece of DNA;  ii) In situ hybridization to localize mRNA and
              immunocytochemistry to localize CelA gene products in wild-type and mutant
              plants as well chemical, physical and cytological analyses of mutant
              phenotypes; and iii) development of a system for domain swapping in which the
              portion of the sequence encoding the catalytic domain of each identified gene
              is used to replace the catalytic domain of a known glycosyltransferase-a
              hyaluronan synthase of mammals, and to test for appearance of a new enzyme
              activity in a transient expression system.  This last method is proposed as a
              way to confirm the function of each of the encoded proteins under study.

By
              such studies, the goal is to understand why plants have so many CelA genes,
              their function, how they may have evolved, and what the consequences to the
              plant would be when each is disrupted. Such information is critical for future
              design of strategies for the engineering of plants that would have altered
              cellulose properties and/or altered timing or extent of deposition of cellulose
              or related polysaccharides. The development of the novel domain swapping
              technique should prove extremely valuable for the entire scientific community
              to use for assessment of function of individual domains within such enzymes and
              other important membrane proteins and also for identification of other genes
              encoding related glycosyltransferases in plants.

This is a
              multi-institutional proposal involving collaborations with scientists from
              Academia, industry, and a USDA laboratory. The project will also fulfill an
              important training role for an undergraduate and graduate student and a
              post-doctoral scholar who will also participate in the research.

