Title       : Modular Distributed Manipulator System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9872255

Award Number: 9872255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Messner bmessner@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred A. Rizzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard M. Choset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the control and motion planning algorithms for a new
              materials transport and manipulator system called the Modular Distributed
              Manipulator System (MDMS), which has applications ranging from flexible
              manufacturing to package handling.  The MDMS comprises an array of actuators
              each of which can impart a directed force to an object resting upon it.  This
              project develops testbed hardware and algorithms to coordinate the actuators to
              transport and manipulate objects.  The theoretical contributions add to the
              existing literature on distributed manipulation, much of which addresses
              chip-scale actuators.  The MDMS works on a macroscopic scale, where physical
              models are more tractable.  In contrast to MEMS actuator arrays, where mass and
              friction are essentially ignored, the MDMS not only incorporates friction and
              mass, but also explicitly exploits them.  This effort considers two primary
              operation modes: sensorless and sensor-based. Sensorless operation is easier to
              implement and analyze but does not provide the precision of sensor-based
              control.  The MDMS also provides a testbed for evaluating distributed control
              strategies, and this research considers the tradeoff between centralized and
              decentralized control approaches.  These algorithms will be demonstrated on an
              existing eighteen cell prototype.  A larger, more advanced prototype will be
              developed to further test the concept.
