Title       : Fatigue Durability of Concrete Bridge Decks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9872357

Award Number: 9872357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor C. Li vcli@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej S. Nowak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1037,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Victor Li, University of Michigan
The investigation addresses the fatigue
              durability of concrete bridge decks.  Recent research suggests that the fatigue
              cracking can be a precursor to severe failure of concrete bridge docks.  The
              fundmentals of fatigue damage and corresponding remedial action on bridge decks
              are currently poorly understood.  

This investigation focuses on basic
              understanding of fatigue durability of concrete bridge decks and on fatigue
              durability enhancement by the use of fiber reinforcement.  fiber reinforcement
              is especially focused on because of the extensive documentation of fatigue
              resistance enhancement of fiber reinforced concrete (FRC) in laboratory.  The
              mechanism of crack growth under fatigue loading, and aggregated and fiber
              bridging (across a concrete crack) response subjected to cyclic loading, are
              analyzed with a statistical/micromechanics based theoretical model.  In
              addition, the degradation of the fiber/cement and aggregate/cement interface
              are expilicitly accounted for based on experimental observations.

Four
              important consequences of this research are:1) Bridge deck slab design
              procedure against fatigue damage; 2) Fundamental understanding of the
              mechanisms governing fatigue failure of FRC; 3) Micromechanics based model for
              design of fatigue resistance FRC composites; and 4) Evaluation/repair procedure
              of brige decks using FRC.  This research leads to mechanism based structural
              performance design forcing a tight connection between materials and structural
              engineering.  

The approach adopted is combination of experimental and
              theoretical work.  Field data of bridge deck performance and laboratory data of
              fatigue specimens are emphasized.  The nature of this reseach requires combined
              knowledge of bridge engineering as well as composite materials engineering. 
