Title       : A Radiation Hybrid and Cloning System for the Genetic and Physical Mapping of
               the Corn Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9872650

Award Number: 9872650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1830669            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Phillips phill005@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard W. Rines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An efficient means to map genes of corn would facilitate understanding the
              genetic makeup of corn, our major cereal crop. The genome size and complexity
              of corn is similar to that of humans with a DNA content of about 2.5 billion
              base pairs. The placement of human genes in their respective chromosomes is
              greatly facilitated by the use of special Chinese hamster cell lines containing
              portions of the human genome. An analogous system is proposed for corn gene
              mapping with the production of oat lines containing portions of the corn
              genome. Crosses of oats with corn pollen followed by the rescue of early
              developing embryos on a nutrient medium leads to the recovery of plants with
              only one corn chromosome together with all the oat chromosomes. Such plants are
              termed oat-maize chromosome addition lines. The complexity of the corn genome
              is reduced by 10-fold in these plants. Irradiation of these plants possessing a
              single corn chromosome can produce an array of progenies with less than the
              whole corn chromosome present. Such progeny are termed radiation hybrids. A
              series of radiation hybrids allows the placement of corn genes to short but
              highly defined regions of the genome. The goal of this project is to complete
              the series of the 10 different oat-com chromosome addition lines (7 are
              currently available) and, for each chromosome, produce a series of
              approximately 100 radiation hybrid lines. Proof of concept has been completed
              with a radiation hybrid series for chromosome 9. A series of only 12 radiation
              hybrids allowed chromosome 9 to be delineated into 22 distinct subregions. The
              average size of these regions, given certain assumptions, is estimated to be
              8.7 Mb. About 100 evenly distributed genetic markers and 100 radiation hybrids
              would be necessary to define corn chromosome 9 regions at the 2 Mb level; 600
              markers would be needed to adequately utilize a 400 kb level of resolution.
              Advantages of this approach - in addition to high resolution mapping -is that
              any gene can be mapped without the availability of polymorphic forms, the
              gene's physical chromosome location becomes known, and the system is especially
              suitable for high-throughput formats. Arrays of DNA samples ultimately will be
              available to researchers for mapping any gene or DNA fragment to a small region
              of a given chromosome. Other uses of the radiation hybrids include the cloning
              of small segments of corn chromosomes separated from the remaining portions of
              the genome, the isolation of additional markers in a small genomic region
              perhaps as tags for important traits, and the identification of oat lines with
              useful traits such as disease resistance or heat stress tolerance incorporated
              from corn into oat.
