Title       : KDI: Scientific Communication and the Shaping of Knowledge Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9872961

Award Number: 9872961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rob Kling kling@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1338,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Systematic communication about methods, theories, findings, and the state of the
              disciplines is central to modern science.  Patterns of communication between
              scientists have changed substantially, not only since the founding of the first
              journals and scientific societies in the 17th century, but even in the last few
              decades.  Scientists' Knowledge Networks (KNs) are formed of nodes (forums)
              that include meetings, data archives, and documents, such as journals.  The
              structuring of KNs varies from one field to another: "working paper"
              collections play a much more important role in high energy physics than in
              molecular biology; conference  proceedings are much more important in computer
              science than in most of the social sciences.  The structure of KNs in a
              discipline changes over time, with the rise and fall in the importance of
              particular nodes, such as specific conferences or journals.  This era is marked
              by significant experimentation in the use of electronic media in creating and
              restructuring nodes of scientific KNs, with excitement about the expansion of
              scientific communications that these developments enable.  Electronic journals,
              on-line conferences, and disciplinary corpora of shareable data are examples of
              new nodes.  The nodes are not just technologies; they involve varied, but
              complex and subtle social practices for filtering and reviewing acceptable
              communications.  These developments are reshaping the KNs of various fields in
              ways that we do not effectively comprehend, and the viability of these new and
              altered forums has varied across the disciplines.  Prior studies indicate that
              scientists' willingness to trust the value of specific nodes as sources of
              legitimate and reliable knowledge can be pivotal.  We know too little about the
              ways that scientists come to trust and value new forums, to guide effective 
              experimentation. A laissez-faire evolutionary approach risks needless failures
              in the development of new electronic forums or in the restructuring of existing
              forums, leading to wasted resources and knowledge losses.  On the other hand,
              the "best practice" approach risks indiscriminate promotion of communications
              practices that fit only certain fields onto all. This multi-disciplinary study
              will provide an empirically-grounded analytic understanding of  why various
              disciplines structure their KNs as they do. It entails a comparative empirical
              study of the changes between 1970-1999 in the structure of KNs in six fields
              that are at different levels of maturity, that have different KN structures,
              and that have also adopted different forms of electronic media as important
              nodes in their KNs: molecular biology - model organisms, molecular biology -
              protein crystallography, particle physics, astrophysics,  human-computer
              interaction, and information systems.  Data will be drawn from published and
              on-line sources, as well as extensive interviews with editors, forum
              organizers, and active scientists.  Results will be disseminated in the
              scholarly literature and at appropriate cross-disciplinary forums on scholarly
              publication practices.
