Title       : Improving Electric Power Industry Competitiveness Through the Application of
               Artificial Intelligence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9872500

Award Number: 9872500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Tylavsky tylavsky@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Heydt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Karady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith E. Holbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Deregulation of the electric industry is forcing most utilites to be more
              competitive.  To be competitive, utilities need people at all levels that are
              trained to deliver a better product, at a lower cost, with more reliability. 
              The goal of this CRCD project entitled, "Improving Electric Power Industry
              Competitiveness Through the Application of Artificial Intelligence," is to help
              improve electric power utility competitiveness by incorporating, into the upper
              division undergraduate and graduate curriculum, instructional modules that can
              be used to train people in these critical areas.  The instructional modules to
              be developed will focus in the area of the application of artificial
              intelligence to operation, control and simulation of electric power systems. 
              These modules are based on already completed research at the University of
              Washington and Arizona State University. 

These modules will be completed
              with a team of technical researchers, instructional methodology experts and
              computer-based media specialists.  All modules will be computer based and
              disseminated in multiple ways including via the Internet.  Formative assessment
              will be ongoing throughout the life of the project. 

Instructional design
              will center around active learning strategies such as cooperative learning with
              emphasis on team methods; however, instructional design will also include
              components to appeal to the reflective learner as well as students with other
              learning styles.

The results of this work is expected to enhance the ability
              of new graduates as well as electric power engineers perform in the rapidly
              changing, highly competitive world brought on by deregulation of the electric
              power industry.

