Title       : Cross-Linked Sorghum and Rice Physical Maps as a Foundation for Analyzing Genome
               Structure, Function, and Variation in C4 Grasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9872649

Award Number: 9872649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3246755            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Paterson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee H. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Kececioglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kresovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suchendra Bhandarkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew H. Paterson   (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Researchers from a vertically integrated "center without walls" will conduct
              closely coordinated research in structural, functional, and population genomics
              across leading Poaceae (grass family) seed/grain crops, biomass crops, and
              major weeds. The grass family stands between humankind and famine, as most
              calories consumed by humans and livestock derive from sorghum, rice, maize,
              wheat, sugarcane, millet, and other grasses. Population growth and
              industrial/residential encroachment on arable land place greater pressure on
              agriculture to secure higher yields at less cost. Modern capabilities for gene
              discovery open new doors to intrinsic genetic improvement of crops in a manner
              that is consistent with responsible stewardship of the biosphere. By utilizing
              well-established parallels in the organization of genes along the chromosomes
              of different grass genomes, the small genomes of sorghum and rice will be used
              to accelerate study and improvement of crops with much larger genomes such as
              maize and sugarcane. The small Sorghum genome (approximately 760 megabases) is
              the most logical complement to that of rice (approximately 440 megabases) as a
              "grass genome template", and is an important bridge to closely related large
              genome crops such as maize (approximately 2500 megabases) and sugarcane (2500 -
              4200 megabases). This project has four major components:

Genome
              organization.  Physical maps for the sorghum and rice genomes will be developed
              that are "cross-linked" to each other and also to other large genome crops.
              This will accelerate completion of a sequence-ready physical map for rice, and
              will provide reference points to extrapolate genomic sequence data to sorghum,
              maize, sugarcane, and other grasses.

Genome function.  A library of unique
              expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and corresponding cDNA clones will be developed,
              with a target of obtaining sequence information for 10,000 different genes,
              expressed at key stages in the growth and development of the sorghum plant.
              These resources will be used for many applications, including study of gene
              expression at key stages of plant growth and development.

Population
              genomics.  Both a methodological and intellectual structure for investigating
              relationships between naturally occurring allelic diversity at the DNA level
              and morphological/ecogeographic diversity among Sorghum genotypes will be
              developed as a valuable complement to genetic/physical approaches to the
              identification of genes responsible for variation in key steps of plant growth
              and development.

Informatics.  Software and web-based resources will be
              developed and implemented to make genomic data rapidly accessible by remote
              users.

This project, together with links to national and international
              efforts, will yield a well-integrated set of shared resources for intrinsic
              genetic improvement of both seed/grain and biomass crops that are keystones of
              agriculture. Sorghum is a leading cereal grain in arid and semi-arid
              agriculture; ranking fifth in importance among the world' s grain crops. Rice,
              although a minor U.S. crop, provides more calories to humans worldwide than any
              other crop. Sugarcane is arguably the world's most valuable crop at
              approximately $143 billion per year. The sorghum genus also includes one of the
              world's most aggressive weeds - "Johnsongrass" (S. halepense) - that reduces
              yields of maize, soybean, cotton and other major crops by up to 45%. Sorghum
              genomics may lead to new strategies for environmentally benign plant growth
              regulation, either suppressing the spread of weeds or stimulating dense stands
              of desirable forage and turf grasses.

