Title       : WebTP: A User-Centered Web Transfer Protocol
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a9872764

Award Number: 9872764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1150413            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean C. Walrand wlr@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven McCanne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The World Wide Web is now a critical communication infrastructure for
society.
              However, the foundations on which the Web is built are largely ad
hoc and
              haphazard, with a protocol framework consisting of the hypertext
transport
              protocol (HTTP) layered on top of the Internet's universal
reliable delivery
              protocol-the transmission control protocol (TCP).
Consequently, the
              performance of HTTP over TCP suffers from a number of
deficiencies that are
              all rooted in the fact that TCP's byte-stream
semantics are often at odds with
              user goals and the performance
capabilities of end clients and
              servers.

Several ad hoc remedies have been proposed earlier to compensate
              for these
deficiencies, e.g. parallel connections, persistent connections, and
              ACK
pacing. However, all these solutions are overly constrained by
              the
presumption of backward compatibility. We believe that the time has come
              to
adopt a holistic and integrated approach embodied in a new
              transport
protocol tailored specifically for the Web. Herein, we propose a set
              of
research tasks to study, design, implement, test and evaluate our new
              ``Web
Transport Protocol" or WebTP.

Our approach is based on a conceptual
              model of user validation, application
semantics, network and client states,
              and a flexible protocol that reflects
this syntax and semantics. The
              conceptual model emphasizes the interaction
between document structure,
              network state, and user preferences. Our
research prototype will leverage the
              well-established and highly successful
congestion control framework of TCP and
              vastly improve upon the existingWeb
protocols by bringing user requirements
              into the design loop. To do so, we
will apply the principles of Application
              Level Framing (ALF) to the design
of WebTP. ALF says that to optimize
              communication paths within the
application and across the network, an
              application's semantics (i.e. its
user requirements) should be explicitly
              reflected in the design of its
network protocol. Although ALF has been adopted
              in modern protocols like
the Real-time transport protocol (RTP), paradoxically
              it has not been
systematically applied to previously existing applications
              like the Web.

We will study the following questions:

* How do we best
              structure the ALF-based Web protocol in terms of
congestion control
              algorithms, loss recovery schemes, packet framing
methodology, header formats,
              toolkit APIs, and so forth? How do these
design decisions impact network
              performance, user satisfaction, protocol
complexity, and server load?

* How
              then does the client elicit user preferences in the least
              obtrusive
fashion?

* How does the receiver (client) learn of the content
              structure of a
server's Web data and combine that structure with its estimate
              of network
state and user preferences to control selective transmission via
              WebTP?

* How should functionality and state information be distributed among
              the
source (server or proxy), client, and user and what are the design
              and
performance tradeoffs? How does WebTP scale with increased speed and
              faster
clients?

Our approach to these questions draws upon network
              engineering and
communication theory, signal processing and stochastic
              control.  We will
use existing network emulation infrastructure from the the
              INDEX Project to
comprehensively test and evaluate WebTP. This project holds
              the potential
to dramatically impact the way we think about Web transport and
              will
further contribute a design methodology, an actual protocol
              architecture,
and performance analysis and results. We believe that our
              versions of WebTP
will demonstrate dramatic improvements and pave the way for
              further
developments.


