Title       : CCNY/UR SEM Collaborative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2001      
File        : a9872777

Award Number: 9872777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stevens                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Akins akins@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis J. Rothberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1081      CIRE OPPORTUNITY FUND
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  The Center for Analysis of Structures and Interfaces (CASI) at the City
              College of New York (CCNY), a minority-serving institution; and the Center for
              Photoinduced Charge Transfer (CPCT): an NSF-supported Science and Technology
              Center at the University of Rochester, will be collaborative partners.  CASI
              and CPCT will establish a long-term SEM education and (collaborative) research
              relationship that will enhance the quantity and quality of  SEM opportunities
              for students and faculty members at the City College, and result in improved
              minority access to SEM careers.
     The goals of the collaboration are,
              broadly stated, (1) to produce cutting-edge research, with underrepresented
              individuals playing a fundamental and pivotal role in the conduct of the
              research; (2) to recruit, retain, and graduate scientists and engineers.  The
              key strategy of this effort is to provide students from high school to graduate
              educational levels an experience in scientific problem solving,
              interdisciplinary research, and material science knowledge.  Also incorporated
              into the CASI-CPCT relationship is a novel collaborative educational
              infrastructure that facilitates "virtual" and on-site research experiences.
  
                The sequence of educational activities for college students will be modeled
              on the highly successful nine-year old CASI program, which supports preparation
              of minority graduate and undergraduate students for science and engineering
              careers.  Avenues for advancement of student participation will include: (i)
              the development of bi-weekly, inter-institutional seminar programs, which will
              be designed to expose audiences of SEM students to areas of mutual research
              interests at both CCNY-CASI and UR-CPCT, through the use of "chalkboard"
              video-conferencing technology, which will be established for this purpose-this
              infrastructure will also be used to support research, internships, and all
              other levels of inter-institutional discussions between faculty and students;
              (ii) annually a selected number of CASI undergraduate students will conduct
              summer research at the CPCT; (iii) CCNY-CASI students and faculty will attend
              the CPCT annual conference, and contribute to the event through (student)
              poster and (student/CASI-faculty) oral presentations; (iv) a peer-led, team
              laboratory workshop in physical chemistry would be jointly developed by CCNY
              and UR faculty scientists that are already associated with the NSF-funded
              Workshop Chemistry Project; and (v) satellite research efforts at CASI that
              complement and expand research that is pursued at CPCT.

	Finally, high
              school students, emphasizing groups underrepresented in science and
              engineering, and interested in science careers, will be selected for hands-on
              research participation each summer.  Research sites will consist of the
              laboratory/research facilities of the investigators participating in the
              collaboration.  This experience will enhance the education of high school
              (science) students and equip them for the initiatives of the new National
              Science Foundation Standards, which strongly recommend that science be taught
              from grades K-12, within a framework of science inquiry that mirrors the
              methodologies of laboratory science.  

	As a result of the symbiotic
              educational and research components of the program, and the strongly stated
              commitments of both centers and their respective institutions, the
              collaboration between CCNY-CASI and UR-CPCT will be long-term and continue
              after NSF funding has terminated.  



