Title       : Modeling and Accelerated Testing of Cured-In-Place Plastic Sewer Rehabilitation
               Liners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9872378

Award Number: 9872378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273724             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Hall dehall@coes.latech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raja F. Nassar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1037,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Cured-In-Place Plastic (CIPP) pipe liners have recently been employed to
              rehabilitate deteriorated sewer lines.  Such liners are often installed below
              the water table and are consequently subjected to external pressure which may
              lead to creep-induced buckling of the liner within the host pipe.  Insufficient
              understanding of this buckling phenomenon is regarded as a limitation of the
              technology and a barrier to more cost effective sewer rehabilitation.  To
              address this problem, coupled experimental and analytical research programs
              will be undertaken.  The experimental program will involve room temperature and
              elevated temperature material characterization tests of liner materials as well
              as creep-buckling tests of liners at these same temperatures.  The softening of
              this material with increasing temperature will be used to establish a
              relationship between time and temperature such that tests performed on
              convenient time scales can be extended to decades. The analytical program will
              examine closed form solutions to the buckling problem and will involve an
              extensive amount of finite element and statistical modeling of liner buckling. 
              The statistical variation of liner buckling times as a function of the external
              pressure and liner/host pipe geometry parameters will be assessed to determine
              the probability that a liner system will survive for the desired design life. 
              This research program will establish a new methodology for the long-term
              testing of plastic sewer rehabilitation liners and will highlight the factors
              which must be considered to develop a physically based model to predict
              buckling of CIPP liners over a 50+ year service period.
***



