Title       : Sooner City - Design Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a9872505

Award Number: 9872505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Kolar kolar@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anant R. Kukreti  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas D. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt C. Gramoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kanthasamy K. Muraleetharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-72505  Kukreti    University of Oklahoma  Sooner City - Design Across the
              Curriculum    The School of Civil Engineering and Environmental Science (CEES)
              at the University of Oklahoma (OU) is embarking on a curriculum reform project
              entitled Sooner City.  The project is in response to the call for more design
              in the curriculum, a call being made by the engineering accrediting agency, by
              practitioners who are dissatisfied with the design skills of graduates, and by
              faculty who want to promote higher-level thinking skills and improve retention.
                 For the project, incoming freshman will be given a plat of undeveloped land
              that, by the time they graduate, will turned into a blueprint for certain
              segments of the city (time constraints prevent the design of an entire city). 
              Design tasks include all facets of the traditional civil engineering program,
              such as site planning and layout, sewer and water infrastructure, water supply,
              wastewater treatment, buildings, transportation systems, channel design,
              floodplain analysis, and geotechnical work.  A common, four-year design project
              unifies the curriculum and allows material learned in early courses to carry
              forward, unlike the "traditional" paradigm wherein courses frequently stand as
              independent entities with no apparent connection.  Also, the project allows
              students to develop a professional design portfolio that can be presented to
              perspective employers, be used as a valuable reference for future design tasks,
              or be used as part of CEES's outcomes-based assessment.  Furthermore, Sooner
              City provides a natural forum for incorporating other pedagogical reform
              initiatives, such as just-in-time learning, collaborative learning, and laptop
              computing.      The primary goal of the project is to produce graduates who can
              consistently think at a higher level, and who are thus capable of handling
              open-ended design projects that require creativity, exploring alternative
              solutions, self-analysis, and awareness of economic, social, and political
              issues.  The e xtent to which we meet this goal is being assessed through
              formative and summative evaluations by an external reviewer.      The project
              is unique in that it threads a common design theme throughout the curriculum,
              yet does so in a flexible, cost-effective manner that requires no change in the
              traditional sequencing of courses.  Because it does not require major
              institutional support, nor lock faculty into a fixed syllabus, the approach
              should be attractive to many institutions and be portable to other disciplines.
               Reform details will be disseminated via the Web and CDROM, and through
              traditional outlets such as conferences, journal articles, and local and
              national media.
