Title       : A Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis Genome via Gene Disruption and Global
               Gene Expression Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9872638

Award Number: 9872638
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ohlrogge ohlrogge@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela J. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In the near future, the complete sequence of the Arabidopsis genome will be
              known, which will lead to the identification of nearly all Arabidopsis genes.
              Most of these genes will have similarity with genes in other plants and many
              will have unknown function. The overall goal of this project is to provide
              plant biologists with a set of powerful tools that can be used in their efforts
              to understand the function and interrelationships of the 20,000 or more genes
              in this and other plants. The project has three components: technology
              development, service to the community, and biological application.

Two
              synergistic technologies to investigate gene function will be developed and
              provided at service facilities. The first will be to assemble DNA microarrays
              of the genes of Arabidopsis. By hybridizing these arrays with probes
              corresponding to mRNA from different tissues and organs of wild type and mutant
              plants, global gene expression patterns under a variety of conditions can be
              investigated. Database and software support will facilitate sophisticated
              searching and comparisons among these global expression patterns. In parallel
              with the microarray experiments, the second technology development effort will
              be to optimize screening of Arabidopsis plants for mutations ("gene
              knockouts"). This will enable establishment of a gene knockout facility. A
              long-term goal of this facility will be to knock out all the genes of
              Arabidopsis. The PIs will use their microarrays to speed up the identification
              of gene knockouts from pools of candidates. The gene knockout facility and the
              microarray facility will comprise the service component of this project. The
              community will also be provided access to project databases and boinformatics
              tools through the existing Arabidopsis thaliana DataBase (AtDB) so that
              microarray and gene knockout data can be analyzed and cross-referenced with
              other plant genome data most effectively.

The synergy between the microarray
              and gene knockout technologies will be most fully realized within the
              biological application component of this proposal. This component will focus on
              enhancing understanding of plant-specific genes of unknown function, but it
              will generate a large amount of data on the other Arabidopsis genes as well.
              Plant-specific genes (i.e., genes found in Arabidopsis and other plants but not
              in yeast, bacterial, or animal systems) are of great interest because they may
              be involved in plant-specific processes such as plant-pathogen interactions,
              cell-wall biosynthesis, and others. The PIs will identify knockout mutations in
              a large number of these genes and then examine the mutant plants for altered
              phenotypes under a variety of conditions. This will allow members of the
              community to formulate and test hypotheses about the function of these
              plant-specific genes.

The impact of this project is expected to extend far
              beyond Arabidopsis. This is particularly true for the information obtained
              about plant-specific genes, many of which will be of general significance to
              crop plants and other plants of commercial value.

