Title       : Collaboration to Integrate Research and Education in Marine and Environmental
               Science and Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9872694

Award Number: 9872694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1484844            (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew R. Gilligan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Verity  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Frischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra I. Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Savannah State University
	      State College Branch
	      Savannah, GA  31404    912/356-2186

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    Coastal  environments  in the  southeastern  U.S.  are  expected to
              undergo unprecedented population growth  in  the  next  20  years  (LUCES, 
              1996).   Accompanying  this  human  expansion will be significant increases in
              land use and  the  potential   for   dramatic  effects   upon   resources   and
               environmental  quality.   To be  prepared  to  handle  these  issues,   our 
              educational  systems  need  to  provide   the  technology, methodology, and
              information required to assess,  predict,   and   improve   marine  resources  
              and   coastal  environmental quality.         African Americans remain
              significantly underrepresented  in  marine  and environmental science.  In
              early recognition  of  both  the  need for and absence of black  participation,
               Savannah  State  University (SSU) applied for  and  received  assistance  from
               NSF  in  1970  to  provide  and  equip  an  undergraduate  curricular option
              in marine  science.   Since  then,  the  College of Sciences and Technology has
               added  a  program  in  biotechnology. These combined  degree  programs 
              provide  a  liberal arts base with fundamental knowledge  in  the  basic 
              sciences,  and exposure to nominal  methods  and  tools in marine and
              environmental science and biotechnology.  However,  predominantly 
              undergraduate  educational  schools  such   as   SSU   simply  do  not  have 
              the  resources   or  justification  to  develop  and  maintain  extensive 
              modern  research  facilities.  Thus their students, while  receiving  fine
              classroom instruction, do not have the exposure to  and  training in
              sophisticated research environments.  Those  who  do,  generally receive it
              during summer research experiences  outside   the  state  or  region.   Without
               such  exposure,  students  will  be  less competitive  than  those  who  have 
              received formal training in research.          The CIRE project proposed here
              would take advantage of  a  fortuitous  geographic  and  administrative 
              relationship  between  SSU  and  the  Skidaway Institut e  of  Oceanography 
              (SKIO),  a  nearby state-of-the-art marine and environmental  research 
              facility, and which is an NSF  Field  Station  and  Marine  Lab (FSML).  As
              members of the University System  of  Georgia, which administers all of the
              public educational and  research  units in the state of Georgia, SSU and  SKIO 
              have  the  potential to create formal ties.  In the past, however,  these 
              relationships have developed only on an ad-hoc basis.  Here,  they  propose  a
              collaboration  which  would  include  diversification of existing courses at
              SSU by  inclusion  of  teaching  and  research  modules  by  SKIO  faculty; 
              formal  detailed training in research via research assistantships at  SKIO  for
              qualified SSU student interns; reciprocal  faculty  exchange   opportunities;  
              and   collaborative   curriculum  development.  Educational programs at SSU
              would benefit from  access to SKIO's research facilities, and SKIO would
              benefit  from  developing formal ties to degree-granting  educational 
              institutions.  In recognition of the growth and  success  of  undergraduate  
              degree  programs  in  marine   biology   and  environmental studies, and in
              view of the potential value of  this collaboration, SSU is planning to submit
              for approval a  new  M.S.  degree  program in Marine Science.   It  will  be 
              seeking support from the University System of Georgia to buy  faculty  time  at
               SKIO to share their  expertise  with  SSU  students  and  faculty; this
              procedure,  however,  may  take  several  years  to fully implement.  The CIRE 
              project  will  assist that process, provide experience for faculty at  both 
              institutions, and give the opportunity to document  for  the  University 
              System  of  Georgia that  the  collaboration  is  appropriate   and  
              successful.   The  organization   of   a  competitive  framework for research
              training, the  provision  for expanding the depth and diversity of existing
              courses at  SSU,  and the collaboration between SSU and SKIO faculty  in 
              teaching,  research, and  curriculum development, will  go  a  long way towards
              enchancing the opportunities and quality of  training   in   marine   and 
              environmental   sciences   and  biotechnology at SSU.
