Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Seasonality of Fertility in the Laguna de
               Sinamaica, Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9872267

Award Number: 9872267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5779               (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Wood jww3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Seasonal birth patterns have been observed in virtually all human
populations.
               While such patterns are known and well understood in many
animal species,
              they are difficult to analyze in humans, since biological
factors contributing
              to birth rates are confounded with cultural factors.
Taken as a whole, the
              conclusion of the many studies on birth seasonality
in humans is that while
              such seasonal variation is universal, the causes of
variation are not
              universal.  Most of the research that has attempted to
explain observed
              seasonal patterns in specific populations has focused on
only a few possible
              causal factors.  In many cases factors such as diet,
workload, and climate are
              shown to be correlated with fertility, but the
mechanisms linking them with
              fertility remain unexplained.  
	The proposed study will analyze seasonal
              birth patterns in an indigenous
American population (the Anu of northwestern
              Venezuela).  It will describe
seasonal variation in  proximate determinants of
              fertility, including
characteristics of ovarian cycles and fetal loss.  These
              data will be used
in models of fecundability and fetal loss that together
              describe
seasonality of fertility.  The study includes analysis of 1346
              urine
samples that were collected twice weekly during the seasons of most
              and
fewest conceptions. The samples will be assayed to determine levels
              of
human chorionic gonadotropin (the hormone that indicates pregnancy) and
              of
urinary metabolites of the hormones estradiol and progesterone; the
              assay
data then will be used with interview data to determine proportion
              of
cycles ovulatory, length of cycles, rates of conception, rates of
              fetal
loss, and levels of progesterone, as an indicator of luteal sufficiency.
              
	Previous investigations of seasonality of fertility have been based
largely
              on factors specific to the population being studied.  The proposed
study uses
              a model of seasonality of fertility that can be applied to any
population.  By
              combining existing models of fecundability and fetal loss,
the impact of
              individual proximate determinants of fertility on seasonal
fertility patterns
              can be more thoroughly analyzed than in previous
studies.  Seasonal data on
              more distal determinants, such as diet,
workload, spouse absence, and
              nutritional status, can then be evaluated in
terms of the information on the
              proximate determinants, shedding light on
possible linking mechanisms and
              opening avenues for further research.

