Title       : PARASOL: An Adaptive Framework for Parallel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9872126

Award Number: 9872126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Rauchwerger rwerger@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy M. Amato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel computers, particularly shared-memory multiprocessors, are
              now
widespread.  However, programmers still have great difficulty
              exploiting
their potential to obtain good performance on real applications.
              Parallel
computing will only be truly successful when this difficulty is
              removed.
The investigators attack this problem by statically analyzing
              programs to
determine their structure, embedding run-time measurements to
              determine
their dynamic needs, and triggering adaptive optimization at
              run-time that
is tuned to those needs.

Technically, the investigators and
              their students plan to explore several
innovative techniques and/or
              combinations of known evaluation and
optimization techniques:

  * Their
              compiler will insert adaptive capabilities directly into
    applications,
              rather than going through a third party such as
    the operating system. The
              application will then monitor its system
    resource usage and control work
              based on its predicted demands
    and the optimal workload of the system.


               * They will use a parallel performance model for adaptive
    optimization at
              run-time. The model will be used to both
    predict execution times for
              potential optimizations and to
    diagnose computational inefficiencies.

 
              * They will implement run-time parallelization and optimization
    techniques
              and integrate them in the POLARIS compiler and the
    PARASOL system.

  *
              They will use run-time parallelization to reduce the impact of
    latency in
              the applications.


