Title       : Lifetime Prediction of Polyolefin Geosynthetics Utilizing Acceleration Tests
               Based On Temperature and Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a9872285

Award Number: 9872285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yick G. Hsuan ghsuan@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1444,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              98-72285

PI - Yick (Grace) Hsuan

Drexel University

"Lifetime Prediction
              of Polyolefin Geosynthetics Utilizing Acceleration Tests Based on Temperature
              and Pressure"



Geosynthetics are being widely used in geoenvironmental,
              geotechnical and transportation applications.  In some of these applications,
              e.g., waste containment, long-term durability assurance is required.  A
              majority of these geosynthetics are manufactured from polyolefins, such as
              polyethylene and polypropylene which have a susceptibility to oxidation
              degradation.  Recent research by the principal investigator has provided the
              first quantitative estimation on the lifetime of some geosynthetics, but the
              studies have also revealed the complexity of the degradation mechanisms and the
              limitation of existing acceleration tests.  The focus of this research is to
              design a scientifically-valid accelerated laboratory test to evaluate the
              oxidation degradation of polyolefin geosynthetics.  Oxidation degradation is
              accelerated by both moderate elevated temperature and oxygen pressure. 
              Therefore, the drawback of the high elevated temperature is compensated by
              introducing pressure as the second acceleration factor.  In addition,
              dissolution of antioxidants to the adjacent soil medium will be investigated
              separately.  The correlation between soil moisture content and the dissolution
              rate will be quantified.  Five types of geosynthetics will be included in this
              project.


The acquired experimental data will establish the relationship
              among the reaction rate, temperature, and pressure.  The basic Arrhenius
              equation will be modified by incorporating the pressure function.  This
              modified Arrhenius equation will be used to predict the lifetime of
              antioxidants and the overall service lifetime of the geosynthetics based on
              actual field data on temperature, oxygen content
              and
moisture.



****




