Title       : KDI: Multimodal Collaboration Across Wired and Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9872995

Award Number: 9872995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2196006            (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Flanagan jlf@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Meer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan Marsic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Casimir A. Kulikowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1337,1338,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a three-year continuing award.  Collaboration is a hallmark of human
              activity.  But today's society is becoming global, and digital networking-both
              wired and wireless-aims to serve geographically-dispersed participants. 
              Networks of computers now become a mediating tool in human collaboration.  And,
              their distributed architecture provides new opportunities for expanding human
              intellect and for enhancing knowledge work.  But to be maximally useful the
              mediating system must be easy to use-preferably transparent to the user. 
              Communication between human and machine should approach the naturalness of
              face-to-face exchange, where the sensory modalities of sight, sound and touch
              carry primary responsibilities for information transport.  Additionally,
              supporting software must include intelligent agents able to fuse sensory data
              into meaningful commands for the machines.  New technologies, now evolving,
              promise greater naturalness in human/machine communication-naturalness that
              substantially transcends the limitations of traditional mouse and keyboard. 
              Incorporated with audio and video conferencing, these techniques include: eye
              tracking, visual gesture, hands-free speech recognition, speech synthesis,
              force-feedback tactile grasp, and manual gesture.  Used in natural combination,
              these modalities provide the human greater dimensions of control and
              communication, and hence greater effectiveness in networked
              collaboration.

This new research, aims to establish the basic understanding
              necessary for the creation and use of multimodal computer interfaces in wired
              and wireless networks.  The research aims to produce a design methodology for
              multi-user collaboration across heterogeneous architectures and computing
              environments.  As multimodal capabilities evolve, human performance must be
              addressed as a recognized component of the total system.  Optimization of
              design therefore includes human-factors assessment to quantify the synergies
              that can be won from multimodal interaction.  The new research identifies three
              application sectors where wired/wireless multimodal collaboration can provide
              new solutions; they include: Telemedicine (where expert participants may
              contribute to diagnoses for remote patients); Crisis Management (where disaster
              relief and emergency aid may be planned and deployed collaboratively); and
              Mobile Offices (where business activities might be conducted in transit-air,
              sea or land).  The design framework resulting from this research is also
              applicable to other activities important in today's society, including:
              ubiquitous and universal access to information systems; increased interaction
              with the World Wide Web; education and knowledge dissemination; and, new aids
              for disabled individuals.



