Title       : Three Dimensional Experiments of Clay with Controlled Microfabric
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9872618

Award Number: 9872618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dayakar Penumadu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9872618
Pennmadu
Multi-axial experiments with local strain measurements
              will be performed using axial-torsional and true triaxial testing in which he
              stress-strain relationship of clays will be evaluated for the stress paths
              associated with the rotation of principal stress directions under undrained
              conditions.  Experiments also include evaluating the relationship between the
              initial microfabric of clay and the nature of its evolution as a function of
              the applied loading.

The microfabric will be evaluated quantitatively using
              digital image analysis of scanning electron micrographs (SEM), and using
              mercury intrusion porosimetry.  The arrangements of solids (clay platelets) is
              evaluated using digital SEM and the intensity gradient analysis.  The
              microfabric will be described quantitatively using two parameters:  fabric
              index and the inclination of orientation. Repeatable hollow cylinder and
              cubical kaolinite clay specimens with a controlled and uniform initial fabric
              will be obtained from a two stage slurry consolidation procedure, and the clays
              will be subjected to both isotropic and anisotropic consolidation for
              predetermined stress levels.  The two- and three-dimensional void fabric will
              be uniquely described by a characteristic pore size distribution curve, and
              analysis will be performed to evaluate yield and failure criteria.

The
              dependency of yield and failure surfaces on the microfabric, specimen shape,
              and the differences associated with apparatus type will be evaluated under the
              generalized three-dimensional stress states.  The research plan will provide: 
              a) quantitative procedures for describing the microfabric of cohesive soil, b)
              a better understanding of mechanical behavior of clay and its relationship with
              microfabric for a wide variety of loading conditions, and c) a database for the
              modeling community to develop three-dimensional constitutive model for cohesive
              soil accounting for microfabric effects.
***




