Title       : A BAC Library Resource for Crop Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9872676

Award Number: 9872676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $616521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey P. Tomkins jtmkns@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rod A. Wing  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ralph A. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Frisch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maciek Sasinowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Clemson University has established a Genomics Institute (CUGI) focusing on
              research, teaching and service in agricultural genomics. The service component
              of the CUGI has been to produce high-quality bacterial artificial chromosome
              (BAC) libraries from plants and plant pests and to provide convenient and
              affordable access to these products. With the assistance of several
              high-throughput robotic instruments, the CUGI has produced, acquired and
              distributed the majority of plant and fungal BAC libraries in use today.
              Because of the increasing demand on the service component of CUGI, funding is
              requested to support operations of the service facility. Funding of this
              project will expand services provided by CUGI to include: picking, arraying and
              rearraying of EST (expressed sequence tag) clones; arraying and rearraying of
              BAC and EST DNA onto filters; production of BAC DNA pools for library screening
              with primers; distribution of BAC and EST clones; BAC library screening by
              hybridization and PCR; fingerprinting of BAC clones identified by hybridization
              and PCR; BAC end sequencing; a centralized database for BAC fingerprints,
              hybridization and BAC end sequence data; training in BAC library construction
              and characterization through workshops at Clemson; and development of
              microarray technology for gene expression profiling and provision of this
              technology to the community. CUGI operates as a non-profit organization and
              will provide these services on a cost recovery basis. The service component of
              CUGI described here should be fully self-supporting by the end of the proposed
              funding period.
