Title       : Symposium on Sea Ice and Its Interactions with the Ocean, Atmosphere, and
               Biosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9872803

Award Number: 9872803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin O. Jeffries   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hajo Eicken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide funds for the partial support of an  International
              Glaciology Society symposium on Sea Ice and its  Interaction with the Ocean,
              Atmosphere, and Biosphere, to be  held in Fairbanks, Alaska, in June 2000 under
              the scientific  sponsorship of the International Glaciology Society.  The  IGS,
              based at Cambridge University, England, is the  professional society for
              scientists who study snow and ice in  all its forms.  There is no comparable
              national organization.  The IGS sponsors at least one symposium annually, with
              the  presentations published in the peer-reviewed Annals of  Glaciology.  This
              symposium is timely since there has not  been a symposium dedicated solely to
              sea ice and its  processes since 1990, and a number of major multi- 
              disciplinary sea ice programs will have been completed within  the next two
              years.  The symposium will provide a suitable  forum for the dissemination of
              significant new results from  (e.g.) the joint NSF/ONR Surface Heat Budget of
              the Arctic  program, the DOE Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program,  the
              NSF/ONR submarine science program, the NSF Long-term  Ecological Research site
              at Palmer Station, ongoing NASA  satellite-based studies, and NOAA -sponsored
              arctic  oceanographic research.    Polar sea ice is both a bellwether and an
              agent of climate  change.  The effects of climate change on the characteristics
               of the Earth's sea ice cover will affect the physical,  chemical, and
              biological processes beyond the immediate  influence of the ice because these
              processes are interlinked  on a global scale.  Interdisciplinary studies
              involving a  combination of field investigations, satellite-based remote 
              sensing, and numerical modelling studies will make important  contributions to
              increasing our knowledge of the geophysics  of sea ice and its impacts on the
              global environment.  Dissemination of research results at conferences such as
              this  will promote future cooperative research, and maximize the  benefits of
              research results.
