Title       : Collaborative to Integrate Research and Education Between the University of
               Puerto Rico and the University of Pennsylvania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9872689

Award Number: 9872689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1358579            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredy R. Zypman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of PR at Humacao
	      100  Road 908
	      Humacao, PR  007914300    787/850-9473

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The  University  of  Puerto Rico  (UPR)  and  the  Materials  Research  Science 
              and  Engineering Center  (MRSEC)  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania (PENN)
              will form  a  long  term  Collaborative to Integrate Research and Education
              (CIRE)  to  enhance  the  participation  of  minority  students  in  the 
              national pool of scientists and engineers (SE).    The CIRE will:       
              Increase  the  number  and  quality  of  baccalaureate    degrees in the
              sciences at UPR and equip students with the    tools  necessary to enter first
              rate graduate programs  in    science and engineering.        Create 
              long-lasting collaborative  research  projects    between UPR and PENN-MRSEC
              faculty who have similar research    interests.        Establish  exchange
              programs whereby UPR  faculty  and    students  to  the PENN-MRSEC for hands on
              experience  with    advanced research techniques and PENN-MRSEC faculty go  to 
                UPR to give short lecture series, collaborate on research,    and participate
              in the program's annual review.    Faculties  from  both institutions have 
              been  selected  for  their  mutual research interests.  The research program 
              has  been  designed around `Charged Interfaces' and falls  within  the  realm 
              of  Materials Research.  Four research  programs  will integrate chemists and
              physicists at UPR with chemists,  physicists, and materials scientists at the
              PENN-MRSEC  with  the goal of including many undergraduates in these programs. 
                A  special feature of this Collaborative will be the use  of 
              videoconferencing between institutions to enhance  the  flow  of    information
                and   provide   real-time   interaction.  Videoconferencing  techniques will
              be used  to  enhance  the  educational  and  research experiences of  UPR 
              faculty  and  students  by  exposing  them to PENN's  Shared  Experimental 
              Facilities,  allowing  participation in  real-time  research  group  
              interaction,   and  having  real-time,   interactive  lectures and colloquia
              from the MRSEC.    Continued  funding of th is collaboration at 60% in 
              matching  funds  of  the NSF level will be guaranteed by  UPR  for  at  least
              three years after termination of NSF funding.
