Title       : Dynamic Adaptivity: Enabling Technology for Emerging Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9872436

Award Number: 9872436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold V. Poor poor@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to Princeton University, under the direction of Dr.
              Harold V. Poor, for the support of a Combined Research-Curriculum Development
              project entitled, "Dynamic Adaptivity: Enabling Technology for Emerging
              Wireless Systems." This is a joint project with Cornell University, Dr. R. C.
              Johnson, co-P.I., that involves the development of courses and courseware in
              the field of adaptive signal processing for wireless communications.  The
              development is intended to bring the latest research results in this area into
              the classroom.  To mesh with the P.I.s research, the courses will focus on two
              main areas: equalization and multiuser detection.  Wireless systems for mobile
              telephony and data transmission are currently undergoing very rapid development
              due to recent international agreements opening new regions in the radio
              spectrum to such services.  This area has been one of the most active in
              Electrical Engineering over the past few years, and promises to continue to be
              so in the foreseeable future. In particular, this project plans to  develop,
              deliver, and assess courseware (including CAD-oriented experiments) to teach
              the needed material both to practicing engineers in the telecommunications
              industry, and to master's level graduate students expecting to enter this
              industry.  The material will be delivered first in short-course form to
              industrial partners, who will participate in on-campus delivery as well. 
              Significant use of new technology is expected through the McGraw Center for
              Teaching and Learning and through the Friend Center, an innovative facility for
              engineering instruction at Princeton.  The initiation of longer-term projects,
              such as the preparation of a suitable subset of the material to the advanced
              undergraduate level, will also be a part of this effort.
