Title       : Sequencing the Arabidopsis Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9872752

Award Number: 9872752
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12677998           (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Davis dbowe@sequence.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9872752

This award provides funds for the SPP (Stanford - University of
              Pennsylvania -Plant Gene Expression Laboratory/UC Berkeley) Consortium to
              continue sequencing the genome of the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. The
              SPP was established for the purpose of sequencing the genome of Arabidopsis
              thaliana and the effort was initiated in 1996 as part of the multinational
              project involving 6 groups in 4 nations.  

In this renewal award, the SPP
              Consortium plans to complete the sequence of chromosome 1 of Arabidopsis
              thaliana during the next three-year period. The size of the chromosome is
              estimated to be approximately 25 Mb (megabases). The estimated cost of
              sequencing is between $0.40 and $0.50 per base pair. The accuracy of the
              sequencing process is continually monitored and, the SPP has exceeded the
              accepted rate of less than 1 inaccurate base in 10,000 bases. The immediate
              data release policy of the SPP Consortium mandates that all contiguous
              sequences (contigs) greater than 2 kb be released to the public database with
              information on the degree of finishing. This allows research scientists in all
              fields to access the sequence data at the earliest possible time but with some
              notation as to the level of completion.  Annotation (pertinent biological
              information) is added to the GenBank entries as soon as possible after release.
               Each SPP site has constructed and maintains its own web page with current
              progress and details about the specific duties and progress at each location. 
              In addition, the SPP Consortium has recently built a new web page summarizing
              in one location the overall progress
              (http://www-sequence.stanford.edu/ara/SPP.html). The individual web sites can
              also be accessed from that address.

The SPP efforts, combined with the
              coordinated efforts by the other sequencing groups, will contributed to the
              goal of completing the sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome by the end of the
              year 2000.  Partial Arabidopsis genome sequence information obtained thus far
              has already contributed new insights into the biology of flowering plants. As
              Arabidopsis is a typical flowering plant, what is learned from Arabidopsis is
              readily transferable to all plants.  It is expected that the complete genome
              sequence information will revolutionize the field of plant biology.  



