Title       : Interactive Concurrent Visualization of Unsteady Flows on Parallel Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9872140

Award Number: 9872140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammed Y. Hussaini myh@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Simulations of fluid dynamics, such as the flow of air over an airplane
wing,
              are vital for understanding the fluids, but cannot be computed fast
enough for
              humans to interact with the simulation.  This project will
develop an
              efficient, accurate, integrated environment for the simulation,
visualization,
              and analysis of time-dependent turbulent flow fields using
advanced physical
              and numerical models.  The investigators will create
low-order (relatively
              cheap and fast) approximations to an existing
Navier-Stokes code, and use the
              approximations to provide interactive
explorations of the simulation database
              while the main code continues to
run.  They will also add a graphical user
              interface to the existing code to
allow remote visualization.  The key
              subtasks in this process will include:

* Developing physically-based models,
              called surrogate models, of the
compressible Navier-Stokes equations that
              sharply reduce the cost of the
simulation yet capture the dominant flow
              structures.

* Using the surrogate models to visualize particle paths,
              streaklines, and
pathlines interactively while the full simulation
              continues.

* Using the flow features to assess the error of the surrogate
              models.

* Developing efficient parallel algorithms for the surrogates,
              and
assessing more advanced strategies for incrementally constructing
              and
adapting them to simulation data.






