Title       : Toolpath Optimization by Real-time Application of an Integrated
               Geometric/Mechanistic Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9872575

Award Number: 9872575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239794             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Jerard robert.jerard@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry K. Fussell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9872575
Jerard
     The goal of this research is to improve the
              productivity of Numerically Controlled (NC) machine tools.  Models of the
              cutting process will be integrated with the NC machine controller.  Sensor
              feedback will be used to monitor the process and continuously improve the model
              accuracy through real-time self-calibration.  Machine tool controllers which
              use these methods will be capable of using high-level part descriptions for
              input as opposed to the low-level "G-codes" that are currently in common usage
              - an attribute that should greatly decrease the overall time required to
              produce parts on NC machines.  Specific elements of the research include:  (1)
              Development of an experimental test facility by retrofitting a 5-axis NC
              milling machine with an Open Architecture Controller (OAC).  (2) Integrated
              geometric/mechanistic models of cutting on the OAC which are efficient enough
              to run in "real-time" mode.  The models will be used to calculate optimal
              cutting conditions.  Sensors on the machine tool will be used to perform
              continuous self-calibration of model parameters. (3) Continuous real-time
              comparison of actual and model-predicted cutting forces and the development of
              corrective actions to compensate for excessive differences.  (4) Experimental
              comparisons between these methods and current "best practice" approaches. 
              Complex sculptured surface programs developed by expert NC programmers at an
              industrial partner will be used.
     The research should lead to improved NC
              machining performance compared with the present NC control, in terms of
              machining productivity and product quality. The open-architecture controller on
              a 5-axis NC milling machine enables testing of the model in an environment
              close to real industrial setting.

