Title       : Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9872022

Award Number: 9872022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Stoltzfus stoltz@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Madden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome W. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bogdan S. Oporowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematics at the Louisiana State University (LSU) will
              purchase  a client-server network of  workstations configured as parallel
              virtual machines, equipment which will be dedicated to the support of research
              in the mathematical sciences.  The equipment will be used for several research
              projects: Solving Multivariate Polynomial Systems, Cohomology of Siegel Modular
              Threefolds, Representation Theory of the Fundamental Groups of Knots and Links,
              Matroid Representability and Scalable Network Scientific Computing. The
              projects involve intensive symbolic, algebraic and numeric computations which
              require speed, memory, network connectivity  and tools for efficient code
              development and  interactive graphical display.

This proposal will enhance
              the competitiveness and productivity  of the researchers in  mathematics by
              supplying workstations to support the specialized research tools available in
              research mathematics, by initiating a research laboratory to implement and
              configure  a distributed network computing environment.   The laboratory will
              aid communication among the research groups as well as support graduate student
              research and dissertation projects. Finally, the grant proposes a solid
              framework for multidisciplinary research and education in the mathematical
              sciences with collaboration from computer science and engineering.  

