Title       : Chromatin Charting: Organization and Dynamics of Plant Nuclear DNA in situ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9872636

Award Number: 9872636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $676234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Lam lam@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Martienssen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The nucleus is the subcellular organelle in which the bulk of the genomic
              information within an eukaryotic cell is organized. Although tremendous
              advances in sequencing genomes of organisms have taken place in the past few
              years, the way by which this vast amount of genetic information is stored and
              physically manipulated in the nuclei of plants and animals remains a mystery.
              From studies using hybridization technologies and microscopy work, a picture of
              an organized subnuclear structure has emerged. One major subnuclear structure
              is the chromosomes, which contain the genome of an organism.  More recently,
              the application of the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) as an in vivo tag of
              chromosomal substances has allowed the visualization of chromosomes in live
              cells of animals and fungi. The goal for this project is to extend the GFP
              technology to understand subnuclear architecture by charting the relative
              physical position of specific genes on each of the chromosomes using cells
              within an intact plant. To achieve the objective of visualizing and charting
              the genes on all the chromosomes of a model plant, Arabidopsis, GFP and two
              different color variants (yellow [YFP] and blue [BFP]) of this protein will be
              used as in vivo tags in transgenic plants. Using the three distinct markers,
              the physical organization of the genome in relation to gene expression and gene
              mobilization patterns will be characterized.  

The project is a first step
              to establish this technology as a powerful tool to visualize the relationship
              between the genome organization and gene expression.  While it is being tested
              in a model plant, Arabidopsis, this approach should provide the necessary
              resources and tools to address fundamental questions about subnuclear
              architecture and chromatin dynamics in all plants. Further, insights from this
              work should contribute to our understanding of global gene regulation as well
              as epigenetic phenomena in all eukaryotic organisms.	




