Title       : Integrating Engineering Design with the Humanities, Social Sciences, Sciences, &
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a9872433

Award Number: 9872433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Devdas Shetty shetty@hartford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leo T. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Leone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hisham Alnajjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ladimer S. Nagurney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              98-72433  Shetty    University of Hartford - Integrating Engineering Design with
              the Humanities, Social Sciences, Sciences & Mathematics    The proposed project
              will develop, apply, and test a model for an innovative undergraduate
              engineering curriculum through:  (1) the integration of contexualized,
              interdisciplinary research and design projects throughout four years of the
              program; (2) experiential and collaborative learning by both faculty and
              students; (3) partnerships with industry in the creation of "real-life"
              engineering projects for students at all levels; (4) cross-collegiate and
              cross-disciplinary teams of faculty working together and along side colleagues
              from the private sector to develop integration of curricular materials and
              coordination of assignments.  In undertaking this project, the University will
              build upon and extend current industrial/corporate partnerships established
              through the successful Engineering Applications Center and existing curricular
              reform efforts (supported by NSF and FIPSE).    This project will transform the
              College of Engineering by helping its faculty transition to new models of
              teaching and learning - especially those that help to insure the success of
              women and minorities - and by redefining the relationship between engineering
              faculty and students and those in the rest of the University.  A core group of
              innovative faculty will become team leaders for curricular reform at both the
              academic year level (Freshman, Sophomore, etc.) and at the Engineering program
              level (Civil, Electrical, & Mechanical Engineering).  These team leaders will
              work with the De3ans of other colleges in the University to identify
              appropriate faculty in the humanities, social and basic sciences, and
              mathematics to create interdisciplinary curricula.  Faculty will be trained in
              team-building, collaborative learning, new pedagogical approaches, especially
              those which enhance learning by women/minorities, and the creation of
              educational and student assessment technologies.  Through  participation in
              multi-disciplinary collaboration and the integration of engineering and
              non-engineering perspectives that we are trying to each students.  Thus, this
              project will provide a paradigm for other schools of engineering of how to
              transform faculty culture while also restructuring curricula in order to
              motivate, excite, and retain engineering students.  In addition, it will
              provide a model of how non-engineering faculty and students can be brought to
              understand the nature of engineering work in its broad social context.     
              Curricular innovations will result in several new course configurations:  the
              clustering of engineering and non-engineering courses into an integrated
              First-year Interest Group (FIG); the pairing of engineering and
              interdisciplinary courses in the sophomore and junior years with collaborative
              projects involving engineering and non-engineering students; and an
              interdisciplinary Senior Capstone Project.  An innovative curricular structure,
              the Integrative Learning Block, will be developed and will serve as the
              mechanism for fostering interdisciplinary, integrative, student-centered,
              project-based learning.
