Title       : Tools for Plant Functional Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9872629

Award Number: 9872629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1801988            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina V. Fedoroff nvf1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Raina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Natan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy A. Eckardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to identify genes that work together
              when plants respond to and develop tolerance for environmental stress. Although
              gene networks have been treated theoretically, biologists have never before
              been in a position to define the components of a network. Microarray
              technology, together with the increasing availability of cDNA and genome
              sequences, now makes it possible to identify groups of genes whose expression
              patterns change coordinately. However this technology is still in need of
              development to make it a more sensitive detection system that is also
              economically accessible to individual academic investigators. This team of
              investigators plans to develop new types of highly sensitive nucleic acid
              microarray detection systems, using colloidal gold particles to amplify
              detection of nucleic acids on a gold surface. While the overall concept
              represents a new approach with potential for both high sensitivity and low-cost
              detection, parts of each component have been demonstrated. This project will
              combine these elements and test two different detection schemes; one based on
              gold colloid-enhanced microwave mixing and the other on gold colloid-enhanced
              surface plasmon resonance.

The initial biological focus will be on genes
              whose expression levels are altered by biotic and abiotic stress. The specific
              stressors to be used in creating a model system for evaluating the new
              microarray detection schemes are ozone and pathogen attack. These stressors are
              the focus because of the parallels between some aspects of plant responses to
              ozone and to pathogens. Ozone can evoke formation of rapid necrotic lesions
              that mimic the pathogen-induced hypersensitive response. However, the response
              to both ozone and pathogens depends on the mode and duration of exposure, as
              well as the genetic constitution of the plant. Microarray technology will make
              it possible to analyze the differences and similarities between these
              physiological stress responses at the molecular level. This will permit the
              identification of gene sets whose activation is common to the stressors, as
              well as gene sets whose activation is unique to each. The results will
              facilitate studies on developmental, tissue-specific, and temporal differences
              in molecular stress response patterns and the combinatorial effects of multiple
              simultaneous stresses. It is well known that there are genetic differences
              among plants in the capacity to develop tolerance to stress and resistance to
              pathogen attack, that tolerance can develop in response to stress and that the
              ability to develop tolerance varies with age. The proposed experiments will
              pave the way for identifying and analyzing gene sets required for the
              development of stress tolerance and pathogen resistance.

A Microarray
              Facility is being developed at the Pennsylvania State University. This will
              initially make use of existing technology for DNA chip construction and
              two-color fluorescent probe hybridization. The microchip arrayer will then be
              used to create microarrays of PCR-amplifled cDNAs on a gold surface. Current
              fluorescence detection techniques will be used to develop a baseline for
              evaluating the new detection techniques. The broadest possible range of
              potential members of stress-response gene networks will be used for the
              construction of microarrays, beginning with candidate genes selected from
              results of published studies, as well as database searches for homologs.
              Existing Arabidopsis ESTs will be screened for additional candidate
              differentially expressed genes through the Monsanto Arabidopsis microarray
              program.

Although Arabidopsis will be used in these studies, the proposed
              research will be directly relevant to agronomically important plants because of
              the high degree of protein sequence conservation among different species.
              Moreover, there is a high probability that gene networks identified in
              Arabidopsis will have counterparts in other plants, facilitating their
              identification and, eventually, their manipulation to improve agronomic traits.
              The microarray research will benefit plant researchers by reducing cost and
              increasing the availability of the technology.

