Title       : Center for Maize Targeted Mutagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9872644

Award Number: 9872644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1842208            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen martiens@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The genetic makeup of crop plants is the fundamental basis for yield, grain
              quality, plant breeding and crop improvement.  In principle, this genetic
              makeup can be determined by sequencing plant DNA, and in this way identifying
              most if not all of the genes encoded by a given plant genome.  Sophisticated
              software tools are becoming available that allow a great deal of information to
              be extracted from sequence data, but ultimately the function of a gene can only
              be determined by genetic analysis.  Classically, this has been achieved by
              subjecting plants to mutagenizing agents, such as chemicals or X-rays, and then
              searching for those mutants that have a desired property or trait.  The gene
              mutated in each case can then be identified by a laborious genetic procedure to
              ultimately isolate the corresponding sequence of DNA.  The availability of
              large amounts of methodically determined DNA sequence information, however,
              allows a novel, systematic approach to be taken to determine gene function. 
              This approach, first pioneered in model animal genomes such as the fruitfly
              Drosophila and the nematode worm, C. elegans, involves first constructing a
              library of thousands of organisms, each of which has a different spectrum of
              mutations.  This library is then screened directly with a DNA sequence to
              identify mutations in a given gene.  Two technological advances make this
              possible.  The first is the use of transposable elements as the mutational
              agent.  Transposable elements were first discovered in maize at Cold Spring
              Harbor Laboratory by Dr. Barbara McClintock in the 1940s.  These elements have
              a conserved DNA structure enabling them to be readily identified in the genome.
               They disrupt genes at random, simultaneously providing the mutation of
              interest, and labeling the gene with the conserved DNA sequence.  The second
              technology is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which allows such DNA
              sequences to be amplified from individual plants giving immediate access to a
              plant carrying a given mutation.  Scientists at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              have combined these advances to develop a systematic method for determining
              gene function in maize.  Robertson's Mutator transposable elements, first
              characterized at the DNA level at the University of California at Berkeley, are
              uniquely suited for this purpose, and a sophisticated genetic strategy has been
              developed allowing large populations of plants to be screened for mutations in
              pools.  In partnership with Novartis AG, geneticists at Cold Spring Harbor and
              Berkeley are developing a population of 40,000 plants, and DNA samples are
              being extracted.  Seed from each plant will be cataloged and stored.  The PCR
              reaction will be performed on DNA pools derived from this population so that
              seed corresponding to mutations in a given gene can be readily identified. 
              Individual geneticists from the maize community will be able to send in
              sequence information for targeted disruption of genes of interest to them.  The
              information will be entered into a database, and seed corresponding to the
              mutation will be distributed to interested researchers to allow them to
              determine the function of each gene chosen in this way.  The Mutator Targeted
              Mutagenesis (MTM) system can thus be used to build up a database of gene
              function in maize, eventually comprising a significant proportion of the
              genetic makeup of this crucial crop plant.
