Title       : KDI: Computational Challenges in Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a9872979

Award Number: 9872979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew H. Jaffe jaffe@cfpa.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph I. Silk  (Principal Investigator former)
              Marc Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Smoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip B. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1337,1339,5115,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Silk
9872979
     In the past decade cosmology has undergone a
              renaissance,
transforming from a data-starved science to a data-driven
              one.
The COBE satellite and subsequent observations of the Cosmic
Microwave
              Background (CMB) have begun to give us a detailed
picture of the early
              Universe; telescopes have found galaxies at
distances corresponding to the
              Universe at one-tenth of its
present age; large-scale redshift surveys have
              begun to map out
the structure of the nearby Universe.  However, the size of
              these
datasets threatens to leave cosmology data-swamped.  Realizing
              our
scientific goals depends on meeting the qualitatively new
computational
              challenges set by the quantitatively new data.  The
issues cosmologists face
              in the analysis, synthesis and
presentation of the data --- including data
              compression and
transmission, mass storage, data mining, parallel algorithms
              and
scaling, inverse problems and regularization methods, and complex
data
              visualization --- are also at the forefront of current
research in Computer
              Science and Statistics.  The investigators
and their colleagues form a focused
              collaboration between
astrophysicists, statisticians and computer scientists
              to develop
computational tools, techniques and technologies to cope with
              the
new challenges posed by these datasets.  The needs of Cosmology
provide a
              practical spur to new developments in Computer Science
and Statistics,
              enabling and informing new research both within
astrophysics and more widely
              in other data-intensive disciplines.
Research is organized along four
              interlocking paths.  First, there
must be appropriate tools to analyze the
              individual datasets.
Next are the synthesis and simulation of the datasets
              to
formulate a coherent picture of the evolution of structure in
              the
Universe.  Finally, there must be access to the data and the
products of
              the analysis, both to members of the collaboration
and to the outside
              community.
     Cosmology is the quest for the understanding of the
              Universe
on the largest scales, and of the events that unfolded in the
first
              moments after the Big Bang.  Light that now makes up the
Cosmic Microwave
              Background (or CMB) last interacted with matter
in the Universe when it was
              about one hundred thousand years old
(a small fraction of its age today of
              fifteen billion years);
observing the CMB allows cosmologists to map out the
              Universe at
these very early times.  Somewhat closer to home, observing
              the
distribution of galaxies lets us see the present state of the
Universe. 
              Only ten years ago, the amount of data involved in
these studies was tiny. 
              Advances in telescope and detector
technology has allowed a manyfold increase
              in these data; this
vast expansion pushes the limits of our computational
              ability to
analyze it.  The investigators and their colleagues,
              from
astrophysics, computer science, and statistics, develop tools to
analyze
              and synthesize this vast amount of data.  This allows them
to form a coherent
              and complete picture of the evolution of the
Universe from the earliest times
              to the present day and ---
perhaps most importantly --- far into the
              future.


