Title       : WISE Investments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9872818

Award Number: 9872818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $892967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Anderson-Rowland mary.anderson@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Blaisdell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jean A. Abel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale R. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda Romero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1588,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The WISE Investments project is multifaceted and is designed to encourage
              females in middle, high school and community colleges to pursue engineering and
              related careers by:  1) teaching middle and high school math and science
              teachers to help students understand engineering as a helping profession; 2)
              teaching middle and high school guidance counselors to support and encourage
              pre-college young women to pursue engineering and related careers; 3) teaching
              community college math and science faculty to include gender-inclusive
              engineering applications of math and science, along with engineering career
              information, in their classrooms; 4) teaching community college advisors and
              counselors to support and encourage community college women to pursue
              engineering and related fields; 5) educating parents (or another significant
              adult) of young women in middle and high school about educational and career
              opportunities in engineering, and by assisting parents to encourage their
              daughters' continued enrollment in higher-level precollege math and science
              courses; and 6) giving young women in middle and high school a single sex
              environment to explore engineering, providing them with engineering mentors,
              and giving them exposure to higher education and engineering-related
              industries.
     Middle and high school math and science teachers, along with
              a district representative from each of the six participating school districts,
              will participate in a two-week summer workshop.  Middle and high school
              counselors will be teamed with teachers from their school and will participate
              in an abbreviated workshop.  Community college faculty and advisors, who will
              also be placed in same-school teams, will participate in their own two-week
              summer workshop.  Educator and counselor participants will also participate in
              a two-week internship with an engineering-related company.
     Educators and
              counselor/advisors workshops will include hands-on engineering labs, exposure
              to engineering-related industry through tours and speakers, opportunity to
              develop engineering applications and outreach activities for their
              classrooms/campuses, and gender-equity training.  The two-week internship will
              allow participants to gain an understanding of engineering in a real-world
              setting.  Participants will be involved in an electronic forum throughout the
              duration of the project and will participate in follow-up activities, including
              dissemination activities.  A mentor team consisting of an engineering faculty
              member, an industry representative, and an engineering student will be paired
              with each educator/counselor team.
     Middle and high school girls will
              participate in hands-on engineering applications developed by the teacher
              teams, gain exposure to engineers and engineering-related industry through
              tours and speakers, and be paired with a trained female undergraduate
              engineering student mentor, who in turn will have her own mentor.  Parents will
              receive information about engineering and how to encourage their daughters in
              math and science, and will gain exposure to engineers and engineering-related
              industry.
     An end-of-the-year banquet will pull the various components
              together and celebrate the participant's accomplishments.  A poster session of
              the educators teams' efforts will be displayed, and one team will be selected
              to present on their involvement at a regional or national education
              conference.
     These project components will give women and girls more
              information about, and create a positive affective response to, engineering. 
              The project will also develop a support network for their pursuit of
              engineering and related fields.  The interventions will serve to ultimately
              increase the number of women pursuing degrees in engineering and related
              fields.  Outcomes for the project will include:  1) an increased knowledge of
              engineering careers and activities by each of the six target groups (listed
              above),  2) an increased interest in engineering and related fields by
              precollege and community college student participants, 3) an increase in plans
              to pursue engineering and related fields by precollege and community college
              student participants, 4) a greater likelihood for precollege student
              participants to enroll in higher-level precollege math and science courses than
              members of a control group, 5) improved teacher's efforts to create a
              gender-inclusive classroom atmosphere, 6) an integration of engineering
              information and activities into teacher participants' classrooms, 7) an
              increased number of outreach programs for middle and high school girls
              interested in engineering and related fields, and 8) an increase in interest
              and knowledge of engineering for students in participating teachers' classrooms
              and students participating in counselors' outreach programs.
     The project
              is a collaboration of the Arizona State University College of Engineering and
              Applied Sciences and College of Education; Northern Arizona University's
              Institute for Future Workforce Development; Chandler-Gilbert, South Mountain
              and Glendale Community Colleges; Phoenix Union High School District, Tempe
              Union High School District, Chandler Unified School District, Kyrene, Creighton
              and Roosevelt School Districts; Intel Corporation, Motorola, Lockheed
              Martin-Andersen Consulting, Honeywell, Boeing, Medtronic Micro-Rel, and Salt
              River Project; the Phoenix Urban Systemic Initiative, Arizona State Public
              Information Network (ASPIN), and other existing programs which will greatly
              enhance the impact of the WISE Investments project in terms of recruiting
              quality participants, informing project development, and providing
              dissemination outlets.  The nature of this collaboration allows for the
              enhancement of the pipeline that creates women engineers.
     Each year this
              comprehensive project will include 24 teachers, 6 district-level
              representatives, 12 counselors, 20 community college faculty, 10 community
              college advisors, 40 middle and high school girls and 40-80 parents.  Aside
              from those individuals directly participating in the WISE Investments project,
              through the engineering applications developed by teachers and community
              college faculty for their classrooms, and outreach projects developed by
              counselors and community college advisors, the impact of the project will be
              felt by thousands of students over time.

