Title       : Research and Development of Engineering Designs Associated With Complex
               Continuum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9872555

Award Number: 9872555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick A. McMurtry mcmurtry@eng.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel O. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Klewicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry A. Southerland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this CRCD project entitled, "Research and Development of
              Engineering Designs Associated with Complex Continuum Systems", at the
              University of Utah, is to provide a research and development environment where
              students are trained to simultaneously apply state-of-the-art computational and
              laboratory research techniques as they explore complex continuum mechanical
              phenomena relevant to industrial research, development and design applications.
               A particular emphasis of the project is to provide experience in the
              integrated application of computational and laboratory tools that focus on
              optimizing their benefits in engineering design processes.
	The research and
              science to be incorporated into this project includes components from several
              different engineering disciplines.  Recent advances in three general research
              areas will be the foci; (1) development of new non-intrusive optical
              diagnostics and molecular tagging used in physical experimentation, (2) recent
              advancements in simulation methodology, in particular computational steering,
              and (3) improved physical understanding of complex continuum systems in
              engineering applications.
	At the heart of the curriculum development will be
              hands-on education in the integrated use of numerical and physical
              experimentation tools from the conception of the research problem to completion
              of the research and/or design objectives.  This will be accomplished through
              participation in original research problems.
	This curriculum is intended not
              to simply teach students about new technology, but directly involve them in the
              reflective application of new technologies in authentic research and design
              problems.

