Title       : KDI: Multidisciplinary Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9872996

Award Number: 9872996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara B. Kiesler kiesler+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Hinds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne P. Weisband  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1337,1338,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a three-year standard award.  Recent advances in computing and
              telecommunications may have as much impact on multidisciplinary collaboration
              in science and industry as those technologies have had within business
              organizations and households.  For instance, global networks make it possible
              to create project teams whose members include biologists, medical scientists,
              and managers in pharmaceutical firms.  These changes may benefit from a better
              understanding of the requirements for successful multidisciplinary work, which
              often faces problems of both geographic and functional distance.  Functional
              distance is a theoretical construct referring to a variety of cultural barriers
              to collaboration created by differences in norms, practices, and languages of
              differing disciplines or professions.  This research will examine
              collaborations within and among disciplines using a variety of research
              strategies (e.g. interviews, citation analyses).  A series of experiments will
              test hypotheses about the role of geographic and functional distance in the
              appropriation of ideas, privacy, attribution of credit, and productivity of
              collaborative projects.  Finally, the PIs will develop and evaluate new
              computer applications for creating and supporting multidisciplinary
              collaborations.  This research tackles a range of theoretical problems in the
              fields of social psychology, sociology, anthropology, and computer science.  It
              will be important to science policy in describing how scientists organize their
              work in response to new technology, and more generally, in specifying the kinds
              of technology and management techniques that are required for successful
              teamwork and collaboration across time, space, and professional cultures and
              conditions.  It will also aid in understanding how multidisciplinary work
              affects career patterns of scientists and professionals.  Finally, the research
              will result in the development and test of usable computer-mediated
              communication technologies that help create and support collaborations.


