Title       : Enriching the Undergraduate Social Science Curriculum to Increase the Supply of
               African American Students Attending Doctoral Programs in the Social Sciences
               and Public Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9872753

Award Number: 9872753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1088185            (Estimated)
Investigator: Obie Clayton oclayton@morehouse.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Blumstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse College
	      830 Westview Drive S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303101427    404/681-2800

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Morehouse College was established a arrangement with the National  Consortium 
              on  Violence  Research  (NCOVR)  of  Carnegie  Mellon  University an NSF
              supported center.    The  focus  of the project on violence research is to
              expand  the  existing infrastructure of Morehouse College to conduct basic and 
              exploratory  research  on the etiology  of  violence  and  social  behavior, 
              to  plan  and  test  interventions  and  programs  for  violence reduction, to
              train a cadre of undergraduate students in  social  science research with the
              idea that these  students  will  pursue  graduate study in the areas of
              violence research  and  to  implement programs for education and community
              outreach  designed  to  improve the quality of life of Americans by reducing 
              violent  incidents  and  resultant fear of crime.  The  specific  research 
              areas  that  the Project will address will include, but  are  not  limited  to,
              the origins of violence, the economics of  violence,  the  legal aspects of
              violence, behavior modification techniques,  dysfunctional  families and their
              impact  on  violence,  domestic  abuse  and  best  intervention strategies. 
              Each of  the  project  areas identified above will be headed by a senior
              researcher from  Morehouse or NCOVR and the teams will include both junior
              faculty  and  undergraduate  students  from Morehouse  and  other  Atlanta 
              University Center (AUC) schools.  They believe that the  outcomes  of  these 
              efforts  will lead to a better  understanding  of  the  populations   studied 
              and  establish  priorities   for   further  research.   In  addition, this
              project will produce  a  cadre  of  undergraduates   trained  in  the 
              methodologies   and   theories  necessary  to  pursue study in violence
              research at the  graduate  level.    The strength of this proposal lies in the
              presence of an existing  research   institute  (The  Morehouse  Research 
              Institute)   and  amplified   by   the  additional  expertise  and  experience 
               of  researchers  and  practitioners in the  Atlanta University  Center  (AUC).
                The  AUC is a consortium of 6 independent  colleges  and  universities  
              primarily   serving   minority   students.     The  institutions  to  be
              involved in this project  include  Morehouse  College,  Spelman College, Clark
              Atlanta University,  and  Morris  Brown  College.  Each of these institutions
              is designated  as  an  HBCU.    The   combined   undergraduate   enrollment  
              of   these  institutions  is  approximately 12, 000 students  per  year.   As 
              such, this project has the potential to recruit students from the  largest 
              assemblage of African American students  in  the  United  States.   Although, 
              Morehouse College will  serve  as  the  core  institution  for  this
              initiative, faculty and students  for  the  other   AUC  institutions  will  be
               active  participants.    The  combination of these diverse institutions - with
              overlapping  and  complementing  missions - will create research and 
              dissemination  strengths unlikely to exist in a single institution or
              consortium  of  institutions  orchestrated for  this  specific  purpose.   To 
              augment  the  research  capabilities of  the  Morehouse  faculty,  researchers 
              from NCOVR will be brought to bear in  the  proposed  research agenda.   
              Morehouse College already has in place a management team which is  experienced 
               in   managing   a  complex,   multimillion   dollar  ($5,000,000  over  five 
              years) Department  of  Defense  project.  Additionally,   a  National  Advisory
               committee  consisting   of  scholars,  professionals and people knowledgeable
              about  criminal  behavior,  crime,  violence and substance  abuse  prevention 
              and  health  promotion  has  already  been  established  and  consults 
              regularly  with the Morehouse Research Institute.  As  they  will  illustrate 
              in  the  proposal, Morehouse has a  long  history  of  collaboration  and 
              active involvement with  community-based  and  institutional  efforts.  
              Further, Morehouse  College  enjoys  an  excellent  working  relationship  with
                the  Center  for  Disease  Control and Prevention
