Title       : KDI: Learning of Objects and Object Classes in Visual Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9872936

Award Number: 9872936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomaso Poggio tp@ai.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amir H. Assadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Earl K. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Wornell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Kanwisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1337,8888,9107,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Poggio
9872936

The ability to learn to categorize and recognize objects is a
              key feature of the visual system of humans and higher animals.  Yet, how the
              representation underlying these powerful visual abilities is organized and
              acquired is still largely unknown.  The investigator and his colleagues tackle
              the problem of how the visual cortex learns to represent and recognize novel
              objects and object classes through a combination of computational,
              physiological and psychophysical approaches.  The physiological experiments on
              alert monkeys rely on multielectrode recordings for which the investigators
              develop a tool kit of appropriate data mining techniques, based in part on
              their own work on learning and classification algorithms.  In particular, the
              investigators undertake a multi-disciplinary research project consisting of
              four interacting components:  i)  Computational modeling of inferotemporal (IT)
              cortical neurons, extending their previous work on representations of single
              objects in IT; ii) cortical physiology using multiple electrodes in awake,
              behaving monkeys trained on between- and within-class classification tasks on
              novel classes of stimuli; iii) new data mining techniques for processing
              multiple electrode data, including classification and learning techniques; iv) 
              visual psychophysics including fMRI studies in humans and monkeys, allowing to
              relate the findings from monkey physiology to object learning in the human
              brain.

Understanding learning in the human brain means understanding the
              very core of intelligence.  Not only is this one of the remaining fundamental
              challenges in science but it is also one area where even small steps forward
              will have significant implications for understanding neurological diseases and
              disorders, and also for the future of computing and machine intelligence. 
              However, despite enormous progress in the last decade or two, science does not
              yet know what various areas of the cortex do and how.  Because understanding
              the brain, the most complex system we know, is a huge endeavor, the present
              project focuses on understanding a part of cortex, involved in a key and very
              difficult task in everybody's daily life -- even if subjectively very easy:
              learning to categorize and recognize visual objects such as faces or cars. 
              Understanding how brain cells come to represent objects will be a major
              breakthrough for neuroscience and also for eventually designing machines
              capable of achieving human-like performance.  More importantly, any significant
              progress in the specific problem of object recognition will have a major impact
              on the goals of the KDI program, because it will open the door to understanding
              broader issues of learning and intelligence in brains and machines.


