Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Search for Microscopic Theory for the
               State-of-the-Art Epitaxial Growth of Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9872053

Award Number: 9872053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Yao Fong fong@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a collaborative research project
              between Dr. Ching-Yao Fong, Physics Department at the University of California
              at Davis, and Dr. Selim Ciraci, Physics Department  at Bilkent University in
              Ankara, Turkey. The two scientists propose to investigate both homo- and
              hetero-epitaxial growths and the role that specific surfactants play in
              modifying these growth processes on semiconductor surfaces from the most
              elementary point of view: with one, several and one monolayer adatoms on a
              surface.  The objective is to develop a microscopic understanding that provides
              a foundation for better control of growth processes.  The two scientists will
              study the basic interaction between the substrate and an incoming atom, or a
              surfactant, on small size system by using an ab-initio method that is capable
              of distinguishing between configurations that have small energy differences. 
              The details of the interaction will be used to develop empirical potential
              energy functions that can accurately describe various low coordination
              configurations.  These functions will be used to study various atomic processes
              that occur during epitaxial growth.  They will analyze the electronic structure
              of every major step in simulated growth to bridge the gap between the
              predictions of atomic configurations in real space and the results of scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM) experiments.    Scope:  This project will support
              collaboration between two teams with complementary capabilities and
              institutional facilities.  Drs. Fong and Ciraci have independently published in
              this field, and the combination of their expertise would help this research. 
              There are significant capabilities for the experimental work at both UC Davis
              and at Bilkent University.  The project will involve travel of a US graduate
              student from UC Davis to Bilkent to participate in the research there, and
              travel by two students from Bilkent to Davis to work in Dr. Fong's laboratory. 
               The knowledge gained in this joint effort will provide theoretical background
              for technological applications in the design and manufacture of electronic and
              opto-electronic devices that will benefit both countries.  The project fits
              well within the objectives of the Division of International Programs.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
