Title       : Genomic Analysis of Seed Quality Traits in Corn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9872677

Award Number: 9872677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2197783            (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Hawk   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bertrand Lemieux  (Principal Investigator former)
              John S. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Dudley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard M. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              About 85% of the U.S. corn harvest is used as animal feed, therefore the
              development of "high energy feeds" is highly relevant to the economy of the
              United States. Fats are the most concentrated source of energy in the cell. The
              long term effort conducted at the University of Illinois has resulted in lines
              with about 20% oil (Illinois High Oil or IHO) as well as lines with less than
              2% oil (Illinois Low-Oil or IHO). These lines have retained a very high level
              of genetic diversity and preliminary mapping studies suggest that a large
              number of genes are involved in this important trait. The goal of the research
              is to identify all of the genes that are involved in this genetic
              trait.

This research program will use a "candidate gene approach" to
              identify genes that may play a significant role in oil deposition in corn. The
              first step of this approach consists of using parallel gene expression analysis
              as a tool to identify genes whose expression levels are altered in IHO vs ILO
              maize. By using the large collection of maize mutants with defects in embryo
              and endosperm development it should be possible to identify a large number of
              genes that share common developmental expression programs. A number of maize
              lines have also been found that can "modify" the amplitude of the IHO trait
              (i.e., lines of corn that contain modifier genes for the IHO genes). These
              lines of maize could also be useful in finding candidate genes associated with
              components of the high oil traits.

The aforementioned approach will identify
              many candidate genes. To reduce this number of candidates to a smaller number
              of "highly probable" candidates genes, a number of strategies will be used to
              map single gene mutations relative to the high oil trait. These will rely on
              cutting edge mutation detection technologies. Two strategies will be used to
              associate single nucleotide mutations and components of the high oil
              trait:

The first will consist of a "direct association" between single
              nucleotide mutations and components of the high oil trait.

The second will
              consist of an "indirect association" between single nucleotide mutations and
              IHO genes.

Both of these strategies will exploit the plant genetic resources
              developed by the University of Illinois for high resolution mapping of DNA
              polymorphisms in IHO x ILO crosses.

In addition to the research goal, this
              research program is designed to train graduate students and post-doctoral
              fellows in the science of genomics. The students will have the benefit of
              having two thesis advisors each and each PI will serve as a co-advisor to a
              minimum of 2 students.

