Title       : MOTI: Mining Bibliographic Information on Emerging Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9872482

Award Number: 9872482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald Senich                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Porter alan.porter@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Watts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Carlisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9872482
Porter
	The advent of the "Information Economy" is making
              ever-expanding information resources available.  A significant challenge is to
              exploit these resources to enhance the management of technology (MOT). 
              Technology Opportunities Analysis (TOA) has been created to analyze text
              information retrieved from electronic publication and patent databases.  This
              project would apply TOA to identify new 'information products' that inform
              technology managers and professionals about particular emerging technologies'
              current and future prospects.  If successful, this will enhance capture of
              external technology information resulting in better informed research
              management, competitive technical intelligence, and strategic planning. 
              Specific analyses and ways to represent technology information will be
              developed, then compared.  These analyses combine bibliometrics and natural
              language processing to measure particular facets of innovation, yielding
              innovation indicators.  Five types of users will evaluate if this information
              fulfills their diverse technology management needs and suggest improvements in
              content and in ways to present findings.  Feedback from users in collaborating
              organizations will help refine the content and form of these innovation
              indicators.
	The results of this program should enhance innovation
              forecasting, allow users to gain a perspective on R&D activities in a target
              domain and enable managers of technology, as well as students, to take full
              advantage of emerging electronic forms of information.

