Title       : Mathematical Sciences Research Computing Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a9872014

Award Number: 9872014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75407              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birne T. Binegar binegar@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carel Faber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. McConnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann G. Burchard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematics at Oklahoma State University will purchase
and
              maintain a computational server dedicated to the support of research
in the
              mathematical sciences.  The equipment will be used to carry out
symbolic
              algebra computations by our research faculty; including, in
particular,

1.
              "Intersection theory computations on moduli spaces of curves",
(C. Faber).
              Computations aimed at verifying a detailed conjectural
description of the
              tautological ring of the moduli space of smooth 
curves of genus greater than
              or equal to 2; and an extension of the 
algorithm for intersecting divisors on
              the compactification this
moduli space to an algorithm that will compute
              intersection numbers of
arbitrary classes in the tautological rings of the
              compactified moduli 
space.

"SCHUBERT: a MAPLE package for intersection
              theory in algebraic
geometry", (S. Katz). Continuation of the development with
              Stromme of a
symbolic algebra package  for research in intersection theory in
              algebraic
geometry.

3. "SHEAFHOM, and Hecke operators on the cuspidal
              cohomology of arithmetic
groups", (M. McConnell). Further development of the
              programs SHEAFHOM that
allow one to work with sheaves, spectral sequences, and
              intersection
homology; and calculations aimed at identifying the cuspidal
              cohomology  of
certain congruence subgroups of GL(4,Z) and computing the
              Hecke
operators on it.

4. "Computing Projects in Numerical Analysis and
              Approximation Theory",
(H.G.W. Burchard). Data fitting by means of primal-dual
              interior
points methods.

