Title       : Structure and Function of the Cotton Genome: An Integrated Analysis of the
               Genetics, Development and Evolution of the Cotton Fiber
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a9872630

Award Number: 9872630
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3800001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thea A. Wilkins tawilkins@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As the world's leading natural fiber, cotton is a major contributor to the U.S.
              and global economy, providing about 55% of the fiber used in textile
              manufacturing. The commercially-important cottons in the USA are allotetraploid
              ("AD") species that evolved from the interspecific hybridization of an Old
              World "A"-genome species of African-Asian origin with an endemic, New World
              "D"-genome diploid. The fibers themselves are actually single-celled hairs
              (trichomes) that range in length from ~17 to >50 mm, depending on the species.
              A vertically integrated, interdisciplinary team has been assembled to elucidate
              the organization, structure and function of genes that impart unique
              agriculturally-important properties to the fiber and to determine what role
              polyploidy has played in the evolution of the fiber.

The specific research
              objectives are divided into three inter-related and complementary approaches:
              Functional Genomics, Structural Genomics, and Comparative Biology. In
              combination with the generation of fiber ESTs, the functional role of gene
              cascades and signaling pathways in developing cotton fibers derived from A or D
              diploid species will be assessed using DNA microarray technology. Global
              genetic and expression analyses will be performed in parallel using a unique
              collection of fiber developmental mutants and near-isogenic lines for fiber
              Quantitative Trait Loci (QTLs). For long-term gene function studies, parental
              lines for generating a gene knockout population in cotton will be developed.
              The structural genomics component will focus on linking fiber genes to the
              physical map by mapping novel fiber ESTs that are differentially expressed
              during fiber development in relation to fiber mutants and QTLs. Using a new
              technique tailored to polyploids, "alloBACs" containing the alleles from the
              individual subgenomes of the tetraploid will be identified for comparative
              analysis. Genes implicated in fiber development on the basis of expression
              patterns and the proximity to QTLs or mutant loci will be subjected to detailed
              comparative analysis to gain insight into the evolutionary basis of the fiber
              at the molecular level. The following null hypotheses will be tested: (1)
              homeologous sequences have evolved independently subsequent to
              allopolyploidization; and (2) rates of sequence evolution are equivalent in
              diploids and polyploids.

The novel integration of structural, functional and
              evolutionary approaches to elucidate the molecular and evolutionary basis of
              the cotton fiber will generate vast new resources that will be available to the
              public sector for basic and applied research purposes. The scientific endeavors
              of this multi-disciplinary team are expected to provide new insight into
              fundamental cellular processes in plant growth and development, the
              evolutionary basis of morphological change, and the functional significance of
              polyploidy. Thus, enhanced understanding of this complex agricultural trait
              holds great promise for the genetic improvement of cotton and other important
              crop species in terms of production and quality.

