Title       : CEDAR/TIMED: Southern-Hemisphere Mesopause Winds, Temperatures, and OH/557.7 nm
               Airglow Intensities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a9872807

Award Number: 9872807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29775              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Meriwether john.meriwether@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Hysell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM9872807

The investigators will upgrade an existing Fabry Perot
              Interferometer (FPI) at the Arequipa Optical Observatory in Peru.  The upgrade
              will produce a capability for mesopause measurements of winds and temperatures
              with high accuracy and frequent sampling rates.  The modifications will also
              improve the measurements of thermospheric winds, temperatures, and airglow
              intensities interleaved with the mesosphere measurements.  These observations
              will contribute to the study of major features of mesopause dynamics such as
              the diurnal tidal winds and temperatures, and planetary wave variations in a
              region of the Southern Hemisphere where the current samping distribution by
              ground-based stations is sparse.  These nighttime measurements, combined with
              Jicamarca Radar measurements of daytime winds, will help ameliorate the
              sampling and aliasing errors that satellite measurements suffer due to the slow
              precession of the spacecraft in local time.  The upgrade will also make
              possible the study of mesopause small-scale gradients in wind, temperature, and
              hydroxyl airglow intensities that may arise from orographic wave effects.  Also
              included in the effort is an upgrade in an imaging camera at Arequipa,
              involving the procurement and installation of a broadband filter to make
              possible the imaging observations of nocturnal variations of hydroxyl
              intensities. The Arequipa observations will support CEDAR/TIMED science goals. 
              CEDAR, which stands for Coupling, Energetics, and Dynamics of Atmospheric
              Regions, is a global change program that combines theoretical modeling with
              ground-based measurements to study the upper atmosphere and ionosphere.  TIMED,
              for Thermosphere, Ionosphere, Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics, is a NASA
              satellite program to study similar regions of the atmosphere.  The joint
              CEDAR/TIMED program aims to coordinate ground-based and space-based
              observations to achieve better understanding of physical processes in the lower
              thermosphere and ionosphere. 

