Title       : Novel Sensors R&D Leading To Curriculum Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a9872531

Award Number: 9872531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheikh A. Akbar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Prabir K. Dutta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A continuing need exists for measurements in industrial processes and products. 
              Where sensor technology has been applied many benefits have resulted, including
              improved energy efficiency, better quality, lower scrap or off-specification
              products, and reduced emissions.  Considerable activity exists in the
              development of new sensor technology.  Unfortunately, much of this is
              fragmented and not always directly applicable to making reliable measurements
              in the harsh industrial environments found in the aerospace, steel, heat
              treating, metal casting, polymer, glass, ceramic, pulp and paper, automotive,
              utility and power industries.  Most of the sensor development efforts are based
              on empirical and/or trial-and-error methods.  A fundamental understanding of
              the sensing and degradation mechanisms is lacking, and this makes the
              optimization of the sensing behavior a formidable task.

	Under the umbrella
              of the NSF Center for Industrial Sensors and Measurement (CISM), a research and
              development program for harsh environment sensors is being actively pursued at
              Ohio State University.  Research teams include students and faculty from
              Departments of Chemistry, Physics, Materials Science and Engineering,
              Electrical Engineering, Industrial Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and
              Chemical Engineering.  Efforts are now underway to embrace the field of
              biosensors and microfabrication.  The objective of this CRCD program entitled
              "Novel Sensors R&D Leading to Curriculum Development," is to exploit CISM
              research advances in sensors for implementation of an innovative classroom and
              industry-oriented curriculum.  A research program that integrates all aspects
              from basic research through product development in a highly communicative
              environment will be established. The CRCD program will target undergraduate and
              graduate students and utilize an interactive approach emphasizing the
              importance of problem solving, group work, communication and use of
              state-of-the-art technology.  Technical education will be expanded to include
              business, management, administration and law with advice of our colleagues from
              the Colleges of Business, Education, and Law.  The goal of this program is to
              ensure that students understand and can communicate the impact of their
              research and education to the broader community.  An educational environment
              where students can continually assess how their research progress is achieving
              the stated goals will help develop skills useful for future careers.

