Title       : Development of Tools for Tomato Functional Genomics: Application to Analysis of
               Fruit Development, Responses to Pathogens, and Genome Synteny with Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9872617

Award Number: 9872617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4648484            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Tanksley sdt4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Tomato has long served as a model system for plant genetics, development,
              pathology, and physiology, which has resulted in an accumulation of substantial
              information regarding the biology of this economically important organism. In
              recent years, the most widely studied aspects of tomato biology include
              development and ripening of fleshy fruits and characterization of responses to
              infection by microbial pathogens. Although Arabidopsis has surpassed some plant
              systems as a model for basic plant biology research, the areas of fruit
              ripening and pathogen response continue to thrive with tomato as the
              experimental organism of choice. In the case of fruit development, this is
              simply due to the fact that the developmental program which results in the
              dramatic expansion and ripening of carpels in tomato and in many other
              economically and nutritionally important species does not occur in Arabidopsis.
              With regard to plant defense, decades of applied and basic research on tomato
              have resulted in characterization of responses to numerous disease agents. In
              many cases, this has led to the identification and genetic characterization of
              loci that confer general or pathogen-specific resistance. In addition, many
              experimental tools and features of tomato make it an excellent model system in
              its own right including: extensive germplasm collections; numerous natural,
              induced and transgenic mutants and genetic variants; routine transformation
              technology; a dense RFLP map; numerous cDNA and genomic libraries; a small
              genome; relatively short life-cycle; and ease of growth and maintenance. The
              intense research efforts in fruit biology and defense responses and the
              available tools that make tomato an especially attractive model system have
              resulted in many important recent discoveries. Specific highlights which have
              had a broad impact on the field of plant biology include: control of gene
              expression by antisense/sense technology; functional characterization of
              numerous genes influencing fruit development and ripening; transgenic analysis
              of genes which impact susceptibility or response to pathogen attack; and
              isolation of more disease resistance genes than any other plant
              species.

This project involves development of an integrated set of
              experimental tools for use in tomato functional genomics. The resources
              developed will be used to expand understanding of the molecular genetic events
              underlying fruit development and the response to pathogen infection and will be
              made available to the research community for analysis of diverse plant
              biological phenomena. Specific objectives include: (1) development of a tomato
              EST (Expressed Sequence Tag) database with emphasis on sequences expressed
              during fruit development and maturation and in pathogen-challenged tissues; (2)
              genome-wide gene expression analyses during fruit development and ripening and
              in response to pathogen infection; and (3) development of a tomato-Arabidopsis
              synteny map which will be used by members of this group and made publicly
              available for target gene isolation, candidate gene identification, and
              analysis of genome organization and evolution.

