Title       : Enhancing Collaborative Research in Industrial and Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9872701

Award Number: 9872701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1336112            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eui H. Park park@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bala Ram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Rubloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Donald Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Industrial Engineering (IE) at North Carolina A&T State
              University (NCA&T) will enhance its research and education programs at the
              undergraduate and graduate level through collaboration with The Logistics
              Institute (TLI) at the Georgia Institute of Technology and the Institute for
              Systems Research (ISR) at the University of Maryland.

The vision of the IE
              graduate program at NCA&T is to be a nationally reputed and leading producer of
              minority industrial engineers with specialization in the areas of materials
              handling and warehousing, logistics and supply chain management, virtual
              manufacturing, scheduling, human-computer interface, and cognitive
              ergonomics.

The mission of the project is to establish a self-sustaining
              partnership with TLI and ISR in order to enhance research and education at
              NCA&T, especially in the areas identified above.  To achieve the mission of the
              project, the following goals have been identified:

À To collaborate with TLI
              and ISR by participating in on-going and new research projects in the above
              research areas;
À To submit proposals for collaborative research jointly with
              TLI and ISR to public and private agencies;
À To develop and improve graduate
              and undergraduate course offerings at NCA&T in the areas identified above;
À
              To support graduate and undergraduate student research in collaboration with
              TLI and ISR;
À To establish a long-term collaboration of mutual interest with
              TLI and ISR.

They seek to accomplish the above goals via a set of
              initiatives for collaborative research, education, and dissemination. 
              Initiatives for research collaboration include joint projects with faculty at
              ILI and ISR, and opportunities for graduate students from NCA&T to spend a
              semester at the research centers.  Education enhancement initiatives include
              course offerings over distance education channels, seminar series, and
              collaborative undergraduate projects.  An annual symposium will seek to
              disseminate project results to faculty and students from other minority-serving
              institutions, and to present capabilities of the partnership to federal and
              private agencies.

The effort under the project will be managed by evaluating
              and sponsoring specific joint proposals submitted by faculty at NCA&T and the
              research center; this will be administered by an Administrative Committee.  An
              Advisory Board will address issues relating to sustaining the collaboration
              beyond the project duration.

NCA&T is a land grant institution with a
              distinguished record spanning a period of over hundred years in academics,
              research, and public service.  The College of Engineering is the Nation's
              leading producer of minority engineers.  The undergraduate program in the IE
              Department has a current enrollment of 168 students of which 92% are
              African-Americans and 48% are female.  The BSIE degree program is accredited by
              EAC/ABET.  The graduate program in the IE Department is over 20 years old. 
              Until four years ago, it was the only IE graduate program among all HBCUs.  The
              graduate program has maintained a stable enrollment of over 50 students with
              90% African-American and 60% female population.  The progress made by the
              Department in graduate research and education over its two decades of existence
              has resulted, as of December 1997, in authorization from the Board of Governors
              of the University of North Carolina system to plan for a doctoral program in
              industrial Engineering.  The Ph.D. Program is expected to begin in Fall of
              1999.





