Title       : KDI: Segmental and Prosodic Optical Phonetics for Human and Machine Speech
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9872849

Award Number: 9872849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1410000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne E. Bernstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Abeer A. Alwan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Talkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Auer, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Keating  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1096,1337,1338,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              	This is a three-year standard award.  When people talk, they produce both
              acoustic and optical speech signals. When people with normal hearing and vision
              communicate face to face, they make use of both types of signals. Being able to
              see and hear a talker can enhance speech understanding in conditions of noisy
              or difficult-to-comprehend speech. The goals of this multidisciplinary project
              are to quantitatively characterize optical speech signals, examine how optical
              speech characteristics relate to acoustic and to physiologic speech
              characteristics, study several fundamental issues in human visual speech
              perception, and apply obtained knowledge to optical speech synthesis. Across
              the entire project, the main questions we address are: (1) What speech
              information can perceivers get from seeing talkers? (2) How are optical and
              acoustic signals related to underlying speech articulations? (3) What are the
              perceptual and neurophysiological bases for visual speech perception? and (4)
              Can we demonstrate usefulness of this knowledge for developing synthesis of
              artificial talking faces? A multi-talker database is being recorded for this
              project. Recordings include acoustic, optical (with retroreflector labeling on
              the faces), and physiologic signals (Electromagnetic Midsaggital Articulography
              -- EMA). Studies follow up on recent results in the literature showing high
              correlations between acoustic and optical speech measures, and between external
              (optical) and internal (physiologic) speech measures. Studies include
              perceptual experiments to determine segmental and prosodic speech
              characteristics. We are investigating the neurophysiologic bases for visual
              speech perception in deaf and hearing adults using electrophysiologic measures.
              Optical speech synthesis is being employed to (1) test our understanding of the
              cues that control visual perception of phonemes and prosody, and (2)
              investigate the neurophysiological bases for human sensitivity to optical
              speech characteristics. 

The project will impact engineering in the areas of
              speech synthesis and audiovisual automatic speech recognition. It will extend
              understanding of human speech perception and its neurophysiologic bases in deaf
              and hearing individuals. The applications that will derive from the project
              include ones in second language training, enhancement of speech transmission
              quality and recognition accuracy under conditions of environmental noise,
              efficient storage and transmission of optical speech information, stimulus
              control in audiovisual perceptual experiments, and communication enhancement
              for hearing impaired people. The multidisciplinary team of principal
              investigators represent the fields of cognitive science, speech perception,
              linguistics, electrical engineering, and neurophysiology.

