Title       : Parallel Infrastructure for Recognition of Non-Local Patterns from Particle
               Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9872114

Award Number: 9872114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene Cooperman gene@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Swain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Reucroft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project studies pattern recognition algorithms for High Energy
              Physics
(HEP).  In particular, it looks at pattern recognition for data from
              HEP
experiments which requires global information and lends itself well
              to
parallelism.  While a trivial form of parallelism has always been
              present
in HEP software due to the independent data (results of separate
              high
energy collisions), there has been little done for pattern
              recognition
within single events.  This is a particularly pressing problem for
              the next
generation of experiments where data is taken in at rates of up to
              20
Mbytes each 25 nanoseconds and rapid pattern recognition is essential
              to
decide which events should be kept for later study.  Since a single
              event
will leave traces in many different detectors, pattern recognition here
              is
a non-local, non-sequential pattern matching problem.

Other physicists
              have tried to find a quick heuristic match during a single
pass through the
              data. In contrast, this project will do a more careful
analysis of the data to
              better resolve multiple events that are close in
time and space by using
              signal processing techniques (e.g. Kalman
filtering) to pre-process the data.
              The project will use a better
algorithmic formalism to take advantage of
              computer science algorithms and
data structures, and will implement parallel
              algorithms to recognize
non-local patterns.  Special challenges will be
              presented by the
anticipated datasets, which have petabyte sizes.  New
              algorithms for these
applications will have to take careful account of the
              different access
times for RAM and disk access.  This project is
              interdisciplinary in
nature, with potential impact on both computer science
              and high energy
physics.


