Title       : The Management of Distant Returns: Decision Making Processes and Systems of
               Resource Allocation, Strategic Planning, & Mgmt. Control for In-House Research
               in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9872070

Award Number: 9872070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39984              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Camillus camillus@katz.business.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gaurab Bhardwaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this investigation is to understand the processes and systems by
              which effective decisions may-be made in the context of distant returns. The
              particular situation being studied is the conduct of in-house research
              in-science by firms. Three specific issues are being studied using field data.
              One, how do qualitative criteria and-behavioral and informal processes
              influence sequences of resource allocation decisions for-in-house research in
              science made over extended years? Two, how do evolving-systems and processes of
              strategic planning and management control influence such sequences of choices
              over the years? Three, how do firm strategies, capabilities, and-new knowledge
              created by research in science influence one another and co-evolve over the
              years?- Given limited prior research on these issues, the investigators will
              develop a grounded theory inductively, employing a-comparative, historical,
              case study methodology to study research decisions in a-pharmaceutical firm.
              Four projects for in-house research in science over roughly the same period
              will be examined in depth. They will be placed in the context of all projects
              in existence during the period of interest. The approach will allow the study
              of extended decision-making processes in their entirety,-and relate processes
              with outcomes to evaluate effectiveness. Qualitative and quantitative data will
              be collected from public and company records, as well as through open-ended,
              semi-structured,-and structured interviews with those scientists, mid- and
              senior-managers who are associated with the projects. Data-collection,
              analysis, and writing will proceed simultaneously. To guide-data collection,
              relevant constructs will be drawn mainly from the research literature in
              strategic decision-making,-resource allocation, real options, strategic
              planning, management control, firm strategy, and organizational
              capabilities.-The investigation will identify how highly uncertain but critical
              resource allocation choices are made,-over extended periods, for returns that
              accrue only in the distant future. It will offer the behavioral and
              informal-underpinnings of such choices to complement the existing literature
              that examines mainly their quantitative, objective, and economic aspects. In
              doing so, it will further theory development in the management of research
              in-science, longitudinal decision-making, and scientific capabilities
              development; and provide a basis for the design of-appropriate dynamic
              administrative systems and processes of strategic planning and management
              control.-Additionally, a decision-making framework will be developed to aid in
              making and managing-long term sequences of decisions for the conduct of
              in-house research in science. Findings will be reported in-journal articles
              aimed at both academics and practitioners. Cases written for the development of
              theory will be-modified into teaching cases and notes for R&D managers and
              senior managers of science based firms.-                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
