Title       : Comprehensive Genetic, Physical, and Database Resources for Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a9872655

Award Number: 9872655
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4352521            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Coe CoeE@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen C. Cone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Polacco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Su-Shing Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. McMullen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The US is a recognized world leader in the production and trade of agricultural
              commodities and US corn exports represent 80% of the total world trade in corn.
              While the yield of corn in the US has steadily increased over the last 40
              years, it is beginning to level off. With the expected increase in world
              population combined with concerns over the environmental effects of chemical
              intensive agricultural practices, it is clear that a new way to increase corn
              yield is needed. According to some experts, 50% of the increase in corn yield
              can be attributed to genetic improvements made to corn with the other 50%
              coming from use of agrochemicals. With the advent of genomics, the scientific
              community has an unprecedented opportunity to make significant genetic
              improvements in corn.

The primary goal of this project is to take the first
              step toward understanding the structure and function of the Maize Genome by
              developing and disseminating a comprehensive integrated physical and genetic
              map of the Maize genome. This will involve the preparation of Maize Genome
              fragments inserted into a Bacterial Artificial Chromosome library, and the
              development and use of an array of markers (Expressed Sequence Tags, Single
              Sequence Repeats and Radiation Hybrids) to help determine the map. In all cases
              the results (the map) and the reagents (the markers) will be made available to
              the scientific community at large.

A consolidated physical and genomic map
              of maize, and the molecular mapping markers to be developed will enable the use
              by basic scientists for gene discovery, studies of gene functions, and
              comparative genomics among others. The information and resources that will
              result from this activity will be invaluable to basic research, the corn
              industry, and, ultimately, US consumers.

