Title       : Analytical and Computational Framework for n-Body Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  2000   
File        : a9872101

Award Number: 9872101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananth Grama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore a range of computational issues related
              to
large-scale simulation of n-body systems using parallel formulations
              of
multipole and Ewald summation techniques.  Today, these techniques
              are
known to scale to systems with tens of millions of bodies,
              including
simulations of molecular dynamics of real materials and full
              galaxies.
However, increasingly data analysis, interpretation, and
              visualization of
these results present serious bottlenecks.  Effective
              algorithms for
pre-processing the data as it is generated and fast techniques
              for querying
the pre-processed data are necessary.  This project will
              contribute the
following methods to those algorithms:

* Analytical
              quantification of performance and parallel processing
overheads of a range of
              advanced n-body methods in the context of various
applications.

* Methods
              for dynamically steering the simulation to subdomains that
exhibit
              "interesting" properties.

* Techniques for predicting macro properties such
              as Young's modulus,
permittivity, and permeability from molecular dynamics
              simulations.

* Methods for data analysis and visualization based on
              selective focus and
level of detail that are tightly integrated into the
              simulation.

The methods will be validated on molecular dynamics applications
              in
materials simulation, protein synthesis, and electrostatics.





