Title       : San Francisco State University-Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
               Collaboration for Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2001      
File        : a9872740

Award Number: 9872740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $901825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Axler axler@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Eisenbud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This project will establish a long-term collaboration between the Mathematics
              Department of San Francisco State University (SFSU), one of the country's
              largest centers of education for minority students, and the Mathematical
              Sciences Research Institute (MSRI), one of the world's leading mathematical
              research centers.  Each semester this collaboration will revolve around an
              undergraduate topics course at SFSU based on one of the emphasis programs at
              MSRI that semester.  

	The SFSU-MSRI collaboration will be taught by a
              faculty member in the SFSU Mathematics Department (a different person each
              semester).  This person will participate in the MSRI program associated with
              the chosen topic during the semester and will act as a bridge between SFSU
              students and the research mathematicians at MSRI.  The SFSU-MSRI collaboration
              course will feature monthly talks by leading mathematicians who are visiting
              MSRI to participate in its program.

	All lectures in the SFSU-MSRI
              collaboration course will be made available to the world through MSRI's
              streaming video technology.  This technique, pioneered by MSRI for publishing
              mathematical lectures on the World Wide Web, uses one browser window to show
              the slides of the talk and another to show the speaker while the sound flows
              smoothly.  Because research mathematicians rarely pitch work to undergraduates,
              as they will in the SFSU-MSRI collaboration course, the entire set of lectures
              will be made available on CD-ROM for dissemination to other
              universities.

	So that SFSU students and faculty can have the library
              resources needed to prepare for MSRI programs, mathematics books will be
              purchased for the SFSU library.  Each semester, SFSU will emphasize the
              purchase of books for the library related to the topic of that semester's
              SFSU-MSRI collaboration course.

	This project also will support four SFSU
              graduate students each year.  These students will participate in various
              activities at MSRI each semester.

	SFSU will become an Academic Sponsor of
              MSRI.  Membership benefits include sending two graduate students, expenses
              paid, to the MSRI Summer Program, inviting speakers from MSRI with expenses
              partially paid, receiving the preprint series, and financial support for
              conferences.




