Title       : Advanced Materials for Civil Infrastructures: Multidisciplinary Curriculum
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9872546

Award Number: 9872546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Watkins watkins@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Nanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. Chandrashekhara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abdeldjelil Belarbi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,9299,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this CRCD project at the University of Missouri-Rolla, entitled
              "Advanced Materials for Civil Infrastructures:  Multidisciplinary Curriculum
              Development," is to create multidisciplinary educational resources for the
              students of the UMR and the greater professional community in the capabilities
              and use of advanced materials and sensors for civil infrastructures.  Advanced
              composite materials offer superior mechanical properties, long-term durability,
              and fabrication flexibility.  Recent sensor advances offer in-situ monitoring
              of the health, geometric, environmental, and structural characteristics of
              civil engineering structures.  Although it is a relatively new area in civil
              engineering, the importance of composite materials and integral "smart" sensors
              are rapidly increasing due to the improved performance and durability as
              compared to conventional technologies.  The area addresses growing needs for
              strengthening and rehabilitating aging structures and for designing new
              structures to more stringent requirements and for longer lifetime.  Advanced
              materials and smart structures technology encompass several engineering
              disciplines; hence, effective education must cross the traditional boundaries. 
              Engineers must gain interdisciplinary knowledge and experience to effectively
              understand and use the new technology.  The specific objectives of the project
              are:

* To develop an interdisciplinary teaching laboratory, 
* To
              construct, instrument, and monitor a smart all-composite bridge on the UMR
              campus as a field experience for students and as a technological
              demonstration,
* To create a World Wide Web site for the Internet which
              features tutorials for the component technologies, multimedia demonstrations
              from the course, virtual experiments from the teaching laboratory, up-dated
              results from the bridge demonstration, and links to other Internet sites
              related to smart advanced structures,
* To develop and offer an associated
              short course for professionals,
* To demonstrate educational methodologies for
              effective interdisciplinary instruction, 
* To prepare an integrated CD-ROM
              hypermedia resource of technology tutorials, experimental demonstrations,
              virtual experiments, bridge tests, course notes, and new technical developments
              in this area.

The project will address the national need for engineers with
              interdisciplinary experience and solutions to infrastructure challenges.  It is
              an extension of the long-standing joint research activities of the
              interdisciplinary research team and will involve significant industrial
              interaction.  The combination of the course and laboratory, bridge
              demonstration, Internet access, short course, and educational innovations is a
              comprehensive approach to disseminating new technology.  These many facets will
              benefit undergraduates, graduate students, their future employers,
              infrastructure engineering at UMR, other academic programs, and industry.

