Title       : NSF Action Agenda for Systemic Eng Ed Reform: Expanding the National Engineering
               Education Delivery System as the Foundation for an On-Line Engineering
               Education Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9872570

Award Number: 9872570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice M. Agogino aagogino@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              University of California Berkeley  Expanding the National Engineering Education
              Delivery System as the Foundation for an On-line Engineering Education
              Community    The last four years have brought the explosion of the Internet and
              world-wide networked communications through the World Wide Web (WWW).  New
              Internet-mediated methodologies are accelerating the paradigm shift from a
              teacher-centric, lecture model of instruction to a learner-centric,
              technology-enhanced learning model that allows the student to control more of
              the learning process, with professors and instructors serving as mentors and
              guides.  Instructional technology can both enable end enhance these new modes
              of learning - via courseware, course Web sites, etc.  Engineering educators
              aroung the country and around the world are all developing these materials to
              support their courses.  Two key NSF reports urge the formation of a national
              resource to address these concerns by providing access to quality courseware
              and to disseminate successful educational practices.       This system is
              available today in the National  Engineering Education Delivery System (NEEDS).
               NEEDS supports an infrastructure that catalogs, indexes, searches, archives,
              downloads and reviews engineering education courseware.  Over the last four
              years NEEDS has gained experience and knowledge in developing a national
              resource of engineering courseware.    The project will:  1. Maintain NEEDS as
              a service to the engineering education community, expanding cataloging efforts
              and viewership to all U.S. Colleges of Engineering.  2. Continue to grow and
              evolve NEEDS as the foundation for an on-line engineering education community -
              adding reviews, feedback to authors on dissemination and use, discussion tools,
              and improved indexing for engineering education.  3. Expand review and
              evaluation services to improve the quality of engineering education courseware.
               4. Serve as a bridge towards the development of a broader program to support
              the Science, Mathematics, Engineeri ng, and Technology Education (SMETE)
              community as a whole.
