Title       : A NetWork-Enabled Virtual Factory System for Manufacturing Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9872488

Award Number: 9872488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff W. Rickel rickel@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Bekey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ed Kazlauskas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maged M. Dessouky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9872488
Rickel

A new three-year project is proposed, aimed at significantly
              expanding the VFTS through extensive evaluation and dissemination.  After
              preparing the software for large-scale dissemination, and instrumenting it to
              gather evaluation data, controlled testing and evaluation will begin at four
              different universities: USC, San Jose State University, Tennessee State
              University, and the University of Virginia.  Use within each university as well
              as the use of virtual teams that span universities will be evaluated.  Next,
              they intend to promote the use of the VFRS to other engineering and business
              schools through conference workshops, promotional materials, and publications. 
              They will also introduce the VFTS to Los Angeles area high school students as a
              way of promoting engineering careers, while encouraging other universities to
              take similar steps in their communities.  Because the VFRS is Webbased and
              network-enabled, they will not need to produce and sell CD-ROMS for its
              distribution, nor will we need to coordinate software purchases.  Thus, the
              continued dissemination and use of the VFTS beyond the three-year period of
              this proposal can proceed without additional funding, and with a minimum of
              administrative oversight.

To achieve a national impact on the education of
              future manufacturing engineers, a large, interdisciplinary team is crucial. 
              The team includes computer scientists with extensive experience developing
              web-based educational software, engineering professors at four different
              universities with extensive experience teaching factory management concepts and
              methods, and experts in educational theory and evaluation methods.  They have
              assembled an advisory board from industry to ensure that our educational goals
              match industry needs.  Finally, they have individuals from industry,
              universities, and high schools that are committed to the broad dissemination of
              the VFTS and its associated approach to education.

