Title       : Integrative Physical Mapping of the Soybean Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9872635

Award Number: 9872635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1303664            (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Lightfoot GA4082@SIU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Khalid Meksem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

    Investment in crop genomic science is justified by the existence of
              genus, species and cultivar specific genes with no known function. A subgroup,
              within this group of genes, is expected to be genes of agronomic and economic
              importance such as disease resistance genes,  major yield determinates and
              genes that produce specific chemicals and components. Identification of members
              of the economically important gene subgroup has been painstakingly slow by
              conventional genetics and preliminary genomics. 
     The continuously
              enhanced productivity and international competitiveness of the US soybean crop
              will depend on applications of biotechnologies in genetic improvement Proposed
              is the development of a physical map of the soybean genome to accelerate the
              rate of economically important gene discovery 10-100 fold; to provide a
              framework for EST mapping; and to provide for the future sequencing of the
              whole soybean genome. 

Methods: 
The primary method for physical map
              construction will be a modified restriction enzyme based polyacrylamide
              (sequencing) gel based fingerprinting (PAGFP) that enables the identification
              of overlapping BAC clones to form contigs. Microsattellite markers will be
              integrated with the contigs by DNA pool assembly and screening. Some gaps in
              the basic contig map (1-2 hundred from 2-5 thousand) will be filled by
              improving fingerprinting methods, developing microsattelite anchors from
              end-BACs or DNA sequencing of BAC end clones. Some RFLPs and ESTs will be
              hybridized  with contigs and anchored genomic regions. Some microsatellite,
              RFLP and EST anchored clones from other cultivars will be fingerprinted.
              Duplicated markers in separate contigs will identify homeologous regions of the
              soybean genome at high resolution.

Potential Impact: 
The proposed research
              will provide all soybean researchers with a powerful tool to:
o	Isolate the
              mapped genes and QTLs important to soybean production,
o	Isolate DNA markers
              for genes and QTLs that are well-suited for marker-assisted selection (MAS) in
              soybean breeding, 
o	Map most (80%) of the soybean  ESTs at a resolution of
              200 - 2,000 kb within a few years.
o  Develop soybean genome chips with
              arrayed linkage groups from the mapped genes and contigs.
The ultimate goal is
              to significantly accelerate discovery, cloning, manipulation, and utilization
              of soybean genes and QTLs of agronomic importance for genetic improvement and
              agricultural production. Thereby, the profitability of the US soybean industry
              will be protected. 

Deliverables:
1.   Fingerprint three soybean BAC
              libraries of 90-120 thousand BACs, equivalent to 12-16 x soybean haploid
              genomes (including 45-60 thousand BIBACs that are capable of direct
              complementation by soybean transformation) to form 2-5 thousand contiguous
              genomic regions (hereafter, contigs).
2.  Integrate the BAC contigs with
              500-1,000 microsattelite markers from the soybean molecular genetic map by PCR
              amplification or hybridization.
3.  Test methods for assembling the
              fingerprinted BACs into the physical map contigs, analyze methods for gap
              filling and contig verification.
4. Test the utilility of the contigs for
              identifying homeologous genomic regions of the duplicated 	soybean genome and
              for the assignment of EST families to genomic regions . 
5.  Provide soybean
              researchers with electronic access to BAC clones encompassing regions likely to
              	contain genes and QTL of agronomic importance.


Contact Information:
For
              Contigs (mirror sites):
http://www.siuc.edu/~pbgc/htmls/link.htm
              and
http://hbz7.tamu.edu/homelinks/phymap/soybean/soy_home.htm
http://www.siuc.edu/~meksem/htmls/link.htm

For Web FPC:
http://hbz7.tamu.edu/homelinks/phymap/soybean/soy_home.htm

For the DAS enabled Soybean Genome Browser:
http://www.siuc.edu/soybeangenome.info
http://www.langin.com/soybean/gbrowse?source=soybean;name=A1


