Title       : CAREER: Electrically Active Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0134032

Award Number: 0134032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhonghua Peng Pengz@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Using a modular building block strategy, conjugated molecules and polymers
              containing polyoxometalate (POM) clusters covalently linked in a variety of
              architectures will be synthesized for the first time.  The proposed research
              stems from a recent discovery of a novel reaction protocol which allows the
              efficient and facile functionalization of POM clusters with a variety of
              aromatic amines and the recent demonstration that functionalized POM clusters
              can undergo Pd-catalyzed organic coupling reactions.  The proposed hybrid
              systems not only represent truly new and novel classes of functional materials
              where strong electronic interactions exist between delocalized d-electrons,
              they are also expected to possess extremely interesting electrical and optical
              properties.  Preliminary studies clearly demonstrate the suitability of the
              proposed modular building block approach.
%%%
The educational goal of this
              Career Development plan is threefold: to be an excellent mentor producing
              creative and productive scientists, an efficient instructor promoting chemical
              science education, and a passionate community member assisting the local school
              district with its science education.  A new teaching style has been brought to
              the Organic Chemistry class and students' response has been extremely positive.
               Strong efforts have been and will continue to be made towards training science
              teachers for the local community and exposing young high school students to
              research laboratories.  The proposed research is geared toward discovery of new
              chemistry and innovative materials.  The planned educational activities
              represent combined efforts in effective education and community involvement. 
              They form a unified career plan, a journey toward becoming a creative
              researcher and an effective educator.

