Title       : CAREER: Ethics and Belief Inside the Development of Nanotechnologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0134839

Award Number: 0134839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : February 28,  2011   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalyn W. Berne rwb@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Theoretically, molecular nanotechnology will mean the ability to build things
              from the atom up, to rearrange matter with precision, and to control its very
              structure. Nanotechnology promises enhanced living, and the transcendence of
              myriad human physical and mental limitations. As self-replicating,
              super-intelligent machines working within and beyond the human body, molecular
              nanotechnology is likely to radically alter not just the physical, but the
              social, psychological, and spiritual dimensions of human life. Therefore, now
              is the time, in the theoretical stages of development, to begin to explore the
              ethical implications of molecular nanotechnology.

This investigator seeks to
              understand the developing ethics of nanotechnology through a narrative analysis
              of discourse inside of its development. The focus is on engineers and
              scientists who are working in the field to answer the questions: 

What do
              scientists and engineers define as the ethical issues connected to the
              development of nanotechnology? 
How, if at all, do scientists and engineers
              imagine confronting or addressing those ethical issues as they are defined?
              
In what ways might religious perspectives and personal beliefs be a factor in
              the ethical framework of developing nanotechnology?

The data are drawn from
              an array of discourses, oral and written, in order to richly understand the
              ethics and beliefs of the developers of nanotechnology, thus revealing its
              largely tacit, newly forming moral/ethical frameworks.  A textbook on
              nanotechnology ethics, and eventually, educational film on the hopes and dreams
              of nanotechnology investigators, are hoped to be offered as tangible outcomes
              of this project. 



