Title       : Mycorrhizal Regulation of Ecosystem Response to Chronic Nitrogen Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0134748

Award Number: 0134748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Lussenhop luss@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hormoz BassiriRad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Michael Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	 Readily usable forms of nitrogen are being deposited from the atmosphere in
              much greater quantities than plants can use.  This is mainly nitrate nitrogen
              produced by the combustion of fossil fuels in urban areas, but some
              agricultural areas are subject to high deposition of ammonium nitrogen. 
              Effects of atmospheric nitrogen deposition were first noticed in Scandinavia,
              the Netherlands, and, in the U.S., in the industrial Northeast where it is
              associated with the death of trees, particularly conifers.  These trees showed
              characteristic responses which included high nitrogen in their needles and loss
              of fine roots.  Currently high levels of atmospheric nitrogen deposition are
              spreading to other parts of the U.S. including the Los Angeles Basin and the
              Colorado Front Range.  After many years of nitrogen additions many forests show
              evidence of reaching a point where no further nitrogen can be taken up, tree
              mortality increases, and nitrate nitrogen leaches into the water table.  
	
              Initially, plants were thought to take up and store most depositional nitrogen
              in forests.  But studies using nitrogen isotopes as tracers suggested that the
              nitrogen was stored in the forest floor.  This focused attention on two groups
              of beneficial fungi that occupy forest floors: ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi.
               Both groups function as supplementary root systems for plants, and
              ectomycorrhizal fungi may store depositional nitrogen in sheaths of fungal
              tissue covering root tips of conifers and oaks.
	This project asks three kinds
              of questions in order to learn the role of ectomycorrhizal fungi in nitrogen
              storage and tree mortality.  First, are species numbers and relative abundance
              of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi affected by chronic atmospheric nitrogen
              deposition?  Second, is the metabolic activity of ecto- and endomycorrhizal
              fungi affected by atmospheric N deposition?  Is the ability of ectomycorrhizal
              fungi to store N decreased when numbers of fine roots decline?  Third, does
              atmospheric nitrogen deposition have the same effect on growth and mortality of
              ectomycorrhizal as endomycorrhizal trees?
	 To answer these questions the
              investigators will quantify mycorrhizal and plant responses across the nitrogen
              deposition gradient in the Chicago metropolitan area in a five-year study.  The
              Chicago metropolitan area is suitable for asking these questions because
              chronic nitrogen deposition increases 24% along a west to east gradient on
              similar soils and vegetation. At each site the investigators will use red oak
              (Quercus rubra, ectomycorrhizal) and sugar maple (Acer saccharum,
              endomycorrhizal) to test whether nitrogen alters (a) the species and abundance
              of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi, (b) the metabolic activity and nitrogen
              storage ability of ecto- and endomycorrhizal fungi, (c) the specific rates of
              ammonium and nitrate uptake by ecto- and endomycorrhizal roots, (d)
              survivorship, growth, and N leaching from soil under red oak and sugar maple
              seedlings at ambient and twice-ambient nitrogen deposition rates ranging from
              17 to 42 kg ha-1 year-1.

