Title       : Molecular Structure and Function of Protective Plant Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0134705

Award Number: 0134705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Stark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The leaf and fruit cuticles of higher plants function principally as barriers,
              controlling bacterial and fungal attack as well as the diffusion of water and
              chemicals from the outside environment.  Their major chemical constituents are
              waxes that provide waterproofing and either of two insoluble structural support
              polymers, cutin (for aerial organs) and suberin (at internal locations and in
              wound tissue).  This project aims to understand how the monomer units of the
              biopolymers are covalently linked together and to cell-wall polysaccharides,
              how the mechanical properties of the cuticular surface change in response to
              stress conditions, and how suberin or related materials are involved in
              textural hardening of potato tissues.  Several biophysical approaches will be
              taken to these problems.  (1) Oligomeric fragments of lime fruit cutin and
              suberized potato wound periderm will be produced by chemical and enzymatic
              means, separated chromatographically, and identified by nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS).  (2) NMR experiments on
              solvent-swelled samples will be used to develop and apply methodologies to
              identify polymer chain structures, cross-links, and cell-wall linkages in lime
              fruit cutin, potato wound periderm, suberized green cotton, and hardened potato
              tissues.  (3) The impact of abrasion, chilling injury, and foliar delivery of
              pesticides on cuticular mechanical properties and molecular flexibility will be
              assessed using rheometry, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and solid-state NMR. 
              (4) The biosynthesis of hard polymeric substances deposited in potato tubers
              that have 'hard-to-cook syndrome' will be studied using texture analysis and
              NMR spectroscopy. 

The overall objectives of this project include
              understanding how the monomer units of the protective cutin and suberin
              biopolymers are linked together and to supporting cell-wall matrices, how
              environmental stresses such as wind abrasion and temperature shock alter the
              mechanical properties of the cuticular membrane, how fruit cuticles interact
              with aqueous detergents used in application of agrochemicals, and how suberin
              or related polyphenols are synthesized during the hardening process that
              degrades potato texture.  Ultimately, this research should have both
              agricultural and economic impact, aiding in the design of essential crop
              protection strategies.  More broadly, the microstructural and molecular
              insights developed from this work may assist the development of synthetic
              waterproofing materials for industrial or cosmetic use.  Finally, this project
              will serve to introduce methods such as solid-state NMR and AFM to the
              community of plant scientists. 

