Title       : CAREER: Studies of Collective Motion In Complex Liquids: Heterogeneity, Disorder
               and Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0134969

Award Number: 0134969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Reichman reichman@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division, Reichman will conduct a five-stage program to develop
              computational and theoretical tools to gain a better microscopic understanding
              of collective motion in molecular, supercooled, and polymeric liquids.  The
              first stage involves a microscopic understanding of collective and
              heterogeneous behavior in supercooled liquids near the glass transition
              temperature using computer simulation.  The second stage develops new molecular
              hydrodynamic approaches in order to understand collective motion in supercooled
              liquids and polyelectrolyte solutions.  In the third stage the PI applies novel
              field-theoretic techniques to study dynamics in random heteropolymers.  The
              fourth stage centers on the application of a molecular hydrodynamic approach to
              understand nonlinear Raman in liquids.  The final stage includes three
              educational initiatives.  The first is a continuation and improvement of a
              multi-institutional theoretical chemistry tutorial series for undergraduate,
              graduate, and postdoctoral students in the Boston area.  The second centers on
              a new computational chemistry course for undergraduate students that includes
              seminars by outside speakers and student presentations on their computer
              projects.  The third involves mentoring undergraduate student collaborators on
              projects in the PI's laboratory.

Much of the difficulty with theories used
              to understand the behavior of supercooled liquids lies in the arbitrary
              approximations that are commonly made to achieve tractable results.  While such
              theories have been surprisingly successful in applications to supercooled
              liquids, for example, there have also been many underlying doubts arising from
              a perceived lack of rigor in the theory.  In this project Reichman is
              developing a new formulation of Mode Coupling Theory (MCT) that restores a
              considerable amount of rigor while making transparent the nature and
              consequences of any approximations that are made.  He will also apply this
              reformulated theory to a number of important condensed-phase problems involving
              materials that have significant technological importance, such as glasses and
              amorphous materials.  In the educational component of this project, Reichman is
              expanding the undergraduate curriculum to include modern chemical physics
              methods that will demonstrate to students the integral role played by the
              computer in theoretical chemistry today.  In the collaborative pedagogical
              seminar series that he has co-organized, he is taking advantage of the rich
              physical chemistry environment that the Boston/Cambridge area presents, and is
              an excellent educational tool.  This lecture series is especially appropriate
              for the area because of the ease of public transportation and the large number
              of research groups that might participate.

