Title       : CAREER: Granular Media: Experimental Kinetic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0134837

Award Number: 0134837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Shattuck shattuck@levdec.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project at CUNY City College will experimentally explore the region
              of applicability of kinetic theory applied to idealized and industrially
              relevant granular materials.  Granular systems are collections of particles
              that typically dissipate energy in collisions. A fundamental understanding of
              these materials, comparable to our current understanding of fluids and solids,
              does not exist today but would have far reaching impacts across many
              industries, such as energy production, food processing, and pharmaceuticals. 
              The assumptions used to derive granular continuum equations for mass, momentum,
              and energy balance, by analogy to normal fluids but including energy
              dissipation, are clearly violated for some of these granular systems.  The goal
              of the experiments is to determine the conditions under which these equations
              produce quantitatively accurate results and to modify the assumptions to
              encompass a broader range of situations. The simple visual nature of these
              experiments creates an ideal opportunity to incorporate research into the
              undergraduate and graduate science curriculum through a combination of
              individual focused research opportunities, an advanced research methods course,
              and a granular materials course.  The students and post-docs involved in the
              project will receive training in cutting edge research methods and will be well
              prepared for careers in academe, industry and government

This CAREER
              development at CUNY City College project will experimentally determine the
              region of applicability of competing theories of granular materials for both
              idealized and industrially relevant systems and will incorporate this research
              experience into the science curriculum.  Granular materials are collections of
              small particles, such sand in an hourglass or grains in a silo.  A fundamental
              understanding of granular systems, comparable to our current understanding of
              fluids and solids, does not exist today but would have far reaching impacts
              across many industries, such as energy production, food processing, and
              pharmaceuticals.  The basic assumptions used to derive current theories of
              granular flow are similar to those of normal fluids but are clearly violated
              for some granular systems.  The goal of these experiments is to determine the
              conditions under which these theories can be used to calculate accurate results
              and to extend the theories to encompass a broader range of situations. The
              simple visual nature of these experiments creates an ideal opportunity to
              incorporate research into the undergraduate and graduate science curriculum
              through a combination of individual focused research opportunities, an advanced
              research methods course, and a granular materials course.  The students and
              post-docs involved in the project will receive training in cutting edge
              research methods and will be well prepared for careers in academe, industry and
              government


