Title       : Conferences on China's Economic Transition -Toronto, Canada, Summer 2002 and
               Pittsburgh, Summer 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a0134832

Award Number: 0134832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Rawski tgrawski@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              China's protracted boom is a major episode in world economic history. Beginning
              in the late 1970s, China experienced two decades of extraordinary growth that
              raised every indicator of material welfare, lifted several hundred million from
              absolute poverty, and rocketed China from near autarchy into unprecedented
              global prominence. Current research, however, leaves fundamental questions
              about the economic, political and social dimensions of this growth process and
              its future prospects unanswered. To address these issues, this project
              initiates a major interdisciplinary effort focused on China's long boom of the
              past two decades.  It seeks a comprehensive and integrated analysis of the
              underpinnings and dynamics of China's protracted growth spurt that will be both
              path breaking and policy relevant. 

This project builds on two earlier
              efforts: one directed by Hugh Patrick and Henry Rosovsky that produced the
              path-breaking volume Asia's New Giant: How the Japanese Economy Works. A
              second, organized by Thomas Rawski, inspired a series of volumes that have
              contributed to deepening the economic content of Chinese historical studies and
              integrating Chinese experience into the study of global economic history.   The
              project's plan includes two conferences scheduled for summer 2002 and summer
              2003.  The conferences consider three groups of papers: five overviews that lay
              out themes, issues, and methods from several interdisciplinary perspectives;
              fifteen thematic papers that focus on specific dimensions of China's recent
              economic experience, e.g. openness, international trade and foreign direct
              investment, agriculture, fiscal policy, and industrial organization and
              enterprise governance; and three interpretative studies that consider the
              implications of China's twenty-year boom for China's future evolution, for
              China-oriented economics research, and for broader studies in economics and
              social science.   The first conference will apply key results from the
              overviews to enrich and integrate the prospectuses for the thematic studies.
              The second conference will review the completed thematic studies and apply
              their results to expand and deepen the initial drafts of the interpretive
              essays. 

These papers will result in substantial publications, including a
              book, tentatively entitled The Transition That Worked, and at least one special
              journal issue, that will appear in Chinese as well as English. The results of
              this project will provide a springboard for future China-focused economic
              inquiry, expand the information base underpinning China-related policy
              discussions, and stimulate the integration of recent Chinese experience into
              research on development, transition, and social change. 


