Title       : CAREER: Chiral Ceramic Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134688

Award Number: 0134688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Smith smithrl@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1711,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Specific:  A variety of technologies (e.g. fuel cells, catalysis, sensors) rely
              on electro/chemical phenomena that occur at ceramic surfaces and interfaces.
              Our overall understanding of these interfaces is however immature, in that we
              generally lack mechanistic and predictive structure-property relations. The
              ultimate goal of this research is to advance such relations for the surface
              properties that are the basis of sensor and catalyst applications. It will be
              approached within the framework of developing a new class of metal oxide gas
              sensors, based on chiral (handed) surfaces, capable of detecting and
              differentiating chiral molecules. Hence, the underlying experimental objective
              is to develop a mechanistic understanding of the interactions between organic
              molecules and chiral oxide surfaces. This will include surfaces that are chiral
              on the atomic scale, e.g. Mo8O23(010), and those that are tailored to have
              chiral nano/microstructures. Surface properties will be investigated through
              the fabrication and testing of model sensors and temperature programmed
              desorption spectroscopy, while surface and bulk structure will be interrogated
              using appropriate probes. This study will advance our general understanding of
              the roles surface and molecular structure play in oxide reactivity (i.e.
              surface structure-property relations) as well as new and powerful sensor
              functionalities. Complementary education and outreach activities include, (1.)
              the development, in collaboration with secondary science instructors, of
              multimedia course modules centered on electrochemical technologies that will
              enhance middle/high school science curricula and raise students' awareness of
              materials science, (2.) the establishment of an outreach program with a local
              community college to provide research and mentoring opportunities to students
              from underrepresented groups, and (3.) an outreach program designed to align
              the PI's research goals with the needs of industry and augment his development
              as a researcher and educator. This will include extended visits to industrial
              and government laboratories (U.S. and abroad) focused on electrochemical and
              interfacial technologies.

General:  Metal oxides have unique surface
              properties that make them useful for detecting, synthesizing, and purifying
              chemicals and our environment. Sensory applications include detecting poisons
              (such as carbon monoxide) and monitoring the fuel mix in automobiles to
              minimize greenhouse gas emissions. Metal oxide catalysts are vital to the
              large-scale production of plastics and pharmaceuticals and can be used to
              purify our air and water. While the surface properties of metal oxides are
              already exploited on large and diverse scales, our overall understanding of
              these properties is limited, particularly our ability to engineer and predict
              them. As a result, we often rely on time consuming and costly trial-and-error
              methods of development. Hence, the ultimate goal of this research is to advance
              our fundamental understanding of the structure and chemical properties of metal
              oxide surfaces. The knowledge gained will lead to powerful new types of sensors
              and, more importantly, enhance our ability to efficiently engineer metal oxide
              surfaces for a variety of applications. Concurrent with this research, the PI
              will conduct a number of education and outreach activities intended to (1.)
              enhance science education at the secondary and undergraduate levels, (2.)
              recruit new students to the vital fields of materials and electrochemical
              sciences, and (3.) augment the PI's own development as an educator and
              researcher.

