Title       : CAREER: Structure and Dynamics of Disordered and Out-of-Equilibrium Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0134377

Award Number: 0134377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Leheny   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER development project considers an common and intriguing aspect of
              condensed matter systems: Many naturally occurring, or artificially structured,
              materials fail to achieve thermodynamic equilibrium.  In some cases this is
              desirable, as in molecular beam epitaxy.  But in bulk materials, understanding
              out-of-equilibrium behavior is crucial to achieve a complete description of the
              system.  This project involves the development of an integrated education and
              research program designed to play a leading role in advancing the frontier
              field of disordered and out-of-equilibrium systems.  Susceptibility studies,
              which characterize macroscopic response, and x-ray and neutron scattering,
              which directly probe microscopic behavior, will be applied in concert to model
              disordered systems such as liquid crystals, sheared fluids, and quenched glass
              formers.  The objective is to illuminate essential features of the
              out-of-equilibrium "state" and to test new theoretical paradigms.  In parallel
              with this, an interdisciplinary course on the science of complex fluids will be
              initiated at Johns Hopkins and an undergraduate thesis program for Physics and
              Astronomy majors will be developed.  Collectively, these efforts, along with
              the coordination of community outreach between Hopkins and local public
              schools, will seek to create a prominent and productive program on the physics
              of out-of-equilibrium systems that strives to be inclusive of young scientists
              and potential scientists.

This is a CAREER development project in the field
              of condensed matter physics.  In many common materials, the microscopic
              constituents are subjected to forces that prevent the materials from organizing
              in their most energy efficient and simplest state.  These forces can be
              "intrinsic" as in the forces between molecules that lead to a liquid cooling
              into glass, instead of a crystal, or "external", as for a fluid confined within
              tiny randomly connected pores.  Again the fluid is prevented from reaching
              solid state with long-range order.  In either case the resulting
              disorganization creates unique material properties that pose unusual challenges
              for physics.  This project will develop an integrated education and research
              program designed to play a leading role in advancing physical insight into such
              "disordered" materials.  The research strategy will involve experimental
              comparisons of different realizations of disorder in order to elucidate
              potentially universal features that might form the basis for a broad
              theoretical understanding.  In parallel with this work, an interdisciplinary
              course on the science of these materials targeted at upper-level undergraduates
              and beginning graduate students will be initiated at Johns Hopkins and an
              undergraduate thesis program for Physics and Astronomy majors will be
              developed.  Collectively, these efforts, along with the coordination of
              community outreach between Hopkins and local public schools, will seek to
              advance the science of disorder in a manner that strives to be inclusive of
              young scientists and potential scientists.


