Title       : The Role of eIF4E Family Members in Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0134013

Award Number: 0134013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary Jagus jagus@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bhavesh Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The translational initiation factor eIF4E is a central component in the
              initiation and regulation of translation in eukaryotic cells.  Through its
              interaction with the 5' cap structure of mRNA and its translation partner,
              eIF4G, eIF4E functions to recruit mRNAs to the ribosome.  The rapid
              accumulation of vertebrate EST and genome sequences has allowed the
              identification of multiple eIF4E family members.  Based on sequence homologies
              and/or function, three classes of eIF4E have been recognized;  Class I
              (archetypal eIF4E and sub-types), Class II (eIF4ELP/HP) and Class III (eIF4E-3,
              vertebrates only).  The uncovering of multiple eIF4E related proteins suggests
              an unexpected complexity of the mRNA recruitment step and its regulation in
              vertebrates and has exemplified the difficulties in annotating DNA sequences on
              the basis of sequence homologies only.  One hypothesis is that each form fills
              a specialized niche in the recruitment of capped mRNAs by the ribosome. 
              Alternatively, it is possible that not all eIF4E family members function as
              initiation factors or in translational regulation directly, but in an unrelated
              function such as RNA/RNP export or RNA splicing.  The overall goal of this
              project is to use the knowledge of eIF4E family members and unique reagents
              accumulated by the Jagus laboratory to elucidate their respective roles in the
              regulation of gene expression in higher eukaryotes.  The objectives are to
              characterize the functions of eIF4E family members and determine their role in
              the regulation of gene expression through the following specific aims: 1)
              analysis of expression pattern of each family member in different tissues and
              at various developmental stages; 2) determination of the function of each eIF4E
              family member (from zebrafish and mammals) in translation using a variety of
              established assays; and 3) kinetic analyses of the interaction of each class
              with cap-structures, eIF4G and the 4EBPs.

The production of cellular
              proteins begins with the template genetic code that is copied in the form of
              mRNA.  The information encoded by mRNA is translated on the ribosomes into
              proteins.  Control of the recruitment of mRNA by ribosomes is an important form
              of regulation of gene expression in animal cells.  Several protein factors are
              required for the recruitment of mRNA by the ribosome, the most important of
              which is the translation factor eIF4E.  eIF4E recognizes and binds to the cap
              structure at the 5' end of mRNA.  The accumulation of DNA sequence data has
              allowed the Jagus laboratory to recognize three classes of eIF4E; Class I
              (prototypical eIF4E and sub-types), Class II (eIF4ELP/HP) and Class III
              (eIF4E-3, vertebrates only).  The overall goal of this project is to
              characterize the functions of eIF4E family members and determine their role in
              the regulation of gene expression in the zebrafish developmental system.
