Title       : CAREER: Laser-Assisted Layered Manufacturing of 3D Mesoscale Structures With
               Embedded Micro Sensors and Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0134583

Award Number: 0134583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaochun Li xcli@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to integrate
              research activities with educational efforts in two interdisciplinary fields:
              layered manufacturing and smart materials and structures. Currently, little has
              been reported on integrating these two fields, especially at the mesoscale (100
              mm to 10 mm). In addition, fundamental issues for mesoscale layered
              manufacturing processes have not been well defined or investigated. 

This
              program involves research on mesoscale layered manufacturing of smart
              structures with a special focus on thermomechanical issues at the mesoscale.
              The approach is to integrate laser-assisted Shape Deposition Manufacturing
              (SDM) and Laser Direct Write to build, at the mesoscale, geometrically,
              compositionally, and functionally complex smart structures containing embedded
              micro sensors and actuators. Analytical models, numerical simulation, and
              embedded micro sensors will be used to investigate the thermomechanical
              phenomena. The educational plan is to improve the existing curriculum in the
              arena of manufacturing by developing new interdisciplinary elements that
              integrate the fields of layered manufacturing, micro-manufacturing, and smart
              materials and structures. Additionally, there will be substantial effort to
              mentor undergraduate and graduate students, and to expose K-12 students,
              teachers, and industries to novel manufacturing processes and smart devices.
              Strategies will be explored to attract, retain, and engage students from
              under-represented groups (women and especially students with disabilities) to
              manufacturing fields.  The research program will have significant implications
              for industry in that mesoscale smart devices could become technologically and
              economically feasible for numerous applications. Emphasis on interdisciplinary
              materials, hands-on experience, teamwork, and high quality teaching and
              learning will better engineering education for next generation engineers.
