Title       : Career: Geochemistry of Redox-Sensitive Elements and Osmium and Uranium Isotopes
               in Large Pristine Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0134966

Award Number: 0134966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Youngsook Huh huh@earth.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1061,1579,9198,9200,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0134966
Hud

Continental weathering is an important component of global
              geochemical cycles and is one of the most significant determinants of the
              atmospheric CO2 levels, and hence climate, on geologic time scales. Weathering
              of organic carbon is an important source of CO2; weathering of silicates a
              sink.  The long-term goal of the PI's research is to understand the mechanisms
              and magnitudes of continental weathering in various pristine environments at
              present and to then project the results into the geologic past using suitable
              proxies. In this endeavor, characterizing the behavior of different chemical
              elements as a function of weathering environment is important. The PI proposes
              to study weathering of organic carbon rich reducing sediments as manifested in
              large pristine rivers. This proposal describes an integrative approach using
              redox-sensitive, oxyanion-forming elements (Re, Mo, V, U) and the Os isotopic
              system (187Os/188Os) intimately related to them. These elements are enriched in
              reducing sediments and are released as soluble oxyanions when they undergo fast
              oxidative weathering. 

The proposed research activities consist of three
              parts: field work, instrumental analyses and data interpretation.  Field work
              will be carried out in western China, eastern Tibet, and northern Vietnam,
              areas affected by the Himalayan collision but whose fluvial geochemistry is
              poorly understood. This will be a continuation of the successful collaboration
              with scientists in China and Vietnam. A graduate student at Northwestern
              University and visiting scholars from China/Vietnam will be involved in all
              three activities. At undergraduate students level, this research will be
              integrated into the Analytical Methods in Geochemistry course that the PI is
              developing to strengthen the interdisciplinary Environmental Science Program at
              Northwestern University.

This work will provide fundamental understanding of
              the behavior of redox-sensitive elements and Os isotopes, which is in turn
              important in deciphering the paleo-environments of the Earth.  Additional
              benefit is documenting the present weathering regime of the Upper Yangtze,
              which is important for the Chinese scientists in their attempt to monitor the
              effect of the Three Gorges Dam and erosion of top soil that is becoming a
              serious problem.  Also, a clear comparison can be made between the undeveloped
              headwaters and the agriculturally impacted lower reaches of the Chinese and
              Vietnamese rivers.

