Title       : CAREER: Understanding Molecular-level Processes of Gas-phase Ammonia Uptake by
               Aqueous Sulfuric Acid Surfaces using Broadband Sum Frequency Generation
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a0134131

Award Number: 0134131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather C. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Heather Allen of Ohio State University has received a CAREER award
              from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program for sum frequency generation
              studies on gas-liquid surfaces, especially ones of environmental interest. 
              Ammonia uptake by aqueous sulfuric acid solution surfaces will be investigated
              using broad-band SFG, allowing the acquisition of vibrational spectra specific
              to the surface region.  The spectra will be interpreted to give molecular level
              pictures of the surface uptake mechanisms of the reactive gas by the liquid. 
              The ammonia-sulfuric acid system has relevance to the formation and growth of
              ammonium sulfate aerosols throughout the troposphere and is particularly
              important in polluted urban atmospheres.  The PI will incorporate
              problem-based-learning in undergraduate courses, and will sponsor a program
              that will award summer research internships with the goal of increasing the
              participation of women and underrepresented minorities in scientific
              research.

Work on the chemical and physical properties of aerosols will lead
              to a better understanding of their role in atmospheric chemical cycles and in
              climate.  Previous droplet-train experiments showed evidence for
              surface-mediated reactions, and new laser-based spectroscopies allow the
              examination of those reactions in a direct manner.  Students involved in this
              research and education plan will be exposed to work that will lead to a better
              understanding of pollution, as well as the role of basic research in solving
              complex chemical problems relevant to society.


