Title       : CAREER: Combinatorial Chemistry in the Classroom and Laboratory: Identification
               of Novel Small Molecule Ligands for Apoptotic Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0134779

Award Number: 0134779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Hergenrother hergenro@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
              Professor Paul Hergenrother, of the Department of Chemistry at the University
              of Illinois- Urbana-Champaign, will investigate using small molecules to
              investigate and modulate biological systems. The overall goal of the research
              being the synthesis, identification, and use of small molecules that bind
              tightly and selectively to proteins involved in apoptosis. An approach to
              apoptosis is proposed in which small molecules that bind tightly to their
              protein target are synthesized and then used in vivo to "knock-out" the
              proteins in the pathway. Such molecules will be invaluable tools in the study
              of this exquisitely important system, and they also have potential as
              therapeutic agents. Initial protein targets will be the caspase family of
              cysteine proteases, as well as regulators of apoptosis such as Smac/DLABLO and
              IAP. The small molecules used for this study will be synthesized on the solid
              phase in a combinatorial fashion, and then screened for binding as small
              molecule microarrays. Use of small molecule microarrays are essential, as it
              will allow for both rapid evaluation of the library against multiple protein
              targets, and assessment of the selectivity of the synthesized compounds for one
              caspase versus another. The library aimed at the caspases will be a "focused"
              library and will be structurally biased towards compounds that will inhibit
              cysteine proteases. The library that will be screened against Smac/DIABLO, IAP,
              and other apoptotic proteins is a "primary" library in which an attempt has
              been made to maximize the diversity within the library. Such primary libraries
              that incorporate multiple chemical scaffolds have not been created on the solid
              phase, and the successful production of the library described herein will
              represent a significant advance in combinatorial synthesis.

Professor Paul
              Hergenrother, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois-
              Urbana-Champaign, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program for his
              CAREER award, will also develop an integrated program for teaching
              combinatorial chemistry in the classroom and applying combinatorial chemistry
              and high-throughput screening in the laboratory. The ultimate goal in the
              training of students is to create a group whose research is on the cutting edge
              of the chemistry-biology interface while developing in the student a wide
              variety of skills, from cell and molecular biology to organic synthesis.

