Title       : CAREER: Model Free Fault Detection for Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0134132

Award Number: 0134132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrone L. Vincent tvincent@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal will deal with concerns of the development and application of
              methods for fault detection of nonlinear dynamical systems. Fault detection of
              linear systems is by now well established, but application of these techniques
              to nonlinear systems can lead to a loss of performance. The market for fault
              detection is growing, as more and more manufacturing and industrial centers are
              interested in improving their productivity by reducing unplanned maintenance
              and limiting losses to product due to equipment failure. In addition, many
              manufactures have installed sophisticated sensor and data collection networks
              in order to closely monitor their processes, which would enable the application
              of very sophisticated fault detection schemes.

Fault detection can be as
              simple as placing limits on the allowable range of sensor measurements, but
              when the systems that are monitored are dynamic systems, more sophisticated
              methods can and should be applied. This is because dynamic systems, by the
              their very nature, have temporal relationships between the system variables
              that characterize both normal and faulted operating conditions. The challenge
              is to codify these temporal relationships. One method is to develop analytical
              models from first principles. In most model based fault detection schemes,
              output observers are designed which generate residual signals that measure the
              disagreement between the model and the measured data. However, these models are
              sometimes difficult to come by. The systems described above are nonlinear
              thermo-fluid systems that are difficult to model accurately and the resulting
              models would have many unknown parameters. In this case, system identification
              methods can be employed.

This proposal is aimed at developing a theory of
              the interactions between the system identification and fault detection
              processes. The focus is on a general, practical method of nonlinear fault
              detection which is easily implemented on input/output models that are generated
              by modern nonlinear system identification methods. The basic question that is
              addressed is to determine how the choices made during the system identification
              process, such as the model structure. The objective function, the choice of
              regularization, and the validation procedure influence or interact with the
              fault detection process. 

