Title       : CAREER: Mechanics of Microstructural Development at Crystal Surfaces: Micro- and
               Nano-scale Modeling and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0134123

Award Number: 0134123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Kukta robert.kukta@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project develops a multiscale approach to modeling and simulation of
              microstructural development in epitaxial thin films. The energetics and
              kinetics of surface steps and their interactions with lattice dislocations will
              be investigated.  To capture features
over a wide range of length scales,
              three modeling methodologies, atomistic, micromechanical, and continuum, will
              be utilized.  Models suited for larger length scale simulations will be built
              from their smaller length scale counterparts, while retaining relevant physics.
              This approach is critical to engineering structures of interest for current and
              emerging micro- and nano-technologies, which are too large to model directly
              using atomistic approaches, but small enough that atomic-level phenomena have a
              large role in determining behavior.

The education component builds on the
              PI's current activities to address the needs of high school, undergraduate, and
              graduate students and local industries. Specific initiatives
              include
instruction and assistance to high school teachers on the principles
              of engineering and developing events and programs designed to promote
              participation and inclusiveness in the ASME student section at Stony Brook. A
              high school outreach program to underrepresented minority students will be
              developed together with the students of ASME and the minority engineering
              student organizations at Stony Brook. In addition to attracting minorities to
              engineering, the program is intended to teach leadership and organization
              skills to participating
students and to convey a sense of duty for community
              service.

