Title       : CAREER: Nanoscale Imaging of Transport Processes in Mesoscopic Materials for
               Electrochemical Energy-Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0134884

Award Number: 0134884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith J. Stevenson stevenson@mail.cm.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Keith Stevenson of the University of Texas at Austin has received a
              CAREER Award from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to study the
              electrochemistry of unique nanostructures leading to efficient energy storage
              and conversion.  Optical and scanning probe microscopy will be applied to
              redox-active materials, starting with the oxides used in lithium batteries, to
              observe mixed conduction of electrons and ions at nanoscales.  Together with
              electrochemical methods, the approach will permit the correlation of structural
              characteristics (e.g. atomic-level defects, porosity and morphology) with the
              energetics and kinetics of ion insertion.  The research will enable the
              development of new nanostructured materials to improve ion transport and
              storage capability.  The PI plans to incorporate new modern electrochemistry,
              light microscopy and scanning probe microscopy in innovative undergraduate
              laboratory courses.  In addition, he will develop an interactive public
              outreach module that interfaces with existing UT-Austin outreach programs. 
              Local high school students will also be involved in the PI's
              research.

Information obtained from the research may lead to next-generation
              energy storage materials and configurations, and lead to creation of
              potentially superior high-performance electrochemical power sources.  The
              students and public involved in the work will gain perspectives about research
              in nanomaterials and cutting edge ideas in energy storage.


