Title       : CAREER: Optimal Diversification of Multiple Energy Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0134208

Award Number: 0134208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick L. Chapman chapman@ece.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our dependence on fossil fuel is causing social, political, technological,
              economical, and environmental problems.  The search for alternative energy has
              given us many choices for replacing fossil-based energy.  However, the choices
              come with their own set of advantages, disadvantages, and risks.  This
              integrated research and education project will prepare students for solving
              energy problems involving alternative energy sources.  

	The goal of this
              project is to make the best use of available energy sources by combining them. 
              Energy sources, including photovoltaic, hydrogen, and wind, each can be
              converted to electrical energy such that it can be combined efficiently.  The
              most effective means to combine and manipulate electricity is power
              electronics.  In this project, new power electronic converters will be
              developed that combine multiple energy sources in an optimal way.  This not
              only requires advances in control and topology - as multiple-input power
              converter technology is undeveloped - but will also require a thorough
              assessment of trade-offs in combining different energy sources.  This will be
              supported by improved energy awareness among all engineering students through
              new courses and through more integration of energy-related topics in existing
              coursework.  

	The research portion of the project will culminate in both
              theoretical algorithms and a hardware demonstration.  The prototype will
              combine energy from at least three different sources and will power at least
              two varieties of loads.  It is intended that this will be the first converter
              of its kind, and inspire a new approach to electric power

