Title       : Quantum Simulation of Chemical Dynamics in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0134775

Award Number: 0134775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Rossky rossky@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter Rossky of the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to carry out research that
              addresses the development and application of simulation methods to describe
              nonadiabatic chemical processes in condensed phases, emphasizing electronic
              processes in liquid environments. The plan includes a balanced approach to the
              development of methods and the application of these theoretical methods to
              experimentally studied systems.  The project will focus on three areas.  First,
              non-adiabatic electronic dynamics for intramolecular electron transfer will be
              explored using direct simulation, to investigate intramolecular and solvent
              dynamical effects on rates, spectroscopy and electronic coupling, the
              environmental dependence of electronic structure, and the role of
              non-equilibrium initial conditions.  Next, fully detailed two state/harmonic
              bath models of solvated electrons and of intramolecular charge transfer systems
              will be developed and implemented, allowing considerably more rigorous
              validation of reduced descriptions and of theoretical algorithms, as well as
              enabling new insights into molecular chemical dynamics.  Finally, new theory
              and algorithms will be developed for atomistic non-adiabatic simulation,
              including alternative descriptions of environmentally induced electronic
              quantum coherence decay and alternative algorithms for implementing dissipative
              quantum dynamics simulation.  Outcomes from this effort are expected to reveal
              the mechanistic character of the individual chemical examples of interest,
              increase the interpretive capacity of model-based descriptions of experimental
              data, and enhance the predictive capacity of theory and modeling applied to
              increasingly complex systems.

Most chemical processes occur in a condensed
              liquid or solid, including those reactions that are responsible for biological
              function and synthetic materials performance.  This research project aims to
              elucidate theoretical principles underlying chemical phenomena that involve
              changes in electronic state.  Continued advances in related experimental
              methods will make theory and experiment increasingly able to interact directly,
              and promise to enhance the understanding and predicted capability of models for
              electroluminescent materials, biological processes such as photosynthesis, and
              chemical processes that occur in solution phase photochemistry. 

