Title       : CAREER: The Science and Engineering of the Nonvolatile Superconducting Switch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0134721

Award Number: 0134721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Ahn charles.ahn@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses materials science issues and properties of
              nonvolatile superconducting switches. The nature of the
              superconductor-insulator quantum phase transition will be studied from a basic
              science perspective, including the correlation of the longitudinal and
              transverse transport properties, the nature of the temperature dependence of
              the insulating state, and the interplay between disorder effects driving the
              localization of holes and interaction effects responsible for pairing holes and
              producing the quantum transition to a superconductor. Long-term goals include
              the application of scanning probe microscopy to write in a nonvolatile,
              reversible fashion nanoscale superconducting structures and devices, including
              small superconducting islands, wires, and electronic Josephson junctions.
              Ultrathin, epitaxial ferroelectric-superconductor heterostructures will be
              studied using advanced thin film deposition techniques such as off-axis radio
              frequency magnetron sputtering. Structural and electronic characterization of
              thin film heterostructures will be carried out using atomic force microscopy
              (AFM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), reflection high energy electron
              diffraction (RHEED), x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet
              photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), nanoscale piezoelectric microscopy, and x-ray
              diffraction. Nanosecond pulse measurements to test the switching speed will be
              carried out, along with standard electronic transport measurements including
              resistivity, Hall effect, and mobility. 
A primary focus of this integrated
              research and education program involves teaching and training of undergraduate
              and graduate students in thin film deposition, a broadly used technology in
              materials research and engineering. Thin film fabrication research will be
              carried out by undergraduate and graduate students, and an undergraduate class
              devoted to physical vapor deposition techniques such as molecular beam epitaxy
              and sputtering will be developed and taught by the PI. This program involves
              collaborations with faculty members in the Departments of Applied Physics,
              Electrical Engineering, and Physics, and is designed to form a broad foundation
              in the study of thin film materials. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance. Outcomes of these studies are expected to broaden our
              fundamental understanding of correlated oxide materials and lead to new
              applications based upon the novel types of behavior observed in these
              materials.
The scope of the project will expose students to challenges in
              materials synthesis, processing, device fabrication, and characterization. An
              important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the
              integration of research and education. 
***  

