Title       : CAREER: Acoustic Wave Filters for High Frequency Wireless Communication
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0134335

Award Number: 0134335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauricio Pereira da Cunha mdacunha@eece.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Expanding commercial and military applications crowd the wireless communications
              frequency band, creating a critical need to expand the band to higher
              frequencies. The application of newly discovered high velocity pseudo surface
              acoustic waves (HVPSAWs), has the potential of satisfying the high frequency
              requirements of the next generation of wireless communications.

This CAREER
              proposal involves an integrated research and education plan for high radio
              frequency (RF) microwave acoustic devices.  The research objective is to
              identify piezoelectric materials and specific orientations in which HVPSAWs
              exist, and to design, fabricate, and test prototype HVPSAW filters. Specific
              research tasks are: (i) search for piezoelectric materials and orientations in
              which HVPSAWs exist; (ii) characterize theoretical mode propagation; (iii)
              determine HVPSAW phase velocity, propagation loss, temperature behavior,
              electromechanical coupling, and power flow angle; (iv) experimentally verify
              the theoretically predicted HVPSAW properties; develop a theoretical model for
              the HVPSAW interdigital transducer (IDT) structure, and its experimental
              verification; (v) model and characterize integral HVPSAW filters structures,
              such as reflectors, multistrip couplers, guiding structures; (vi) integrate
              HVPSAW structure components into HVPSAW filter design; and (vii) fabricate and
              test prototype HVPSAW filters. The educational objective is to provide a
              learning experience in a fast moving state-of-the-art area to students ranging
              from high school to graduate level. The learning experience will range from
              team projects at the high school level to theses at the graduate level. In
              summary this project will not only provide the necessary research to realize
              the next generation of wireless communications but also educate students in a
              very relevant high need technology area which has applications ranging from
              cellular phones to high speed communication and signal processing systems.


