Title       : CAREER: Interdisciplinary Design in Biotechnology and Biomedical Applications
               using Microelectromechanical Systems Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0134481

Award Number: 0134481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Cao lcao@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project addresses an integrated
              research and education plan for a new generation of mechanical engineers in
              interdisciplinary design in biotechnology and biomedical applications (i.e.,
              BioMEMS) using Microelectromechanical systems technology.   The research
              objectives of this CAREER project are to experimentally:  (1) evaluate the
              ability of electrowetting actuation to precisely transport and manipulate
              nano-liter to femto-liter discrete droplets in a discrete moving manner in
              BioMEMS devices; (2) determine how the design parameters and fabrication
              variables affect the performance of electrowetting-actuated discrete droplets
              in BioMEMS devices; and (3) determine an interdisciplinary design methodology
              for BioMEMS applications.  Integrating the proposed research with education,
              the PI will incorporate MEMS education with existing curriculum in mechanical
              engineering, develop a new MEMS design course in mechanical engineering,
              organize a MEMS seminar at Iowa State University, advise graduate and
              undergraduate students through the proposed research, and work with a high
              school student and teacher on the proposed research during summers. 

The
              research studies of the fundamental issues associated with the electrowetting
              actuation will enable us to precisely, quantitatively and flexibly control the
              movement of nano-liter to femto-liter discrete droplets, transport it to any
              designed destination, and manipulate it to any designed size.  The most
              significance of this project will enable us to further reduce sample
              consumption to the range of nano-liter to femto-liter volume, improve the
              overall performance, and achieve the current unachievable functionality of
              BioMEMS devices.  This project will impact the current MEMS design methodology
              and promote the commercialization of MEMS applications.  The educational
              activities of this project will take place at several levels (K-12 students and
              teachers, and undergraduate and graduate students majoring and non-majoring in
              mechanical engineering).  Through this CAREER project, the PI will facilitate
              these audiences to succeed in the technology-based world of tomorrow.  


