Title       : CAREER: The Nature of Excitations in Dendrimers and Educational Development of
               the Physical Properties of Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0134691

Award Number: 0134691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Goodson tgoodson@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award involves ultra fast spectroscopic investigations of
              dendrimers.  Initially, femtosecond time-resolved measurements will be carried
              out with an upconversion setup on both homogeneous and inhomogeneous dendrimer
              systems in order to investigate the coherent nature of the excitations.  The
              long radiative lifetimes of several of the novel dendrimer systems will also be
              measured by time-correlated single-photon counting measurements.  These initial
              studies will also determine superior candidates for other light emitting
              applications as well.  In the second stage of the anisotropy measurements in
              order to probe the fast kinetics of the energy migration process in organic
              dendrimers.  In order to measure the homogeneous line-width more quantitatively
              as well as the dephasing dynamics in the dendrimer systems that possess strong
              interactions, he will carry out three pulse photon echo experiments.  With this
              information quantitative comparisons to various excitonic theoretical
              predictions can be carried out.  This research will help answer an important
              question that not only concerns organic dendrimers, but also concerns
              excitations in any branched (fractal) molecular geometry.  The question, how do
              we describe the coherent nature of strongly interacting branched chromophores,
              will have a significant impact on the materials science, photo-physics, and
              technological communities.
%%%
The CAREER educational plan is focused on the
              physics and characterization of macromolecules.  The first component is to
              expose undergraduate students to the real world of research and developments in
              industry that is concerned with the physical properties of macromolecules. 
              Secondly, the PI will integrate these programs into larger group interactions. 
              This will include both undergraduate and younger high school students in the
              Detroit Metro public school district, an area that has been underrepresented in
              science in the past.  This will be done in conjunction with ongoing programs
              that the PI is involved with including the ACS-project SEED program.  The third
              component to the CAREER educational plan is to enhance the instructional
              aspects of the physical chemistry lecture and laboratory courses by including
              more instruction and experimental understanding of macromolecules.

