Title       : CAREER: Heterogeneous Reactions and Groundwater Flow in Reactive Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0134545

Award Number: 0134545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Devlin jfdevlin@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0134545   Devlin  This work proposes to use granular iron, a low alloyed steel
              reclaimed from the scrap metal, as a model reactive porous medium to evaluate
              the following hypothesis:
the hypothesis applies to media found in natural
              settings, such as sulfides and iron oxides, and has important implications for
              engineered in situ passive treatment systems as well as natural attenuation. 
              The granular iron medium functions abiotically, simplifying the experimental
              designs and analysis.  The emphasis of this work is with reactions involving
              organic pollutants in groundwater, and the processes selected for investigation
              as part of this program are: (1) reactivity discrimination between different
              classes of organic compounds and kinetics of reaction in systems with finite
              reactive surface availability, (2) sensitivity of hydraulic conductivity to
              precipitate accumulation, (3) relative importance of precipitate accumulation
              rates compared with corrosion rates to assess overall porosity loss/gain rates,
              (4) modeling of reactive transport with the appropriate kinetic models and (5)
              assessing and quantifying the effects of surface carbon on reactivity. 
The
              investigations are supported in the modeling and spectroscopic aspects by
              collaborators in Canada, and in the effects of surface carbon by Peerless,
              Michigan, a manufacturer of the material. Novel experimental techniques and
              approaches are incorporated into the investigations as listed above: (1)
              Reactivity experiments will be conducted in a batch reactor especially designed
              to minimize mass transfer effects and abrasion of particles at the same time. 
              This will be accomplished by adhering the particles to a glass encased magnetic
              rod suspended in the reactor vessel.  Competition experiments will provide
              evidence of reactive sites shared by different compound
classes; (2) corrosion
              rates will be estimated by 2 independent methods (measurement of hydrogen
              production rates and electrochemically) and compared; (3) precipitation rates
              of anaerobic processes will be estimated from surface area changes and mass
              accumulations and the results compared; (4) changes to hydraulic conductivity
              will be investigated by examining columns connected to a common manifold so
              that more than one flow path is available should hydraulic conductivity changes
              occur to the reactive medium and (5) surface carbon investigations will be
              conducted in flow through batch reactors modified from earlier experiments (1
              above). This technique will permit a distinction to be made between mass losses
              due to sorption from those due to reaction.

