Title       : CAREER: Glycolipid Interactions In Myelin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0134908

Award Number: 0134908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amit Basu Amit_Basu@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Amit Basu, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University, is
              supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies
              of glycolipid interactions in myelin. In the research portion of the career
              plan, carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions between glycolipids are identified
              as the object of exploration. Interactions between the carbohydrate portions of
              membrane glycolipids mediate the compaction of the myelin sheath, adhesion of a
              variety of cancer cells, and also initiate signal transduction pathways in
              certain instances. This proposal outlines a new approach for detailed
              characterization of carbohydrate-carbohydrate recognition using the interaction
              present in myelin as a model system. Professor Basu will prepare carbohydrate
              containing liposomes as well as self-assembled monolayers as cell surface
              mimics of glycolipids. The monolayers will be used to obtain information about
              how carbohydrate structure affects monolayer morphology and its recognition
              properties. The second stage of the project will use chemical mutagenesis to
              identify individual binding interactions in the associated carbohydrates. Each
              type of mutation provides a unique probe of the nature of the native binding
              interaction. These mutants will be incorporated into monolayers and their
              effect on monolayer architecture and recognition will be examined. Finally,
              detailed experiments are designed to correlate glycolipid structure with
              membrane morphology and recognition.

The teaching portion of this proposal
              focuses on methods for introducing research into the undergraduate curriculum.
              The class will be introduced to research through the exclusive use of the
              primary literature for course readings. Students will develop the skills
              necessary to interpret and critically evaluate information that is presented in
              research articles. In the course of doing so, they will begin to identify key
              features and limitations in experimental methods and design. This will lead
              them to consider new experiments that might be performed. Therefore, with the
              support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Amit
              Basu, of the Department of Chemistry at the Brown University will use an
              integrated approach to teaching and research, that is, the methodology of
              research will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum.

