Title       : Climate Sensitivity to Absorbing Tropospheric Aerosols in Experiments With a
               General Circulation Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0134935

Award Number: 0134935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Perlwitz jperlwitz@giss.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Direct radiative forcing by absorbing tropospheric aerosols such as carbonaceous
              and soil dust aerosols is one of the most uncertain factors in climate change.
              The main objective of this project is to improve understanding of the climate
              response to forcing by these absorbing tropospheric aerosols for present day
              conditions. The PI will conduct sensitivity experiments using the NASA Goddard
              Institute of Space Studies General Circulation Model (GCM), plus other GCMs as
              available and as time and resources allow, e.g., the Community Climate System
              Model. He will analyze the response of main climate variables such as surface
              temperature, precipitation, cloud cover, sea level pressure and geopotential
              height on the global scale. Global and zonal averages, the horizontal patterns
              and the variability in time of these variables between different experiments as
              well as between experiments and observations, will be compared. From these
              analyses, the PI will draw conclusions about the uncertainty, both in the
              spatial structure and in the magnitude of the climate response in simulations
              of the present day climate due to the uncertainty in the radiative parameters
              and the vertical distribution of the absorbing tropospheric aerosols. The PI
              will also estimate what accuracy of these parameters is necessary to obtain
              reliable results from climate simulations with carbonaceous and soil dust
              aerosols. 

This research is important because atmospheric aerosols strongly
              impact the atmosphere's radiation budget and new knowledge about
              aerosol-radiation interactions will improve the ability of climate modelers to
              project future climates.
