Title       : CAREER: Towards Molecular Optical Data Storage Using Luminescent Inorganic
               Compounds with Photochromic Quenchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0134782

Award Number: 0134782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix N. Castellano castell@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1984,9161,9178,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
              award to Bowling Green University.  With this award, Professor Felix Castellano
              will design, synthesize and characterize photochromic luminescent quenchers
              based on transition metal complexes dispersed in polymer matrices. 
              Metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) excited states using a series of Ru (II)
              and Re (I) compounds in polymer matrices will be used for a variety of data
              storage applications such as write-once-read-many systems and read-write-erase
              systems.  One- and two-photon photochemical and photophysical processes of
              these polymer composites will be determined to evaluate potential photonic
              device applications. Development of new inorganic chemistry laboratory course
              in partnership with a private science center will provide new education and
              training opportunities to students.  Planned science exhibits will reach a
              large segment of population including students at different educational
              levels.

Photochromic luminescent quenchers based on Ruthenium and Rhenium
              complexes dispersed in polymer matrices will be designed, synthesized and
              characterized.  Metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) excited states of these
              compounds in polymer matrices will be used for a variety of data storage
              applications.  One- and two-photon photochemical and photophysical processes of
              these polymer composites will be determined to evaluate potential applications
              in photonic devices. Development of new inorganic chemistry laboratory course
              in partnership with a private science center will provide new education and
              training opportunities to students.  Planned science exhibits will reach a
              large segment of population including students at different educational levels.
