Title       : CAREER: Optical Spectroscopy of Quantum Coherence, Correlations, and Many-Body
               Effects in Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0134058

Award Number: 0134058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Junichiro Kono kono@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER development project explores optical phenomena in semiconductor
              nanostructures.  Various ultrafast and nonlinear optical techniques will be
              employed to probe the dynamics of charge and spin carriers in nanostructures
              and address issues of contemporary interest.  More specifically, issues and
              questions addressed include: Autler-Towns splitting or "dressed" excitons in
              quantum wells, spin dephasing in semiconductor quantum wires, spin-charge
              separation in Tomonaga-Luttinger liquids, and carrier-induced ferromagnetism in
              magnetic semiconductors.  The research work will train student researchers in
              frontier projects to produce next generation experts in semiconductor optics
              with broad knowledge in quantum optics, quantum information science, and
              nanotechnology.  The impact of this project includes: increased understanding
              of the quantum states and dynamics of interacting and/or strongly driven
              electrons in nanostructures; new spectroscopy techniques; novel device concepts
              and implementations; establishment of the quantum nature of semiconductor-light
              interaction; progress towards the solid-state realization of quantum
              information processing, computation and communications; and provision of a
              controlled environment in which to address unanswered questions in many-body
              physics.

This CAREER award will develop a five-year program that coherently
              integrates research and education in the area of optical studies of
              semiconductor nanostructures.  The proposed research work will train
              undergraduate and graduate students in frontier projects to produce next
              generation experts in semiconductor optics with broad knowledge in quantum
              optics, quantum information science, and nanotechnology.  Various cutting-edge
              optical techniques will be employed to study electron dynamics in
              nanostructures.  Such research will increase our understanding of quantum
              effects in nanostructures, increase students' readiness for the fast-paced
              world of modern quantum technology, lead to novel device concepts and
              implementations, and bring significant progress towards the solid-state
              realization of quantum information processing, computation and
              communications.

