Title       : CAREER: High-Performance Ultra-Wideband Radio Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0134629

Award Number: 0134629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Won Namgoong namgoong@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0134629
Namgoong

Ultra-wideband (UWB) radio systems are emerging as one of
              the key technologies for high bandwidth digital wireless communications. The
              rationale for deploying UWB radio systems lies in the benefits of exceptionally
              wide bandwidths: covertness (very low power density signal), very accurate
              ranging (down to a few centimeters), good material penetration (at low
              frequencies) and high performance in dense multipath (because of fine time
              resolution).

A common concern among UWB proponents is that an integrated,
              high-performance radio may not be achievable, because of the extremely high
              bandwidth, dynamic range, and clock speeds required. Such concern appears to
              lead to two alternative development paths. In the first, the UWB radio system
              is scaled down to operate at a much reduced bandwidth, compromising much of the
              benefits of an UWB system. In the other, advanced process technology with
              numerous discrete components is employed, albeit at the expense of
              significantly higher cost and power consumption.

In this proposal, the PI
              presents a promising approach to realizing an integrated high-performance UWB
              radio using today's low-cost standard CMOS technology without compromising the
              signal bandwidth. To meet the design requirements of a high-performance UWB
              radio, which are currently far from being practical, he proposes an
              architecture that channelizes the incoming signal into frequency subbands, then
              processes them in parallel. By channelizing the incoming signal, the circuit
              requirements in both the analog front-end and digital back-end are dramatically
              relaxed, especially when large narrowband interfering signals are
              present.

This research will demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of
              the proposed architecture for reception and transmission of UWB signals. He
              will provide a complete design framework based on a clear understanding of
              various design options and the corresponding trade-offs in performance and
              implementation complexity. Furthermore, he will demonstrate the feasibility and
              the advantages of the proposed architecture by realizing it on silicon. The
              goal is to design a high-performance single-chip UWB radio.

Many of the
              concepts and techniques developed in the proposed research are not limited to
              UWB systems. They can be generalized to other high-bandwidth communication
              systems, such as high-speed satellite and wireline communication systems. A
              specific application that he plans to pursue in this project based on the
              techniques developed for the UWB radio is multimodal radios, which are radios
              that support multiple communication standards.

The above research plan is
              coupled with an education plan that describes the PI's educational motivation
              and strategy at all levels of teaching. It includes specific plans to teach
              students how to learn, introduce a new class on communication transceiver
              design, instill high-quality oral and written skills, train research students
              with broad technical backgrounds, assist with university-sponsored outreach
              programs aimed at helping the neighboring area, and pursue applied research
              that is guided by the needs of our society.

