Title       : CAREER: Steady and Transient Dynamics of Catalyst-Assisted Combustion in
               Micro-Scale Power Generators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0134128

Award Number: 0134128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Im hgim@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A major limitation to the wide use of MEMS and other micro-scale devices is the
              availability of suitable power sources.  Combustion is an attractive power
              source because of its high energy density, but there are major technical
              challenges including ignition from cold start and control of sustained
              combustion.  Given the high surface-to-volume ratio inherent in a
              microcombustor, there is attraction in using heterogeneous catalytic reactions
              to promote ignition and to extend flammability limits.  This is a computational
              and experimental study of the physical and chemical processes relevant to this
              strategy.

Advanced computational methods are developed and validated with
              experimental measurements and parametric studies are done specifically targeted
              at small-scale combustion systems.  Two canonical configurations are studied. 
              First, stagnation-point flow over a catalytic surface is analyzed by modifying
              existing transient one-dimensional stagnation-point flow code with detailed
              surface and gas-phase chemical kinetics.  Parametric studies address various
              combustion regimes, modified ignition and extinction limits due to catalytic
              reaction, and overall combustion performance.  Also, the effects of transient
              modulation of the surface temperature and inlet flow are investigated as a
              potential control methodology.  Second, a microchannel combustor is modeled by
              developing a high-fidelity multidimensional direct simulation code providing
              detailed temporal and spatial information on the combustor process.  The
              feasibility of a nonpremixed combustion mode (using a coaxial supply of fuel
              and oxidizer) as a means of enhancement of ignition and heat generation is
              assessed.  For both configurations, experimental measurements of temperature
              distribution and product species compositions are compared with computational
              results to validate embedded submodels.

As an education program, interactive
              computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tools are designed for undergraduate and
              graduate students in thermo-fluid sciences.  These include application packages
              that are compatible with widely used kinetic simulation packages and web-based
              tools for solving differential equations and simulating data on reacting flows.
              

