Title       : CAREER: Multi-Scale Modeling of Sol-Gel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0134699

Award Number: 0134699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev D. Gelb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER award funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program in the Chemistry Division and the Division of Chemical and Transport
              Systems, Lev Gelb will develop novel methods for simulating the preparation of
              sol-gel materials and other real-world substances.  A multi-scale approach
              integrating molecular and meso-scale descriptions will be used.  The initial
              focus will be on atomically realistic models of silica based porous materials
              generated by sol-gel synthesis.  Examples of such materials are controlled-pore
              glasses, silica xerogels and silica aerogels.  Later work will be extended to
              the group of mixed oxides, non-siliceous materials, nanoscale thin films, and
              templated gels.  Sophisticated characterization methods will be used to compare
              model and experimental materials, and these methods will be applied to new
              areas such as thin films and templating.  In the teaching component of this
              work Gelb will bring molecular modeling ideas into the chemistry curriculum,
              both through a course in molecular modeling and through efforts to incorporate
              these methods and ideas into existing freshman chemistry and physical chemistry
              courses.  Specifically, he will develop a new "hands-on" course in
              computational chemistry as well as sophisticated visualization tools for
              in-class demonstrations, and he will invite undergraduate students to
              participate in his research activities.

The development of computer models
              and algorithms for simulating nanoscale material structure is an important
              research area.  Such models have considerable value in understanding nanoscale
              phenomena occurring in adsorption and catalysis, as well as in the context of
              materials characterization.  The characterization of the computer-generated
              materials allows comparison of calculations with data from real materials and
              results in a refinement of the simulation techniques.  The application of these
              advanced simulation methods to the rational design of sol-gel materials has
              implications in chromatography, sensing, catalysis and separations.  The
              educational component of the project can be expected to impact chemistry
              students by improving their knowledge of computational methods and exposing
              them to visualization techniques.

