Title       : CAREER: Public-Sector Decision Modeling for Facility Location and Service
               Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0134890

Award Number: 0134890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Johnson johnson2@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop prescriptive planning models to addresses two
              important problems: provision of subsidized housing for low-income families and
              social services for the elderly.  These application areas are important because
              the recipients of these two types of services are usually considered society's
              most deserving", yet in practice these services are delivered with little or no
              use of quantitative planning methodologies that have become common in other
              domains, such as transportation, medicine, emergency and police services and
              the environment. Moreover, proactive planning for these two types of service
              delivery is difficult due to the lack of knowledge regarding: forecasting of
              demand for services; measuring dollar-valued and non-dollar-valued impacts of
              alternative policies, and choosing policies that balance competing concerns of
              efficiency, equity and effectiveness. Key analytical tools to be used in this
              project are: optimization-based planning models from operations
              research/management science (OR/MS) to generate policy alternatives given
              limited resources and specific objectives; urban economic models to
              characterize housing and labor markets and to identify impacts of various
              potential configurations of subsidized housing; forecasting models based on
              statistics and geographic information systems (GIS) to estimate demands for
              senior services, and group negotiations and decisionmaking to identify
              most-preferred policies to implement. 

This project will result in a number
              of important contributions to quantitative public policy research and teaching.
              First, it will enable the comprehensive evaluation of benefits and costs of
              subsidized housing location and elderly service provision. Second, it will
              enable the design of efficient strategies for solving difficult optimization
              problems associated with these two domains. Third, through use of actual agency
              data, researchers and policymakers may be persuaded that these planning models
              could improve the quality of service provision as compared to current practice.
              Fourth, it will provide a framework for the design and implementation of
              multiple-stakeholder decision support systems (DSS) for subsidized housing
              location and elderly service provision. Last, it will enable schools and
              departments of public policy and public administration to better motivate
              course offerings in MS/OR and information systems/information technology
              (IS/IT), and to integrate these course more smoothly into traditional
              curricula.

This project is important more generally because the models it
              generates will help those who manage or advocate for subsidized housing and
              elderly service delivery to better justify policy initiatives that may seem
              controversial, at least in the short run. Many of the political controversies
              arising in subsidized housing and elderly service delivery are characterized
              by: incomplete data on current conditions, an inability to identify realistic
              outcomes associated with alternative potential policy initiatives, and great
              difficulty in negotiating towards a single policy alternative acceptable to all
              parties. This academic research is not intended to transform policy analysts or
              political activists into experts in OR/MS or IS/IT, nor will it eliminate
              ambiguity and uncertainty surrounding these facets of public-sector facility
              location and service delivery. However, the research may persuade some actors
              in policy and political debates that the use of planning models in general,
              along with more accurate data estimates and well-defined ways to discuss policy
              alternatives, could result in outcomes in which society is better off as
              compared to traditional policy-analytic and political advocacy methods.
              Finally, this research will enable students of public policy and public
              administration to more readily avail themselves of OR/MS- and IS/IT- based
              quantitative planning and implementation tools that business school graduates
              have used for years to improve the efficiency of private-sector organizations.
