Title       : CAREER: The Evolution of Income Inequality During the 20th Century: Effects of
               Taxation and Policy Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0134946

Award Number: 0134946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel Saez saez@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The general objective of this research is to study the evolution of income
              inequality in four OECD countries: the U.S., Canada, Australia, and New-Zealand
              using income tax returns statistics available since the beginning of the
              century. To carry out this study, homogeneous series of income shares received
              from the top fractiles of the income distribution and the composition of income
              within each of these fractiles will be build. All these countries have produced
              detailed income tax statistics that are particularly well-suited for analyzing
              the top of the income distribution. These statistics have not yet been used
              extensively to study the evolution of inequality over the long-period. The goal
              of the analysis is to assess whether changes in inequality are due primarily to
              shocks such as world wars or macro-economic depressions and tax policy or due
              to deeper technological transformations. The data will also allow to do a
              comprehensive study of the short term, and long term effects of taxation on
              incomes. Exploiting the numerous tax reforms, we plan to investigate how each
              source of income responds to taxation, and in particular, whether the high top
              tax rates on capital income over long time periods have had adverse effects on
              the concentration of wealth.
      Understanding the mechanisms behind the
              evolution of inequality of capitalist countries over the course of their
              development is critical to assess whether capitalist economies have a natural
              tendency to create increasing inequality and whether government interventions
              are required or effective to curb the level of inequality. The analysis of the
              behavioral response of of high incomes to taxation is of central importance to
              assess the efficiency of the tax system and the costs of taxing the rich to
              finance redistributive programs. Understanding better the mechanisms of these
              behavioral responses to taxation can help improve current tax systems and
              transfer programs for lower incomes.

