Title       : CAREER: Nanoelectronic and Nanophotonic Characterization of Hybrid Hard and Soft
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0134706

Award Number: 0134706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Hersam m-hersam@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses complementary scanned probe microscopy (SPM)
              techniques for covalently nanopatterning polymer and biological molecules on
              silicon surfaces with an integrated research and education plan. One approach
              explores feedback controlled lithography as a means for templating hydrogen
              passivated silicon surfaces for subsequent wet chemistry in ambient conditions,
              and a second approach, termed liquid phase nanolithography (LPN), attempts to
              pattern organic molecules onto silicon surfaces directly from solution using
              conductive AFM. In addition to nanolithography, this project explores
              innovative frequency dependent nanoelectronic and nanophotonic characterization
              schemes. Nanoscale impedance spectroscopy (NIS) will be developed to delineate
              the phase and amplitude response of current through a conductive AFM tip in
              response to a variable frequency applied bias. NIS would provide, in effect, a
              nanoscale spatial map of the frequency dependent electronic behavior of hybrid
              hard and soft materials. In the case of photoactive materials, photocurrent
              will be detected through the conductive AFM tip under sample illumination;
              whereas, photons emitted from electroluminescent materials will be measured
              with a photodiode and current preamplifier. The basic elements of these
              research ideas will be incorporated into a comprehensive interdisciplinary
              nanoscale education and outreach program. In an effort to induce
              interdisciplinary interactions among graduate and undergraduate students, the
              research includes domestic and international collaborations with faculty and
              industrial representatives from other academic departments. 
%%% 
The project
              addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having technological relevance. Outreach to undergraduates and underrepresented
              minorities will be addressed through a Research Experience for Undergraduates
              and Minority Internships in Nanotechnology program that the PI is co-organizing
              through the Northwestern University Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center.
              Additionally, the PI is involved in developing new web- based nanomaterials
              coursework. This undergraduate coursework will then be adapted for the
              development of a nanomaterials world module for K-12 students, non-science
              majors, and the general public both domestically and abroad. The scope of the
              project will expose students to new challenges and research approaches in
              materials synthesis, processing, and characterization. An important feature of
              the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of
              research and education. 
***  

