Title       : Career: Research and Education of Flexible Methods for Statistical Modeling and
               Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134987

Award Number: 0134987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Lin yilin@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, many novel techniques for regression, classification, and
              density estimation have been developed, both in statistics and in other related
              areas such as machine learning and neural networks. Some of these methods have
              been very successful in practice, but their statistical properties are not
              fully understood. This hinders the further development of these techniques. The
              goal of the proposed research is to gain statistical insights into these
              techniques, and to develop new methodologies and improved algorithms. The
              specific techniques investigated are the support vector machine, the randomized
              trees, and the log density functional ANOVA model for continuous and mixed
              data. Several new techniques are introduced. The support vector machine for
              multi-category classification with arbitrary cost structures will be further
              developed. A new framework is proposed that connects the adaptive nearest
              neighbor estimation and the randomized trees. Through the use of the sparse
              grid method, a backfitting type algorithm is proposed for fitting the log
              density functional ANOVA model, with applications to graphical models for
              continuous and mixed data. These new techniques will be examined through
              theoretical investigation and empirical evaluation. The investigator will
              develop a graduate level course on flexible methods for regression,
              classification, and density estimation, and their applications. Part of the
              proposed research will be incorporated into the course material.

Regression,
              classification, and density estimation are the standard problems in statistics.
              Traditional methods typically employ strong distributional assumptions. With
              the vast computing power of today, it becomes possible to develop and implement
              more flexible methods, and a host of new techniques emerged, both in statistics
              and other related areas. Many of these are computationally intensive, and their
              statistical properties have not been wellunderstood. A clear understanding of
              these methods is crucial for their further development and statistical
              education. The proposed research develops valuable insights into flexible
              statistical methods of current research interest. The techniques developed in
              the research provides new and useful tools to efficient data analysis, and can
              be applied to many problems in medical, social, economical, environmental and
              biological sciences. An important aspect of the current statistical education
              is the teaching of flexible statistical methods that take advantage of the
              computing power we have today, and their application in different scientific
              and industrial areas. The insights and new techniques developed in the proposed
              research will be incorporated into graduate level courses, and benefit the
              training of graduate students.

