Title       : CAREER: Stress Redistribution Imaging for Rock Failure Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0134034

Award Number: 0134034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Westman ewestman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0134034
PI:		Erik Westman
Institution:	Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
              State University
Title:		"CAREER: Stress Redistribution Imaging for Rock
              Failure Prediction"

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research
              and education project uses high-resolution, three-dimensional tomographic
              imaging to better understand and communicate the process of failure in rock. 
              Accomplishing the ultimate goal of predicting rock mass failure will result in
              significantly reduced fatalities, lowered construction costs, and increased
              environmental protection.  Failure prediction extends to all aspects of rock
              mechanics including tunnels, mines, rock slopes, earthquakes, waste
              repositories, and bridge and dam abutments.  

To predict rock failure, it is
              quite helpful to monitor the redistribution of stresses within the rock. 
              Recent advances in computational power have allowed this to be done using
              acoustic waves and tomographic imaging.  The basic principal behind monitoring
              the redistribution of stresses is that microfractures within the rock are
              closed under increased loading, allowing the acoustic wave to travel at a
              greater velocity and with less attenuation.  This method has been used
              successfully in the laboratory and has had growing, but poorly founded,
              application in the field.  This project will put the technique of imaging
              stress redistribution in rock on a sound theoretical and practical foundation
              by 1) standardizing methods and 2) extending results of prior studies into the
              gap between laboratory- and field-scale studies.  Educational efforts related
              to rock failure prediction will also be enhanced.

Specific tasks associated
              with both education and research include 1) generating three-dimensional
              tomographic images to observe relevant alterations to the fabric of rock
              samples loaded to failure, and 2) using those images to calibrate numerical
              modeling results.  By collecting data as rock samples are loaded, time-lapse
              animations will be developed which will assist in the communication of
              stress-analysis to undergraduates.  Additional educational efforts focus on
              transitioning from a presentational teaching method to a constructivist model
              for two of the proposer's undergraduate courses and developing a graduate-level
              course for understanding failure through coupled analysis of imaging and
              numerical modeling results.  

