Title       : CAREER: Quantum Properties of Ultrasmall Homogeneous Superconducting
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0134770

Award Number: 0134770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexey Bezryadin bezryadi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER development award will support a young physics faculty member at the
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  The project is focused on
              fundamental problems of phase coherence in quasi-one-dimensional
              superconducting systems.  A novel nanofabrication method developed by the PI
              will be applied in order to investigate fundamental properties of ultrasmall
              superconductors.  The fabrication technique involves metallic decoration of
              single-wall carbon nanotubes and provides nanowires as thin as 5 nm in
              diameter.  The following basic problems will be addressed:: (i) the interplay
              between the fermionic and bosonic mechanisms of  superconductivity suppression
              in one dimension, (ii) the effects of a "dissipative" environment on quantum
              superconductor-insulator transitions, and (iii) macroscopic quantum effects in
              homogeneous superconducting nanostructures. In addition to training students
              and postdoctoral researchers, the project PI will develop a course on
              mesoscopic physics and modern nanotechnology for undergraduate and graduate
              students.  The multidisciplinary character of modern nanotechnology will be
              emphasized in the course in order to attract students from different
              disciplines.  The students will receive training and education in cutting edge
              research techniques that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and
              government.

This five-year CAREER development project will integrate
              research at the forefront of condensed matter physics and nanotechnology with
              an interdisciplinary educational program.  In the research portion of the
              project, new techniques will be used to investigate the properties of
              superconducting systems with dimensions approaching 5 nanometers-a virtually
              unexplored size scale of great importance to the development of future
              generations of ultrafast computers and electronic devices.  Novel experimental
              approaches will be used to study the behavior of superconducting materials in
              ultra-small structures.  Understanding these phenomena may provide information
              useful for the technical development of highly integrated superconducting
              quantum computers.  Nanoscale science and technology is becoming increasingly
              important in ensuring the nation's scientific leadership, and the project will
              also support the development of new coursework on mesoscopic physics and
              nanotechnology for undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
              Illinois.  The students will receive training and education in cutting edge
              research techniques that will prepare them for careers in academe, industry and
              government.

