Title       : CAREER: Computation, Combinatorics, and Reality in Algebraic Geometry, with
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0134860

Award Number: 0134860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Sottile sottile@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sottile  will work on projects ranging from research in algebraic geometry 
and
              algebraic combinatorics, to strengthening links between algebraic
geometry and
              applied  science, to educational outreach.  His work in algebraic 
geometry
              will focus  on concrete aspects of flag manifolds and their 
              Schubert
varieties, involving a range  of problems  from the  real Schubert 
              calculus,  from 
extensions  of  quantum  Schubert calculus,  from
              combinatorial  problems in  
Schubert  calculus, and  from  the geometry  of
              Schubert  varieties.  This  will 
deepen  our understanding  of computation,
              combinatorics,  and real-number 
phenomena  in algebraic   geometry.  Sottile
              will study structural properties of
certain combinatorial  Hopf algebras, work
              that has  applications to polytopes, 
to the  Schubert calculus, and to
              certain  combinatorial   schemes in  physics.   
He  is  actively engaged  in
              applications   of  computational  algebraic   
geometry  to   other 
              fields,particularly discrete geometry and  the applied sciences.  
A unifying
              theme in  this scientific work  is studying  concrete mathematical  
objects
              using computer experimentation to inform theoretical work.

While  algebraic 
              geometry is  concerned  with  abstract  questions about 
solutions to
              equations,  its value to other disciplines  is largely through concrete
              
objects and computational tools.  A major activity of this project is  to 
              help 
disseminate  the  modern  computational  tools from  algebraic geometry
              to 
other fields,  including the applied sciences, through research
              collaboration,  
organizing  conferences,  and  co-authoring a  textbook  on
              algebraic  geometry  
for applied scientists.  Sottile will  also organize an
              outreach program for talented 
high school students in Western Massachusetts
              with the particular  goal of
serving the needs of  students in nearby urban
              areas,  many of  whom come
from groups  traditionally  underrepresented in
              science.   The  intention  of  
this  work:  the  research,  the  technology
              transfer, the service and the outreach, 
is to provide a firm foundation for a
              lifetime of integrated research and 
educational activities for Sottile.

