Title       : CAREER: "Biology on Display: Museums and the New Life Sciences in America"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0134482

Award Number: 0134482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Rader krader@slc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sarah Lawrence College
	      One Meadway
	      Bronxville, NY  107085931    914/337-0700

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal SES 01-34482
Biology on Display: Museums and the New Life Sciences in
              America
Karen A. Rader, Sarah Lawrence College

This CAREER Award integrates
              research and teaching toward a detailed exploration of the historical relations
              between academic and public understandings of biology in the twentieth century
              United States. The five-year research project examines with historical research
              methods the changing display patterns of life science exhibitions in American
              museums between 1900 to 1980 -- a subject uncharted by historians of science.
              This study clarifies central issues about the academic and social
              reconfiguration of biology as a science, including the relationship of the
              people and practices involved in life science laboratory research to those
              involved in its public presentation; the interplay of disciplinary and material
              forces that led biological exhibits to play a central role in newer science and
              technology museums, as well as in American culture more broadly; and,
              ultimately, the changing institutional role of the museum in sustaining social
              support for the twentieth-century life sciences.  Research activities include a
              program of museum fieldwork in New York and at archives and museum sites in
              Washington, Boston, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, and
              Columbus (Ohio).

Alongside the research project, the PI is developing two
              new courses that involve undergraduate students in independent historical
              and/or sociological research. Students in an open seminar,  "Public
              Science/Popular Science: Knowledge-Making and Scientific Literacy in the Modern
              World," explores how science is constructed as a public enterprise. This course
              investigates the general relationship between laboratory practice and processes
              of social and political change, as well as the particular meaning and
              significance of scientific literacy issues in differing historical and cultural
              contexts. Also, an advanced undergraduate seminar, "Nature on Display: Museums
              in Science," focuses on how science and culture co-construct one another in the
              museum setting, with special attention to the historical evolution of different
              types of science museums, and the process of exhibition construction. This
              latter course requires students to undertake field placements at local science
              museums, in order to experience first hand (either by researching primary
              source historical documents, or by becoming a participant-observer in the
              design of a contemporary display) the process of museum science in-the-making.
              Located in the New York Metropolitan area, Sarah Lawrence College is an
              innovative liberal arts school with a unique undergraduate course structure
              that features small seminars, writing-across-the-curriculum, and individual
              tutorials; thus the pedagogical aims of this plan are uniquely suited to the
              institution's niche. To further encourage public outreach during the seminars,
              the PI is developing a workshop series on "The Meaning of Public Science," in
              which exceptional local and national scholars, artists, and scientists will be
              invited to address their work to class themes in small panel discussions and
              lectures. All educational efforts make considered use of a WWW infrastructure
              for information and interaction.

The primary goal is production of a book,
              as well as conference presentations (for students and the PI) and articles in
              scholarly journals and general education venues.  By providing an overview of
              the history of biology displays, this research project re-situates museums as
              important institutions in relation to the existing histories of research
              practices and popularization in the life sciences.  By placing liberal arts
              students in museums,  the PI's pedagogical activities can expose them to social
              science methodologies, as well advance community and disciplinary outreach
              between the public and academic worlds of science.

