Title       : CAREER: Electrophoresis of Proteins in Templated Nanoporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0134429

Award Number: 0134429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Carbeck jcarbeck@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: ELECTROPHORESIS OF PROTEINS IN TEMPLATED NANOPOROUS MATERIALS

This
              CAREER project brings together biophysical and bioanalytical chemistry, with
              materials science and nanotechnology, to address challenges in the field of
              proteomics. The description of complex mixtures of proteins that make up a cell
              is done through a combination of separation and identification. Separations are
              almost always done under conditions that denature proteins and thereby
              obliterate their function.  We seek new materials that will support the rapid
              and efficient separation of complex mixtures of proteins under conditions that
              maintain native protein structure and function. Proteins separated in these
              materials will be available immediately for the screening of function, such as
              ligand binding or enzymatic activity. We propose to develop nanoporous silica,
              produced using surfactant liquid-crystal templates, as a new matrix material
              for the electrophoretic separation of proteins under non-denaturing conditions.
              These materials will be fabricated into thin-films and microchannel arrays.
              Models of the electrophoretic motion of proteins in nanochannels should guide
              identification of optimal separation conditions. Our fundamental understanding
              of this process, however, is incomplete. Protein charge ladders - collections
              of protein derivatives that differ incrementally in net charge - have been
              useful in testing models of protein electrophoresis in free solutions. We will
              use charge ladders to study the role of protein charge and hydrodynamic size on
              the efficiency of separation and resolution of different proteins in
              nanochannels. Knowledge gained from these fundamental studies will test current
              models of electrophoresis in nanochannels and direct the formulation of new
              models that will, in turn, aid in the development of optimal conditions for
              protein separations. 

Proteomics - the study of the complete protein
              complement to the genome - seeks to answer the following two questions. Which
              proteins are expressed (i.e., are present and functional) in a cell? What are
              the functional interactions between the expressed proteins and other molecules
              in the cell? Answers to the first question require the separation and
              identification of complex mixtures of proteins isolated from cells. 
              Separations are usually done under conditions that denature proteins and
              thereby obliterate their function. Answers to the second question require the
              biochemical analysis of individual proteins; analysis is usually done with
              isolated samples of pure proteins in their native functional state. Current
              attempts to answer these two questions therefore involve independent and
              mutually exclusive techniques. Our approach would combine separation with
              analysis of protein function. The goal is to integrate protein separation,
              identification and analysis of function on a single "chip". This integrated
              approach to protein analysis requires new matrix materials that allow
              separations of proteins under conditions that maintain their native structure
              and function. We believe our approach will allow this integration. The
              development of these templated silica materials and the understanding of the
              transport of proteins through them via electrophoresis should also have
              significant impact on the use of such materials in bioprocess
              engineering.

This CAREER award integrates research with an educational
              program that includes new course development at the university level, research
              opportunities for high school students, and focused educational outreach to
              elementary schools. The central theme of this educational program is that
              engineering applications and technology are effective "hooks" that introduce
              and draw students into the basic sciences and mathematics.


