Title       : CAREER: Helical Electroactive Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0134287

Award Number: 0134287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dhandapani Venkataraman dv@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the research component of this work is to prepare novel
              electroactive C2-symmetric or pseudo C2-symmetric molecules and assemble them
              into helical electroactive macromolecules.  The building blocks are bridged
              triarylamine derivatives.  These molecules exist as atropisomers which can be
              resolved and studied prior to polymerization.  The resolved atropisomers are
              then functionalized with vinyl groups or boronic esters and polymerized using
              ADMET chemistry or Suzuki couplings.  The helical electroactive polymers
              produced will be characterized by a variety of physical and spectroscopic
              methods.  Minority students in the SPUR program of the Northeast Alliance for
              Graduate Education will participate in these investigations.  An additional
              educational component of this work is the development of a web based library
              for the exploration of structures of minerals as well as inorganic and
              molecular based materials. The site will contain information which should prove
              useful to students, teachers, and researchers.

   With this CAREER award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and
              educational goals of Dr. Dhandapani Venkataraman of the Department of Chemistry
              at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.  Dr. Venkataraman will explore
              the synthesis of electroactive materials.  These materials are expected to
              exhibit circularly polarized luminesence.  This means they are expected to emit
              light when they are excited by other wavelengths of radiation.  Such materials
              may be useful for backlighting in liquid crystal displays (LCDs, i.e. computer
              screens).    Students trained as a result of working on this project will gain
              experience in materials research as well as supramolecular organic chemistry,
              hence they will have skills needed by both the specialty chemicals and the
              computer/materials industries.   An additional educational component of this
              work is the development of a web based library for the exploration of
              structures of minerals as well as inorganic and molecular based materials. The
              site will contain information which should prove useful to students, teachers,
              and researchers.
