Title       : RUI: Molecular Phylogenetics and Biogeography of the Poison Frogs (Family
               Dendrobatidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0134191

Award Number: 0134191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle Summers summersk@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award is to fund an investigation of the systematics and biogeography of
              the poison frogs (family Dendrobatidae) in Peru and other parts of Amazonia. 
              The award will fund the collection of specimens in the field, and the analysis
              of DNA from tissue samples in the laboratory. 

Tissue samples (toe clips)
              will be collected from poison frogs from remote parts of the Peruvian
              rainforest. These and previously obtained samples from other regions of
              Amazonia will be used to obtain DNA sequences from six gene regions via
              molecular genetic analysis.  The DNA sequence variation among populations and
              species will be used in a phylogenetic analysis of the systematic relationships
              of the poison frog family.  Information on DNA sequence variation among
              populations will also be used to investigate associations between genetic
              divergence and geographic barriers to gene flow in Amazonia.  Finally, the
              information obtained on the systematic relationships of the poison frogs will
              be used to investigate evolutionary associations between life history and
              ecological characteristics of the poison frogs, including parental care, egg
              and clutch size, tadpole deposition pool size, tadpole cannibalism, mating
              systems, and sexual dimorphism. 

This research will provide the first
              thorough analysis of systematic relationships in the poison frog family.  It
              will also provide an important contribution to recent debates about why the
              Amazon River basin supports such a huge number of species.  Most of these
              debates have centered on the contribution of specific geographic barriers to
              genetic divergence, and this research will directly address the relevant
              hypotheses.  The systematic results from this research will be used to
              investigate important questions concerning the evolutionary ecology of the
              poison frogs in a comparative framework.

