Title       : CAREER: Integration of Research and Education in the Study of Analysis and
               Partial Differential Equations in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0134318

Award Number: 0134318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Capogna lcapogna@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
--------


The research component of this proposal deals with the
              study of 
solutions to certain non-linear systems of Partial
              Differential
Equations  which arise in connections with the geometry of
              
Carnot-Caratheodory spaces. More precisely, we will study the 
sharp
              regularity of solutions to quasilinear subelliptic 
systems, and apply the
              results to the theory of quasi-regular 
maps in Carnot groups and in more
              general spaces. 
We will study critical points of the energy for maps with
              
target in the Heisenberg group and with domain in a Riemannian 
manifold or
              in the  Minkowski space.
The analysis of boundary value problems for
              sub-elliptic 
operators, and the  study of qualitative and quantitative
              
properties of solutions of some  non-divergence form non-linear 
equations,
              are also part of this proposal.
The educational component of this proposal is
              centered around 
the creation of Integrated Research Groups, in which
              
undergraduate and graduate students work on basic research 
projects
              supervised by the PI. One of thegoals of this 
activity is the dissemination
              of information, through a 
web-based data-base, seminars, and publications.
              

Partial differential equations are used to provide a 
mathematical model
              for  real-life phenomena, such as 
chemical reactions, force-fields or
              conductivity. Such models
allow both to better understand the phenomena and to
              try to 
forecast the future behavior of the system under study.   
Roughly
              speaking, smooth solutions to PDE's correspond to 
systems which can be  well
              understood and modeled. The study 
of regularity of solutions consists in
              finding smooth solutions.
The equations described in this proposal appear in
              the study of
motion under constraints (as in Robot arms motion),
and in the
              study of diffusion in a non isotropic  media.

