Title       : Emergent Properties of Fungi Exposed to Long-Term Radiation: Fungal
               Ecophysiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0134795

Award Number: 0134795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Dighton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As a result of the extreme exposure to radiation at the site of the former
              Chernobyl Atomic Electric Station, changes in the community composition of soil
              fungi have been identified. Some of these fungi have been shown to be able to
              decompose some of the carbon based radioactive materials from the fuel rods and
              from contaminated roof material. One of the properties that has been found in
              these fungi is that isolates from the Chernobyl area appear to show 'positive
              radiotropism'. These fungi appear to have evolved an ability to recognize
              radioactivity, the direction of the source and then grow towards the source.
              This ability does not seem to have evolved in isolates of the same fungal
              species isolated at a distance from Chernobyl.

Our proposal is to further
              investigate the mechanics of this 'radiotropism'. We wish to identify the
              nature of the radioactive cues that elicit a response in the fungi and will use
              a range of radioactive sources (a, b, g, mixed bg, neutron and X-ray) at a
              range of doses to determine which type and dose of radioactivity these fungi
              respond to. We will also initiate investigations of the underlying biochemical
              changes that may be triggered to cause the growth changes in these 'adapted'
              fungi.

The work has ecological and environmental significance in that, if we
              can show that fungi can respond to radioactive cues, grow towards sources of
              radioactivity, which they can then decompose, this may be a potential
              bioremediation tool that could be used in contaminant remediation.

