Title       : CAREER: Coordination of Production, Inventory and Transportation Across the
               Supply Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0134175

Award Number: 0134175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana Muriel muriel@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
              development of optimization-based decision support systems that model the
              interaction between various levels of the logistics network and utilize
              improved network communications to increase logistics efficiencies. The major
              focus is to design and analyze algorithms which integrate production plans,
              inventory control and transportation strategies across the supply chain to
              reduce system-wide costs and enhance service.  Analysis of the theoretical
              properties of different problem formulations and optimal policies will be used
              to develop efficient and robust solution techniques.  Building upon our
              previous research in distribution planning problems, a series of increasingly
              complex models will be considered to account for large-scale
              production-distribution networks, nonlinear production and transportation
              costs, multi-modal transportation, capacity constraints, and uncertainty in
              demand.  This research will be fully integrated with the educational program
              through the incorporation of case studies, industry projects and software tools
              in Logistics and Supply Chain Management courses. The most salient aspect of
              the educational component is the preparation of case studies that provide
              sufficient technical information to allow rigorous engineering analysis, while
              presenting students with real, unstructured situations that require sound
              business assessment. Finally, the educational program also includes curriculum
              design, mentoring and outreach activities with particular focus on women and
              minorities.

If successful, this career program will lead to improved
              coordination in large-scale logistics networks and significant contributions to
              the theory of combinatorial optimization, networks and algorithms, as well as
              to education.  The impact of our research is clear: lower system-wide costs,
              more reliable delivery times and enhaced service in supply chains. On the
              educational front, we expect that the introduction of appropriate case studies
              to engineering education will be widely accepted to stimulate critical thinking
              and bring hands-on experience to the classroom.
