Title       : CAREER: Advanced Materials for Photonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0134544

Award Number: 0134544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bethanie J. Stadler stadler@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed activities are organized according to the impacted student group
              from graduate down to preschool students. Maintaining an active research
              program on the cutting edge of technology will enable truly applicable lessons
              to be brought to each age group.

Towards graduate education, the P1 will
              continue to teach a course entitled "Principles of Thin Film Technology," and
              will focus on two specific goals over the next 5 years. One is the development
              of a new textbook and the other is the continued development of hands-on
              team-competition laboratories. These two goals are complimentary in that a
              laboratory manual will be published as an ancillary to the textbook.

Towards
              graduate research, the proposed work aims to equip integrated optical circuits
              with important devices that are currently available only as discrete
              components. A great example would be magneto-optical isolators, currently
              composed of doped yttrium iron garnet (YIG), which have been cited as the most
              important components in fiber optic systems due to their extension of laser
              lifetimes. The size, weight and cost of adding an isolator to an optical system
              would be greatly reduced if the isolator could be integrated directly into the
              optical source. Here, rapid progress will be made toward integrated isolators
              using the foundation laid by prior NSF support (work invited to Photonics West
              2001). Various magneto-optical waveguides and permanent magnet films will be
              investigated so that several generations of integrated isolators will be
              developed over the next five years.

In addition to integrated isolators, the
              proposed work will extend P1's expertise into the revolutionary field of
              photonic crystals. She has started growing nanostructures in anodized alumina
              and plans to apply these structures to develop 2D magnetophotonic bandgap
              materials. For this application, the nanostructures must have excellent
              periodicity. Using a novel vapor deposition technique, the structures will be
              observed directly in an electron microscope as they grow. This will enable
              investigations of the growth mechanisms so that nucleation can be suppressed
              while growth is encouraged, resulting in extended long range order. These
              nanostructures will then be used to pattern the best magneto-optical waveguides
              from the isolator work in order to make magnetophotonic crystals. This work is
              revolutionary in that it adds a new dimension to the current field of
              magnetophotonic crystals, which are presently only studied as one-dimensional
              multilayers.

Towards undergraduate education and research, a Local College
              Facilities Usage Program will be inaugurated, support of the MRS Undergraduate
              Materials Research Initiative (a program founded by the P1) will continue, and
              the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program in the P1's department
              will be renewed. Both the NSF REU and the University of Minnesota's UROP
              programs will be used to support undergraduate research projects. Undergraduate
              teaching will take the form of recitations initially so that the P1 can learn
              about the departmental courses that she will subsequently teach.

Finally,
              preschool-12th grade science outreach will include hiring a high school student
              to work with P1's group every summer, and developing and delivering science
              demonstrations to preschool-12th grade groups. As part of an underrepresented
              group, the P1 is often asked to deliver these demonstrations to youth of the
              same group. This grassroots outreach has promise for recruiting additional good
              students to science.


