Title       : CAREER: Semiparametric Regression Models for Censored Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134431

Award Number: 0134431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhezhen Jin zjin@biostat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Semiparametric regression methods for censored data currently used by empirical
              researchers rarely extend beyond the well-known Cox proportional hazards
              regression model. The Cox model assumes that covariate-specific hazard
              functions are proportional, an assumption often not satisfied in practice. The
              proposed research investigates the accelerated failure time regression and the
              family of semiparametric linear transformation models, of which the Cox model
              is a member. Existing methods for these models are complicated by their
              numerical difficulties and stringent assumptions. To circumvent these
              complications, the investigator proposes a number of new approaches, including
              modified least squares method, the M-estimation and a minimization-based
              rank-type estimation for the accelerated failure time model and a general
              counting process-based score equations for the transformation models. An
              important feature of the new approaches is that their inference procedures can
              be readily implemented with numerically stable algorithms.

Results from the
              proposed project will be relevant and directly applicable to many scientific
              disciplines. They will provide methodologic tools for analysis of data across
              many important fields, including economics, business administration, industrial
              engineering, medicine, biology and public health. Examples of the scientific
              research problems that the methods can deal with are as diverse as
              identification of factors associated with the duration of unemployment,
              determination of major risk factors for cancer, testing of new drugs to combat
              AIDS, examination of factors associated with the lifespan of system components,
              evaluation of potential confounding factors in crime prevention and drug abuse.
              The research touches many important areas in statistical science: linear
              regression, survival analysis, semiparametrics, robust statistics,
              nonparametric statistics and statistical computing. In this connection, it will
              generate excellent opportunities for graduate students to have exposures to a
              broad spectrum of modern statistics as well as to learn vital skills in
              conducting independent researches. A research topic/reading course and a
              journal club will be developed to facilitate these exposures and enhance the
              educational experience.

