Title       : A Troubled Realm: Russian Agriculture's Spatial Constraints, Variance, and
               Prospects for Revival
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0134109

Award Number: 0134109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grigory Ioffe gioffe@radford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Radford University
	      Radford Univ Post Office
	      Radford, VA  24142    703/731-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the development constraints faced by Russian agriculture.
              The project will quantify three critically important constraints with strong
              spatial dimensions (physical environment, burden of space, and rural
              demographics), help to understand their implications, and evaluate prospects
              for Russia's agricultural development through the prism of these constraints. 
              Previously, explanations of Russian farming's failures have been mostly based
              on aspatial socio-economic factors such as incentives, ownership, and communal
              forms of life. However, low efficiency and poor production outcomes have
              survived at least three changes in the dominant socio-economic order and this
              provides motivation for an alternative explanation. The research methodology
              will combine multivariate statistical analysis, field observations, and GIS.
              The latter will be used to juxtapose place-specific estimates of agricultural
              development constraints and to produce relevant and informative maps. The study
              will involve two spatial scales: European Russia as a whole and three diverse
              provinces of European Russia in particular. Following the delimitation of
              "marginal" lands, factors of agricultural variance within non-marginal spaces
              will be explored. These factors are fertility of the soil, accessibility to
              major urban cores, and market conversion. It will be shown how their combined
              effect produces differential productivity in the Russian agricultural
              system.

The research will challenge aspatial  and Human Geography
              insensitive explanations of Russian agricultural travails and contribute to
              knowledge about transitioning to market economy. The "breaking news mentality"
              of the 1990s whereby the Russian scene was viewed through the prism of
              upheavals and political personalities, rather than long-term processes and
              their historical and geographical antecedents and roots, will also be
              challenged. The study will establish an example of a replicable framework for
              presenting both the data and results of our spatial statistical and
              cartographic analysis. The databases assembled in the process of this research
              will be fully documented and published in a software-independent format,
              queryable across the Internet and useable by other researchers in the field.
              This design will contribute to the ongoing development of research
              infrastructure to enable integration of results from diverse area and case
              studies.

