Title       : CAREER: Linking In situ Monitoring with Damage Modeling for Life-Cycle
               Performance Simulations of the Concrete Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134272

Award Number: 0134272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374998             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Jason Weiss wjweiss@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project will unite sensing and modeling in a virtual environment to enable
              simulation of as-built concrete structures and pavements.  Embeddable sensors
              will be developed to utilize acoustic, electric, ultrasonic, and thermal
              measurements as complementary technologies, thereby enabling the in-place
              concrete quality and integrity to be measured.  The predicted development of
              concrete properties will be compared with real-time field measurements to allow
              the stiffness, porosity, load, and damage to be adjusted to accurately
              represent the field concrete.  Energy based damage criteria will be developed
              to compare information obtained from the sensor with the model predictions. 
              This information will be used to characterize existing damage and to quantify
              the risk for future irreversible damage and deterioration.  This modeling
              approach can permit contractors and inspectors to implement corrective actions
              during construction that can improve long-term performance. In addition to
              providing information during construction, these models will utilize early-age
              measurements to compute long-term performance.  These models can be used to
              provide the owners of a structure with the feedback needed to assess alternate
              construction strategies, to determine pay adjustments, or to plan repair
              strategies.  At the conclusion of this project the life-cycle performance
              models may be utilized by a wide range of users which could include
              governmental agencies (departments of transportation), material suppliers,
              contractors, insurance and surety companies, repair material producers,
              researchers, and students to predict the long-term performance of structures
              and to assess the success of innovative material and design improvements. In
              addition to the research, this project is focused on preparing both the
              construction engineer and the construction workforce for tomorrow.  This
              project utilizes a 'problem-based-education' approach to encourage high school,
              undergraduate, and graduate students to consider careers in civil engineering
              materials through 'hands-on' projects in which they will learn to diagnose
              problems, conduct independent research, and develop solution procedures.  In
              addition, this project will use continuing education courses and demonstrations
              to inform practicing engineers, concrete laborers and testing technicians of
              the project developments. 
