Title       : CAREER: Research and Education to Further Knowledge and Literacy in the
               Postgenomic Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0134953

Award Number: 0134953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil L. Kelleher kelleher@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Professor Neil Kelleher of the University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program
              in the Chemistry Division.  The overall research goal is to analyze entire
              proteins by mass spectrometry as efficiently as small peptides are processed
              today.  The main research goal involves development of a unique measurement
              platform centering around Fourier-Transform Mass Spectrometry (FTMS) and
              automating the fractionation and fragmentation of wild-type proteins above 10
              kDa.  Realization of this goal will detect biological events in the
              extremophilic organism, Methanoccoccus janaschii, that unexpectedly generate a
              protein of different molecular weight than that predicted from the sequenced
              and annotated genome.  This career plan also reflects a determination to
              positively influence large numbers of young students.  Specific plans include
              direct visitation to six high schools in Illinois with follow up field trips to
              the University for students to peek at research, and a teaching conference for
              regional educators of 14-18 year old students.  

Our society's expectations
              for postgenomic biomedicine and bioengineering demands a better understanding
              of proteins and their structural modifications.  The unique analytical platform
              described above will contribute to the national research infrastructure and
              analyze genome-predicted proteins with unprecendented detail in the
              least-studied domain of life.  The thermophilic enzymes encountered could be
              engineered into industrial catalysts with less negative impact on the
              environment.  Execution of this plan will also recruit, train and educate
              people at many levels for an improved understanding of modern biotechnology.  
