Title       : CAREER: Self-Similarity: Roadblock or Breakthrough?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134264

Award Number: 0134264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tilmann J. Gneiting tilmann@stat.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Following Mandelbrot's seminal work, fractal based analyses of time series,
              profiles, and natural or man-made surfaces have found extensive applications in
              almost all scientific disciplines. The fractal dimension, D, of an object or
              data set is a roughness measure and routinely estimated in scientific studies.
              Long-memory dependence in time series or spatial data plays key roles in the
              discussion of issues such as global warming. It is associated with power-law
              correlations and quantified by the Hurst coefficient, H. In principle, fractal
              dimension, D, and Hurst coefficient, H, are independent of each other: fractal
              dimension is a local property, and long-memory dependence is a global
              characteristic. Nevertheless, the two notions have been linked through the
              celebrated relationship that indicates that the fractal dimension added to the
              Hurst coefficient equals n+1, for a self-similar surface in n-dimensional
              space. This relationship is based on the assumption of self-similarity, which
              has hardly ever been put to test. Recently developed stochastic models allow
              for any combination of fractal dimension, D, and Hurst coefficient, H, and
              therefore challenge the relationship and the role of self-similarity. Has the
              prevalence of self-similar model been a roadblock, keeping scientists from
              exploring and understanding a wide range of local and global behavior in
              complex systems? Or is it indeed a breakthrough, which lets scientists focus on
              models for which the above relationship holds, while other combinations of D
              and H are physically meaningless? This research develops tests for
              self-similarity and thereby addresses these problems. Along the way, new
              insight into the behavior of statistical estimators of fractal dimension and
              Hurst coefficient, software for the fast and exact simulation of self-similar
              and related classes of random processes, an analysis of topographic data for
              Oregon and Washington state, and new theoretical results for stationary random
              functions will emerge. Visualization tools and Freshman Seminars at the
              University of Washington will introduce undergraduate students to mathematical
              and statistical modeling, to fractals, long-memory dependence, and
              self-similarity, and to the natural beauty and diversity of the Pacific
              Northwest. 

Many natural phenomena such as mountains, clouds, ferns and
              rocks have features that look alike across scales. A little piece might indeed
              resemble the whole if the scale is not disclosed. Over the past decades, this
              notion of self-similarity has emerged as a popular and fruitful theme in a vast
              number of scientific studies. This research develops statistical tests, which
              allow scientists to assess whether their observations and data are compatible
              with classical assumptions of self-similarity. Alternative models allow for
              distinct behaviors at different scales and might inspire and encourage new
              theories across disciplines. The research is paired with the development of
              visualization and simulation tools as well as Freshman Seminars, through which
              students are introduced to mathematical and statistical modeling, to fractals,
              long-memory dependence, and self-similarity, and to the natural beauty and
              diversity of the Pacific Northwest. 

