Title       : CAREER: Optically Transparent Gripper for Microassembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0134585

Award Number: 0134585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eniko T. Enikov enikov@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
              development of a flexible and economical robotic system for micro-assembly.
              This research will explore the possibility of applying electrostatic forces to
              visually servoed micro-assembly, by developing an optically transparent
              electrostatic micro-gripper, integrated into an automated assembly cell.
              Characterization of the residual interfacial charge and dielectric breakdown of
              several high-dielectric-constant materials will be performed in order to
              optimize the operation of the gripper. A theoretical model for the trapped
              charge will also be developed and experimentally verified using an electric
              field scanning probe microscope (SPM). Using the SPM as a charge-writing tool,
              the results of this research will be extended to nano-assembly and fixturing of
              carbon nano-tubes and large molecules. 

If successful, the outcome of this
              research will lead to development of economical techniques for the automated
              manufacturing of complex micro-systems with heterogeneously manufactured
              components. It will also generate experimental and theoretical data on possible
              future assembly techniques for the nano-world, based on electric charge
              writing. The interdisciplinary nature of the outlined research will provide
              educational opportunities for senior-year undergraduate students through
              participation in component design and system integration. A graduate-level
              laboratory course on the application of electrostatic techniques in
              manufacturing and sensing at micro and nano-meter length scales will be also
              developed.
