Title       : CAREER: Acculturation, Health, and the Ecology of Immune Function: Integrated
               Research and Education in Human Population Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0134225

Award Number: 0134225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2011       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas McDade t-mcdade@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Acculturation and urbanization have been linked to a wide range of human health
              issues, but the associations are mixed:  A number of studies highlight the
              health benefits of improved access to infrastructure, health services, and
              education, while others draw attention to rising rates of stress-related,
              chronic degenerative, and atopic diseases.  Further research in this area is
              needed, especially since indigenous groups around the world are becoming
              increasingly incorporated into a single global economy.  Previous research has
              focused largely on adults, and additional research is needed on the specific
              health issues confronting children and adolescents, and their unique
              experiences in the context of rapid culture change.  In addition, improvements
              in the methods used to assess health and human biology are required to overcome
              the constraints of research conducted in field settings.  This project
              addresses these issues in pursuit of the following objectives:  1) investigate
              immune function and child/adolescent health in the context of social and
              economic transitions in lowland Bolivia, 2) develop and evaluate
              minimally-invasive methods for assessing immunocompetence in remote field
              settings, and 3) create a series of educational opportunities in which high
              school, undergraduate, graduate, and international students can participate in
              mentored original research. 

Initial research efforts (Project 1) will be
              focused on a prospective study of culture change and health in lowland Bolivia.
               600 participants between the ages of 5 and 20 years will be recruited from 9
              villages, and sociocultural, demographic, socioeconomic, anthropometric, and
              morbidity data will be collected at multiple time points.  Saliva and finger
              prick blood samples will be collected to assess physiological markers of immune
              function and health.  By applying a uniform set of biological and
              socio-cultural methods across a range of cultural-ecological settings, this
              project will investigate the multidimensional nature of acculturation, and its
              positive and negative implications for child and adolescent well-being.  In
              addition, assessment of immunocompetence-using methods that do not require
              venipuncture-in conjunction with growth and morbidity will reveal underlying
              physiological processes that may mediate the associations between shifting
              cultural-ecological environments and adverse growth and health outcomes. 
              Subsequent research efforts (Projects 2 and 3) will be dedicated to a
              comparative analysis of immune development:  Multiple dimensions of immunity
              will be compared in samples collected from 5-20 year-olds in Bolivia, Samoa,
              and the U.S. to gain insight into the range of variation in immune development,
              and to explore the contribution of a comparative, ecological perspective to
              current understandings of human immune function.

 Broader merits of the
              project include a number of educational initiatives: 1) development of a
              two-course sequence in Human Biology Research; 2) mentored research experience
              for undergraduate students; 3) summer workshop in laboratory methods for
              graduate students; 4) training of international students in Bolivia, and 5)
              establishment of a partnership with a local high school to provide internship
              and research opportunities for high school students.  Participating students
              will engage in the scientific process, apply new methodological skills to
              issues in human biology and health, and become members of a collaborative
              research community.  

