Title       : CAREER: Physical Modeling for Geotechnical Engineering Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0134370

Award Number: 0134370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Wartman joseph.wartman@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0134370, Joseph Wartman, Drexel University 

"CAREER: Physical Modeling
              for Geotechnical Engineering Research and
              Education"

ABSTRACT:
Earthquake-induced landslides damage many structures,
              roadways, and utilities. Researchers have identified three mechanisms of
              earthquake-induced deformation in slopes: (1) sliding displacement along a
              localized shear surface, (2) deformation resulting from densification of
              unsaturated materials, termed seismic compression, and (3) distributed
              deformations resulting from accumulation of plastic strains in highly stressed
              regions of a slope, termed cyclic straining. While researchers have studied a
              number of issues related to sliding displacement, little effort has been
              devoted to understanding and developing analysis procedures for computing the
              magnitude and location of distributed deformations in slopes.

The research
              component of this career development plan employs physical models to study
              seismically induced distributed (versus localized) deformations in slopes. It
              uses both 1-g (shaking table) and centrifuge physical modeling methods,
              complemented by numerical analyses. The project also consider issues related to
              the reliability and repeatability of physical model experiments, and explores
              ways of increasing use of physical modeling in engineering practice. It also
              involves collaboration with physical modeling researchers at the Port and
              Airport Research Institute of Yokosuka, Japan.

Specific objectives include:
              (1) Investigate the mechanisms of cyclic straining and seismic compression in
              slopes. (2) Understand how various earthquake, slope (topographic), and soil
              parameters influence the relative contributions of the three deformation modes
              to total slope deformation. (3) Develop systematic analysis procedures for
              computing the magnitude and locations of distributed slope deformations. (4)
              Assess the reliability of model test results, and to develop a
              reliability-based framework for interpreting model experiments. (5) Investigate
              ways of increasing engineering practitioners' use of physical modeling.

The
              educational component addresses the integration of physical modeling into the
              geotechnical engineering curriculum at Drexel University. Models are used for
              demonstration and experimental (laboratory) purposes. A wealth of educational
              psychology research suggests that physical models will improve students'
              understanding and comprehension of geotechnical engineering. The educational
              component also includes initiatives to encourage student intellectual growth
              through classroom instruction; involve undergraduate students in research; and
              expose school students to the concepts of experimental discovery.

This
              career development plan reflects the PI's long-term goals of using physical
              models to study, and ultimately, to reduce worldwide exposure to seismic
              hazards.
-
