Title       : CAREER: Interaction between Turbulence Structures and Suspended Sediment in
               Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0134924

Award Number: 0134924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Schmeeckle mschmeec@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The transport of sediment in suspension by turbulent flows is important to a
              large number of geologic and environmental problems. In most instances, the
              suspended sediment concentration decreases very rapidly moving away from the
              sediment bed. Therefore, the most important factor in predicting the suspended
              sediment flux is an accurate estimate of suspended sediment very near the
              sediment bed.  Numerous formulas have been introduced to predict this near-bed
              concentration, but estimates from these formulas vary considerably. There
              exists no qualitative or quantitative model for the actual process by which
              suspended sediment grains are entrained and disentrained from the bed of a
              hydraulically rough flow.  One of the primary goals of this award is to develop
              an understanding of the process of suspended sediment entrainment and
              disentrainment from a hydraulically rough bed with simultaneous bedload
              transport. It is hypothesized that the entrainment and disentrainment process
              is governed not only by near-bed turbulence structures with positive,
              vertically upward velocities, but also by the availability of suspended-size
              particles at the bed surface. The availability is presumably controlled by the
              exhumation and burial of suspended-size particles at the bed surface.  To
              understand this process, a number of quantitative visualization experiments
              will be conducted in a laboratory flume using a high-speed video system, laser
              light sheet, and a suite of novel hybrid PIV-PTV algorithms. A numerical
              simulation of the overall entrainment and disentrainment will be performed by
              calculating the simultaneous motions of a very large number of bedload and
              suspended-size particles. The motions will be driven by temporally and
              spatially realistic turbulent structures.  Finally, the suspended sediment
              transport field will be coupled to large-scale lateral turbulent structures
              occurring in river channels.  The lateral structures will be investigated in a
              laboratory stream table and in a river using PIV-PTV velocimetry techniques.
              Then the modification of the sediment transport field by the structures will be
              calculated.  A Student Earth Surface Fluid Laboratory will be built with the
              help of graduate and undergraduate students. The laboratory will consist of a
              hele-shaw cell for ground-water flow investigations, a stream table for flow
              and channel change investigations, and a sediment recirculating flume for
              sediment transport experiments.  Also, the lab will be equipped with tools and
              materials to build other small experimental devices for student directed
              projects.  A set of flow-structure-resolving numerical routines will be written
              for each of the laboratory devices. A course in earth surface fluid experiments
              will be developed.  The course will provide hands-on experience of how to
              build, setup, and take measurements of flow structures. The focus of the class
              will be on developing student directed research projects. A newly introduced
              sediment transport mechanics course for graduate students will continue to be
              developed with material incorporated from results of this proposed research. 
              Also, a new "shadow course" for geology undergraduates will continue to be
              developed that tutors students with their homework while introducing geologic
              applications of calculus and physics.
