Title       : CAREER: Improvement and Integration of Laser-based Sensors for Advanced
               Situational Awareness: A Combined Research and Education Program for Students
               in Lasers and Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0134640

Award Number: 0134640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Audra M. Bullock abullock@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Hawaii system is an educational institution unlike any other,
              due to its remote location, culturally rich history, and locally populated
              student body. It is unique among our nation's universities and requires an
              equally unique approach to research and education. Cultural and geographic
              issues that do not exist at other institutions filter into nearly every facet
              of our function as a university. These can create a sense of unity among the
              administration, faculty, and students, or a sense of division; therefore, it is
              essential to consider the local cultural dynamics in any research and
              educational plan. This 5-year career development plan addresses the uniqueness
              of the University of Hawai'i and seeks to increase undergraduate and graduate
              enrollment, student research participation, and diversity within the College of
              Engineering. A key aspect of this plan is working with the local cultural
              dynamics to foster a positive image for the College of Engineering within the
              state of Hawai'i, as well as the Mainland. The proposed plan is an integrated
              research/education/outreach program. intended to encourage students to pursue
              graduate degrees, while providing them the experience of open-ended
              collaborative research projects in the areas of lasers and optics.
The
              research proposed here involves fundamental investigation and development of
              optical sensors; particularly low-cost, high-efficiency, laser diode and
              LED-based sensors. Various innovative optical sensors will be developed with
              applications ranging from biomedical monitoring to target tracking. I will
              build upon previous work in gas sensing to optimize sensitivity, while
              miniaturizing the sensor. Innovative modulation techniques will be explored for
              increased accuracy to measured parameters. Central to this is the wavelength
              modulation technique employing higher harmonic detection. The focus of this
              research will not only be on the development of novel sensors, but also on the
              integration of such sensors in a sensor network. The motivation for
              concentrating on integration of optical sensors is to address the escalating
              need for situational awareness over multidimensional environments with a
              cost-effective robust system in environmental, military, and commercial
              analysis.
Theoretical, experimental, and practical issues of all levels will
              arise in this research project, making it ideally suited for teams of students,
              composed of individuals at various academic levels ranging from sophomore to
              Ph.D., to participate. The rationale for including undergraduate students in
              what is traditionally graduate work, is threefold: (1) hands-on research
              projects give them the opportunity to apply the knowledge learned in their
              course work; (2) exposing them to open-ended research problems gives them a
              feel for what is involved in graduate school and can encourage them to pursue
              graduate degrees; and (3) undergraduate students are typically an untapped
              resource in academia: given the right opportunity, students are often highly
              motivated and extremely creative. I intend to use this team-oriented approach
              to propose and implement an accelerated Masters of Science Option to the
              College of Engineering at the University of Hawai'i Manoa campus. This program
              would allow top performing students to get a Masters of Science with a thesis
              within one year of their Bachelors degree. This plan would be the first of its
              kind in the College of Engineering and would contribute significantly to the
              College's current initiative to boost enrollment. Furthermore, this interactive
              program would have a positive impact on the local community for two reasons.
              First, high-tech research draws attention from the mainland, as well as Japan,
              which can play an essential part in helping to balance the tourism-based
              economy. Second, engineers with graduate degrees and having a solid education
              and good practical experience are in high demand in the current job market, an
              asset highly revered in this tight-knit community. Creating a positive image
              within the local community is the most effective form of outreach here in
              Hawaii.

