Title       : CAREER: Connectivity Among Marine Fish Populations: Emphasizing Ecological Links
               Between Estuaries and the Coastal Ocean through an Integrated Program of
               Interdisciplinary Res/Educ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0134998

Award Number: 0134998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $686214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon R. Thorrold sthorrold@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1650,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The need for spatially?explicit models of marine populations has become obvious
              as fisheries scientists search for alternatives to traditional management
              strategies for marine resources. Efforts to develop spatial models for marine
              fish populations have been handicapped, however, by the absence of quantitative
              estimates of exchange rates among geographically?separated groups
              ("connectivity"). This lack of knowledge is primarily due to the difficulty of
              conducting mark?recapture studies in species that are characterized by the
              production of large numbers of small pelagic offspring that suffer high initial
              mortality rates. In this study, Dr. Thorrold will continue development and
              application of a marking approach that relies upon natural variations in the
              geochemistry of fish otoliths (ear bones) as a marker of source location.
              Recent work suggests that it is possible to track individual fish from juvenile
              nursery areas to adult spawning locations using these geochemical signatures as
              a natural tag of natal location. The otolith is an ideal natural tag
              because:

Deposition time of any material in the otolith can be determined by
              reference to periodic
	increments in the otolith.
Otoliths are metabolically
              inert, and material is not re?worked or re?sorbed after deposition.
The
              chemical composition of the otolith reflects, to some degree, the environment
              in which the
	fish has lived.

     They will begin with a series of
              laboratory studies to investigate factors influencing the
              elemental
composition of otoliths in larval Atlantic silversides (Menidia
              menidia). Then characterize
geochernical signatures in otoliths of
              young?of?the?year (YOY) Menidia from 10 estuaries along the coast
of New
              England. Otoliths will be assayed for VC, 8"0, "Sr/16 Sr ratios, and a number
              of trace elements
(Mg/Ca, Mn/Ca, Sr/Ca and Ba/Ca). This process will include
              the development of a technique for
quantifying 87 Sr/ 86 Sr isotope ratios in
              otoliths using multi?collector inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry.
              The resulting multivariate chemical signatures in these otoliths will be used
              to develop
maximum likelihood estimators to classify adult Menidia returning
              to estuarine waters to spawn the
following year. Otoliths ftom spawning adults
              will be sectioned to reveal the section of the otolith laid
down during
              juvenile residency in their natal estuary. A combination of micro?drilling and
              laser ablation
ICP?MS will be used to assay geochemical signatures in this
              portion of the otolith. Adult fish collected
from each of the 10 estuaries
              will be assigned to natal estuary based on the MLE algorithm developed
from
              ground?truthed signatures of juveniles captured in the estuaries the previous
              year. These data will
provide quantitative estimates of connectivity through
              natal homing and straying in a coastal fish species
on an unprecedented
              spatial scale. More generally, the study will provide a framework for research
              aimed
at quantifying connectivity in marine ecosystems through the use of
              natural signatures in calcified
structures of marine organisms. 
     The
              educational component of the proposed research will include the
development of
              topics courses in fisheries ecology and oceanography for the MIT[WHOl joint
              program in
biological oceanography, the mentoring of undergraduates on summer
              student fellowships at WHOI, and
the development and implementation of teacher
              training workshops for high school teachers in
Massachusetts. They will focus
              on a common fish species that is a critical component of coastal habitats
with
              which students are most familiar. The ability to track the movements of fish
              from the backdoors of
local students to other estuarine and coastal habitats
              will stress the interconnectedness of salt marshes,
estuaries and the coastal
              ocean.
