Title       : CAREER: NLApack: Software for Numerical Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0134611

Award Number: 0134611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Verschelde jan@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this Career project, the investigator creates a software
platform (called
              NLApack) for Numerical Algebraic Geometry,
trains students in the development
              and application of
mathematical software, and broadens the graduate education
              of
students in the areas of mathematics, computational science,
              and
engineering.  In a first stage, the algorithms for the
              numerical
irreducible decomposition of the solution set of a
              polynomial
system are refined and combined into a blackbox program. 
              Besides
software, another outcome of this stage is the development of
              a
textbook for a course introducing students to symbolic and
scientific
              computing.  The second stage of the project focuses on
three specific topics:
              pole placement, overconstrained linkages,
and multi-body dynamics.  A result
              of this stage is a collection
of software tools specialized for those
              application fields, case
studies, and benchmarks.  Throughout, students are
              trained in
mathematics and computing and in important applications areas.
   
               The principal investigator, his collaborators, and his
graduate students are
              working in the areas of numerical analysis
and computer algebra.  While
              computer algebra solves mathematical
problems in an exact symbolic fashion, as
              one would by hand,
numerical analysis calculates with limited precision on
              input
data often only approximately known.  The software developed in
this
              project combines the symbolic and numeric approach.  Most
scientists seek
              insight (not just numbers) in the form of
equations to reveal new relations
              between the important
parameters in their models.  But these models contain
              approximate
data that cannot be handled directly by current symbolic
              methods.
The investigator develops symbolic-numeric methods that will
make
              computer algebra more relevant to scientific computing, and
trains students
              who will adept at both numeric and symbolic
computation, with significant
              payoffs for disciplines that depend
on large-scale scientific computing.

