Title       : CAREER: Enabling Nanoscale Science and Devices Using Selective
               Biomolecular-inorganic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0134950

Award Number: 0134950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414747             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deron A. Walters dwalters@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1984,9161,9178,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
              award to University of Central Florida.  With this award, Professor Deron
              Walters will study interaction of peptides with carbon nanotubes (CNT) and will
              build nanomaterials from bottom up.  These studies will involve selecting
              nanotube-binding peptides, studying electronic effects of peptide binding to
              individual tubes, and linking tubes together with bifunctional
              binding/structural peptide units. Modification of electronic properties and
              nanopatterning of CNT surfaces by Atomic Force Microscopy will also be carried
              out with this award.  Two- and three-dimensional assembly and chiral separation
              of CNT-peptide complexes planned with this award will be helpful for successful
              development of electronic devices, circuits and sensors.  The PI, with the
              departmental support, will provide innovative approaches to teach quantum
              mechanics courses to undergraduate students at University of Central Florida. 
              In addition, principles and behavior of the nanoscale world will be made
              available to the public, and precollege teachers and students through the
              Orlando Science Center. 

Interaction of peptides with carbon nanotubes (CNT)
              and nanopatterning of CNT surfaces by Atomic Force Microscopy will be carried
              to build nanomaterials from bottom up.  These studies will involve selecting
              nanotube-binding peptides, studying electronic effects of peptide binding to
              individual tubes, and linking tubes together with bifunctional
              binding/structural peptide units. Modification of electronic properties and
              nanopatterning of CNT surfaces, two- and three-dimensional assembly and chiral
              separation of CNT-peptide complexes will be helpful for successful development
              of electronic devices, circuits and sensors.  Innovative approaches will be
              used to teach quantum mechanics courses to undergraduate students at University
              of Central Florida.  In addition, nanoscale science will be made available to
              the public, and precollege teachers and students through the Orlando Science
              Center.
