Title       : CAREER: The Dependence of Friction on Vibrations at the Atomic Scale: A
               Fundamental Study Using Isotopic Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0134571

Award Number: 0134571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Carpick carpick@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: The Dependence of Friction on Vibrations at the Atomic Scale: 
A
              Fundamental Study Using Isotopic Engineering 

Robert W. Carpick 
University
              of Wisconsin - Madison 

Research 

Much progress has been made in the
              long-standing engineering discipline of tribology - the study of friction,
              adhesion, lubrication, and wear - yet many key questions remain. Recently,
              tribology has emerged as critically important to the field of nanotechnology,
              since the increased surface-to-volume ratio at small scales ensures that
              surface or interface effects dominate the interactions between micro- or
              nano-scale components. Therefore, progress toward the implementation of
              nano-scale materials technologies will not occur without a fundamental
              atomic-scale understanding of the tribological properties of interfaces.  The
              proposed research will address this knowledge gap by studying a fundamental
              aspect of tribology: the relationship between frictional energy dissipation and
              the vibrational properties of materials. Specifically, the PI will perform
              atomic force microscope (AFM) measurements of friction at the atomic scale as a
              function of isotopic composition of the sliding materials. The substitution of
              heavier stable isotopes is a method to tailor specific vibrational properties
              by changing the mass, but not the chemical identity, of atoms in a material.
              The impact of this research will be: (1) to provide a quantitative experimental
              basis that will critically enhance the theoretical understanding of frictional
              energy dissipation in terms of vibrational energy; and (2) to enable the design
              of nanostructured materials and devices with optimized tribological (and other)
              properties via isotopic engineering. 

Education and Outreach 
	To be
              prepared for new opportunities in nanotechnology, engineering programs must
              incorporate previously non-traditional physical and experimental concepts into
              the curriculum. The PI will make a major contribution to this by: (1) expanding
              an engineering mechanics undergraduate laboratory course to include a battery
              of nano-scale experiments including AFM experiments; and (2) co-developing an
              advanced seminar course in nanotechnology directed at engineers. The intention
              is not simply to provide new course materials locally, but to have these
              materials serve as models for enhancing engineering curricula everywhere
              through evaluation and wide dissemination on the web, education publications,
              and in public meetings. In addition, outreach efforts aimed at the general
              public and K-12 students will be pursued. The PI will contribute to the design
              of an upcoming international science museum exhibit on materials science by
              developing modules (visualization, models, hands-on materials) on the topics of
              microscopy, friction, and isotopes. The PI will also develop a
              classroom-compatible macro-scale AFM made of simple and affordable components
              which can demonstrate concepts behind high resolution imaging and friction
              force measurements. Local impact of this work will be felt through the PI's
              active involvement in a successful minority university recruiting program at
              UW-Madison. Finally, building on the established practice in the PI's lab, the
              laboratory efforts will also include substantial involvement of undergraduates
              including members of underrepresented groups.

