Title       : CAREER: Light in Chaotic Dielectrics - Resonances and Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0134736

Award Number: 0134736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evgenii Narimanov evgenii@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This is a CAREER award which supports both research and education.  In
              particular, the PI will study the behavior of light in chaotic dielectrics. 
              Due to the extremely high degree of coherence and the ability to manipulate ray
              dynamics by changing the shape and the size of the system, deformed dielectric
              resonators represent an ideal system to study the fundamental phenomena which
              determine the evolution of generic conservative dynamical systems.  In the last
              few years, such structures were also used to develop a number of novel
              photonics devices, e.g., our "bow-tie" microlaser with power output increased
              by three orders of magnitude.

The primary research goal of this grant is the
              study of resonances and light scattering in these dielectric systems.  Research
              topics will include: a semiclassical theory of resonance lifetimes and emission
              patterns in deformed dielectric resonators; Arnold diffusion and chaos-assisted
              tunneling in open systems;  dynamic Anderson localization and "scars" in
              dielectric resonators, both in two- and three-dimensional geometries; light
              scattering by nonspherical dielectric particles.

The nonlinear dynamics and
              modern classical methods which play the major role in research are also the
              focus of the education program.  Here the primary goal is to bring these ideas
              to the optics curriculum at both the undergraduate and graduate level.

This
              is a CAREER award which supports both research and education.  In particular,
              the PI will study the behavior of light in chaotic dielectrics.  Due to the
              extremely high degree of coherence and the ability to manipulate ray dynamics
              by changing the shape and the size of the system, deformed dielectric
              resonators represent an ideal system to study the fundamental phenomena which
              determine the evolution of generic conservative dynamical systems. The primary
              research goal of this grant is the study of resonances and light scattering in
              these dielectric systems.

The nonlinear dynamics and modern classical
              methods which play the major role in research are also the focus of the
              education program.  Here the primary goal is to bring these ideas to the optics
              curriculum at both the undergraduate and graduate level.




