Title       : CAREER: Integrated Engineering and Economic Modeling of Problems in Deregulated
               Electricity Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0134210

Award Number: 0134210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shi-Jie Deng deng@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of the proposed research is to develop parsimonious electricity market
              models and to integrate asset valuation models with probabilistic simulation
              models of an overall power system.

Tremendous market volatility in
              electricity prices has been witnessed in recently established power markets.
              Volatile electricity price not only puts pressure on efficient operations of
              power generation assets, but also increases the importance of having realistic
              power market models for the purpose of evaluating real assets and performing
              risk management tasks in quantifying and controlling operational and financial
              risks.

Two competing approaches are now being used for modeling electric
              power market behaviors for the above mentioned purposes: The "fundamental
              approach", which emphasizes on the engineering aspects of power markets, relies
              on system simulation and market operation to determine market prices; and the
              other so-called "technical approach', which is economically oriented, involves
              the direct modeling of the stochastic behavior of market prices from historical
              data and fundamental analysis. While the fundamental approach provides finer
              details about electricity markets in specific scenarios, it is computationally
              prohibitive due to the large number of scenarios it entails. The proposed
              project will combine the strengths of the two approaches by developing specific
              stochastic models for electricity prices that are calibrated using a
              probabilistic simulation of an overall electric power system. 

The
              methodology and analytical models developed during this project can make a
              significant impact on the divestiture process and the evaluation of new
              projects by power system planners and marketers in the deregulated power
              industry. Costs due to discrepancies in capacity valuation resulting from
              differing valuation methodologies and assumptions of power price dynamics are
              estimated to be in the millions. To lower such costs, this approach is expected
              to yield realistic power asset valuation methodologies that properly reflect
              the reliability of the power systems.

