Title       : CAREER: System-wide Traffic Condition Monitoring and State Estimation for
               Intelligent Transportation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0134025

Award Number: 0134025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Billy M. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Traffic congestion continues to be one of the most pressing problems facing
              urban America.  Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) provide the systems
              perspective needed for sustainable solutions to urban mobility problems. During
              the final decade of the 20th century, hundreds of millions of dollars were
              invested in ITS surveillance, detection, and traveler information technologies.
              In this first generation ITS there remains a largely untapped potential to
              exploit the wealth of remotely sensed data for automated, time critical
              management and control. Multi-scale system-wide forecasting and state
              estimation is required for next generation ITS to support proactive rather than
              reactive transportation system management.  

This career development plan
              will provide an integrated research and education framework for system-wide
              traffic condition monitoring and state estimation for intelligent
              transportation systems.  Research activities will include: (1) development of a
              system-wide ITS traffic condition monitoring and forecasting framework, (2)
              seasonal ARIMA based Kalman filtering for univariate forecasts, (3) application
              of continuum traffic flow theory to one-step system forecasts, and (4)
              continuum theory-based incident detection, missing data estimation, and shock
              wave propagation prediction.  The first research activity is broad in scope and
              will provide a typological focus for ITS forecasting research and guidance for
              new course development and course enhancements to support the education and
              training of 21st century ITS practitioners and researchers.  Specific
              educational activities will include (1) undergraduate course development and
              enhancement to increase student exposure to information technologies and
              infrastructure sustainability, (2) development of a new traffic flow theory
              course directly linked with ITS research activities, (3) involvement of
              undergraduates in ongoing ITS research activities through interdisciplinary
              research teams under graduate student leadership, and (4) active recruitment of
              students from traditionally underrepresented groups through various programs
              aimed at incoming students and graduate school candidates.

These research
              and educational activities will be built and integrated around a new campus
              traffic operation center and ITS lab. The lab will provide direct access to
              system-wide traffic condition data and full motion surveillance video. This
              ready access to system-wide data will greatly enhance the research and graduate
              education efforts. Special emphasis will be placed on exposing undergraduates
              to ITS research and development through course projects and undergraduate
              participation in ITS research teams.  The ITS lab will also serve as a showcase
              for student recruitment, including efforts to attract women and
              underrepresented minorities to civil engineering.


