Title       : Ethical, Legal, and Technical Issues of Biohistorical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0134850

Award Number: 0134850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori B. Andrews landrews@kentlaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Buenger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9123,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Advances in science and technology give scholars and institutions new means of
              undertaking research on historical figures and historical artifacts. Techniques
              of bio-analysis commonly used in medicine and forensics, such as DNA testing or
              biochemical assays, are now being applied to answer historical questions.
              Recent proposals for bio-historical investigations of scientist Albert
              Einstein, explorer Meriwether Lewis, and presidents George Washington, Thomas
              Jefferson, and Abraham Lincoln have generated scientific, historical, ethical,
              and legal controversies. 
The Institute for Science, Law, and Technology
              (ISLAT) at the Illinois Institute of Technology and the Chicago Historical
              Society (CHS) coordinate a collaborative investigation to develop ethical
              guidelines for the emerging field of bio-historical research. The project
              fosters interdisciplinary academic partnerships between specialists in
              bioethics, science, law, social science, history, and museology.  The
              researchers investigate the reasons bio-analysis has been used, and might be
              used in the historical context, and the scientific, legal, ethical and social
              concerns raised by bio-analysis.  The project examines pplicable existing
              guidelines for professional organizations of historians, anthropologists,
              museum curators, survey researchers, epidemiologists, pathologists,
              geneticists, forensic scientists, archeologists, and sociologists.  They also
              analyze ethical and legal precedents such as those governing informed consent,
              privacy, respect for the dead, duties of museum curators, access to information
              about historical figures, contracts between donors and museums, and access to
              body tissue. 
Building on this research, ethical guidelines for bio-historical
              analysis will be developed for use on tissue samples (such as hair, blood, or
              bones) from figures of historical interest.  Such guidelines are useful to
              geneticists, chemists, forensic scientists, and others who are requested to
              test such artifacts; and to foundations, government agencies, and others asked
              to fund such analyses. The draft guidelines will be posted on the Chicago
              Historical Society's Internet site, submitted to professional organizations for
              written comments, and presented at selected conferences for discussion. The
              principal investigators will incorporate this comprehensive feedback in the
              final draft of the guidelines that will be published in various academic and
              professional journals. 

