Title       : CAREER: Chemical Communication in Marine Ecosystems: Interactions Involving
               Harmful Algae and Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0134843

Award Number: 0134843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia Kubanek julia.kubanek@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1045,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Most organisms use chemical signals to assess their environment and to
              communicate with other organisms. Chemical cues for the purposes of defense,
              mate attraction, habitat selection, and food tracking are known to be crucial,
              widespread, and diverse. As our understanding of receptor-ligand interactions,
              biosynthetic pathways, sensory biology, hydrodynamics, and ecosystem function
              has improved dramatically in the last decade, the opportunity to address the
              chemistry of marine biological processes has become more promising than ever
              before. This project will focus on the ecological effects of chemical
              communication in marine systems, demanding significant integration of biology
              and chemistry, involving active participation of young scientists in hypothesis
              building and testing, and training students in research methods and
              communication. 

In this study, the Florida red tide dinoflagellate Karenia
              brevis (= Gymnodinium breve) will be used as a model system for understanding
              how phytoplankton natural products directly mediate critical interactions such
              as predation, which affects population and community structure. Phytoplankton
              chemistry may also induce food-web cascades affecting multiple ecosystems,
              amplified by the movement of blooms over vast distances. Indirect evidence
              suggests that some harmful algae use natural toxins to deter grazing by
              zooplankters, shellfish, and planktivorous fish, or as allelopathic agents
              against competing microalgae, perhaps contributing to bloom proliferation. This
              study will test the hypothesis that chemical compounds produced by Karenia
              brevis defend it against grazing by the co-occurring copepod Acartia tonsa.
              Chemical fractionation guided by copepod behavioral and physiological feeding
              assays will be used to isolate antifeedant compounds from K. brevis extracts.
              Ecologically active compounds will be identified by spectroscopic techniques
              such NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (including LC-MS). This research
              will provide adaptable methods for studying  food-web and competitive
              relationships between unicellular organisms and their enemies, effectively
              decoupling chemical from morphological and nutritional factors.

Students
              involved in interdisciplinary science need to develop strong communication
              skills for bridging fields and to acquire a breadth of experience without
              sacrificing scientific rigor and depth in their specialty. Towards these ends,
              two new educational opportunities have been designed. First, a new seminar
              series is planned for graduate and upper-undergraduate students, researchers,
              and faculty on the intersection of research, policy, and communication with
              non-scientists, using harmful algal blooms as an example of science that holds
              public interest. Second, a new interdisciplinary course will be developed for
              graduate and upper-undergraduate students on methodologies for the discovery of
              novel bioactive molecules that function as cues among aquatic organisms. 

