Title       : CAREER: Effects of Surfaces on Bacterial Metabolic Activity and Survial:
               Examination of a Physiochemical/Bioenergetic Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0134362

Award Number: 0134362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derick G. Brown dgb3@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0134362  Brown  It has long been recognized that the adhesion of bacteria to
              surfaces can result in enhanced metabolic activity. This can be beneficial,
              such as with attached-growth bioreactors for water and wastewater treatment,
              biodegradation of subsurface contaminants and with nutrient cycling in soils.
              However, it can also be harmful, such as with bacterial survival and growth in
              water distribution systems, pathogen growth on medical implants and equipment,
              plaque formation on dental surfaces, and bacterial attachment in pipelines with
              concurrent degradation of the pipelines and the fluids they carry.
Most
              research in this area has focused on the availability of nutrients and growth
              substrate adsorbed to the solid surface. The research approach proposed
              addresses this issue from a different viewpoint by considering specific
              interactions between the surface and the bacterial cell wall. The approach
              examines the link between two disparate theories, one involving colloid
              deposition processes and the other involving cell membrane bioenergetics. 
              Specifically, this approach focuses on the interactions between the
              physiochemical charge-regulation process, which occurs as a surface containing
              ionizable groups (e.g. bacterial cells) approaches another surface, and
              cellular membrane bioenergetics  the chemiosmotic theory of Peter Mitchell -
              which directly impacts metabolic activity and survival.
The proposed research
              project examines the link between the charge-regulation and chemiosmotic
              processes through numerical and experimental investigations.  Numerical
              simulations of the proton motive force and the charge-regulation process will
              be used to design and interpret experiments that will systematically examine
              the effects of bacterial, solid surface, and solution properties on bacterial
              metabolic activity and survival.  The ultimate goal is to elucidate the nature
              of the link between the charge-regulation and chemiosmotic processes, allowing
              these models to be used as a tool to assess biochemical processes in natural
              systems and to assist in the selection or design of surfaces in engineered
              systems based on bacteriological constraints.
The main educational thrust of
              this proposal takes a step back and focuses on Environmental Engineering
              curricula taught in middle- and high-schools.  To reach the widest possible
              number of teachers, the PI proposes to develop a comprehensive web site.  A
              main benefit of the web format is that the site will be a living document,
              which will evolve based on feedback as the curricula is used in the classroom.
              This site will be developed in conjunction with the National Science Teachers
              Association (NSTA).  The NSTA has agreed to assist in setting-up reviewers in
              order to ensure that the site content and format are tailored to the needs of
              middle- and high-school teachers.***

