Title       : CAREER: The Role of Relative Motion and Intermolecular Ordering on Dynamic
               Behavior of Polymers and Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0134910

Award Number: 0134910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janna K. Maranas jmaranas@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this research project are to (1) correlate relative motion in
              relaxation processes of glass-forming polymers with the character of inter- and
              intra-molecular packing, and (2) assess the way in which intermolecular packing
              changes as a function of environment and the relation of these changes to know
              relaxation behavior in blends.  The importance of the spatial region
              corresponding to the preferred intermolecular packing distance has previously
              been demonstrated.  However, not all polymers have similar degrees of
              intermolecular ordering, and the effect of this on dynamics is unknown. 
              Further, intermolecular ordering shifts depending on environment, and the
              effect of this is unknown as well.  To achieve the objectives stated above, a
              series of polymers, wherein the degree of intermolecular ordering ranges from
              very little to extensive will be considered.  A given polymer [A] will then be
              considered in a series of second components [B].   Changes in the degree of
              intermolecular ordering will be observed, including the original polymer [A-A],
              and the new ordering [A-B} induced by the changing environment.  Observations
              will be made by coherent neutron scattering, which reveals relative motion on
              selected spatial scales, and molecular simulation, will assess the location and
              extent of spatial separations relevant to interchain packing.  This combination
              of techniques has been chosen because they can follow relative motion with
              spatial selectivity.  The ability of neutron measurements to select for spatial
              scales will be exploited to separate the contributions of the a and
              b-relaxations, and assess the influence of environment of each individually. 
              The novelty of the proposal lies in following relative, rather than self
              motion, investigating carefully selected series of materials, and integrating
              molecular simulation.  This work, when completed, will allow us to connect
              features intermolecular packing with relative motion, and to unambiguously
              delineate the role of environment in miscible blend dynamics.
%%%
Educational
              activities are centered on bringing research-oriented activities to students
              who would not otherwise have these experiences.  Specifically, open-ended
              experimental/simulation problems will be introduced in core chemical
              engineering courses, research opportunities will be provided to students in
              non-research universities, and a senior elective course on molecular simulation
              and its role alongside experiment will be added to the Chemical Engineering
              curriculum.  Selected undergraduate students entering their senior year at Cal
              Poly Pomona, and industrially oriented university with no formal research
              program, will be invited to spend a summer pursuing research in the PI's group.
               The students' research will continue as their senior thesis project during
              their final year.  These students will develop a course project based on the
              research they conduct at Penn State.  At the same time, open-ended projects
              will be developed and used in the reaction engineering and thermodynamics
              courses, and an experiment with a simulation comp0nent will be added to the
              senior laboratory course.  These projects will be compiled, and in the last
              year of the Plan, used as modules in a senior elective course.  This course,
              aimed at non-simulators, will teach students how to use and interpret
              simulation data, much as a traditional laboratory course does the same for
              experimental data.

The research to be carried out in this proposal falls in
              the general area of short-time dynamic behavior in polymer melts and blends, an
              area important for its relevance to the glass transition and processing
              behavior of these common materials.

