Title       : CAREER: Integrating Time-Variant Source Directivity into Architectural Acoustic
               Auralizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0134591

Award Number: 0134591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lily Wang lwang@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project will escalate and integrate architectural acoustics research and
              education in the United States.  The research focus is on fundamental advances
              in understanding and modeling of auralization, or the process in which the
              listening experience in a space is audibly simulated from a physical or
              computational model.  The computational procedure is already being used in the
              prediction and design of the acoustics in built spaces, but its accuracy and
              realism are limited by geometrical considerations, knowledge of material
              properties, and the use of time-invariant sound source directivity.  This
              project plans to implement changing source directivity in real time to improve
              the accuracy of auralizations.  Psychoacoustic subjective tests will also be
              run, so that perceptual differences may be quantified between (a) traditional
              auralizations using omnidirectional time-invariant sources, (b) auralizations
              with time-variant source directivity, and (c) measured results from actual
              sources in real spaces.  With improvements, auralization will advance the study
              of acoustics in the built environment and potentially impact many other fields.
               Realistic sound fields can be recreated and tested on humans in controlled
              laboratory environments for psychoacoustic studies; auralized sound fields may
              be used to train people who are vision-impaired; and assessments may be made of
              noise quality in work environments and how that impacts productivity.  

The
              United States currently lacks a technical center for architectural acoustics
              research and education, as is found overseas.  The PI plans to promote such a
              hub within the University of Nebraska - Lincoln Architectural Engineering
              program.  The significance and excitement about building acoustics will be
              conveyed by making the auralization research accessible to all levels: in
              required undergraduate and graduate acoustics classes; in opportunities for
              undergraduates to complete segments of the research, mentored by graduate
              students; and through outreach to local high schools so younger students may
              participate as test subjects or aid with measurements of real spaces, such as
              their own classrooms.


