Title       : CAREER: Detachment from Biofilms Under Dynamic Operating Conditions -
               Integrating Fundamental Research and Practical Biofilm Modeling Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0134104

Award Number: 0134104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eberhard Morgenroth emorgenr@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0134104
Morgenroth
The overall objective of this proposal is to determine the
              influence of dynamic variations of shear stress on biofilm detachment. 
              Mechanisms of biofilm detachment are poorly understood and procedures for the
              design and operation of biofilm reactors are mainly empirical.  In biofilm
              reactors, the process of detachment is necessary to balance bacterial growth
              and to prevent clogging.  In addition, the overall rate and time dependent
              variation of detachment significantly influence bacterial selection within the
              biofilm
community.  Specific objectives of this proposal are to determine the
              relationship between detachment rate, detached particle characteristics, and
              overall reactor performance under constant or dynamically fluctuating shear
              conditions.  Based on experimental results, a dynamic mathematical biofilm
              model will be developed.  The model will be used for experimental design,
              interpretation of research results and to
teach students and practitioners the
              underlying principles governing the application of biofilms in biological
              treatment processes. 

Innovative tools for on-line monitoring of detachment
              will be developed.  Laser backscattering and in-line video microscopy will be
              adapted to provide continuous information on the size and shape characteristics
              of detached particles.  On-line techniques for measuring bacterial respiration
              rates within the biofilm reactor will be developed and used to correlate
              overall biofilm reactor performance with detachment
dynamics.  Detached
              particles will also be characterized for strength, surface hydrophobicity,
              surface charge, and abundance of nitrifying bacteria.  Laboratory scale biofilm
              systems will be developed that allow biofilms to grow under defined
              hydrodynamic conditions (annular reactor) or under conditions used in
              full-scale reactors (packed bed reactor, airlift reactor).  A mathematical
              biofilm model will be developed
that will be applied both in research and in
              teaching. Inputs to the model will consist of wastewater composition, biofilm
              thickness distribution, and detached particle size distribution.  The
              mathematical model will be tested in the laboratory and in full-scale biofilm
              reactors.  

