Title       : CAREER: Development of Nonlinear Modeling Tools for Analysis, Simulation, and
               Structural Health Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134333

Award Number: 0134333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew W. Smyth smyth@civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Much of our civil infrastructure is in a severe state of degradation. This
              project will develop methods to assess the health of critical structural
              systems based on limited information about their vibration response signature,
              providing engineers with a set of reliable tools to evaluate their continued
              viability and prioritize repair and maintenance within limited budgets. Unlike
              conventional structural health monitoring methods (where data is analyzed in an
              off-line/batch mode) the project, through an emphasis on algorithm efficiency
              criteria, will develop new approaches in adaptive system identification
              involving real-time damage detection into a set of application-oriented tools.
              These tools will be evaluated through a phased experimental program, involving
              numerical simulation, laboratory experimentation, and full-scale
              evaluation.
Building on the PI's prior work, the research will show the
              potential of nonlinear identification techniques for application in the
              structural health monitoring context, and in broader fields of structural
              engineering/engineering mechanics. The research objectives are: 1) to develop
              hybrid methodologies, circumventing difficulties associated with nonparametric
              vs. parametric modeling of nonlinear structural systems for damage detection
              purposes; 2) to develop nonlinear real-time identification techniques for
              structural health monitoring and active control, and seek to benefit from
              alternative sensor technologies; 3) to evaluate limitations in identification
              of structural dynamics from low-level excitation or from response measurements
              only (i.e., unknown excitation); 4) to evaluate limitations of inferring damage
              from vibration sensor arrays that are sparse, and develop cost-effective
              methodologies that enable engineers to readily detect structural damage; and 5)
              to apply these tools to other engineering challenges, e.g., MEMS, soil-dynamics
              and aerospace.

Complementing the research project, an integrated educational
              project is undertaken. This educational project has three main aspects: 1) the
              development of a lab facility for repeatable nonlinear dynamic testing for
              research and student participation - repeatability achieved through use of
              active control to synthesize nonlinear behavior; 2) the development of a
              graduate-level course on health monitoring; and 3) a summer outreach program to
              engage underprivileged, inner-city, New York high-school students in the
              engineering research environment through teaching, field-trips, laboratory
              demonstration, and hands-on testing - all in collaboration with Columbia
              University's Double Discovery Center. 

