Title       : CAREER: Intelligent Based Performance Enhancement Control of Micropower Energy
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0134130

Award Number: 0134130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcelo G. Simoes msimoes@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

An advanced renewable based distributed power generation system is required
              for
the next age of the alternative energy market. Improved and dependable
              systems
for energy conversion, energy storage requires power quality demands
              and
compatibility with distributed energy systems, also called by microgrid
              or
micropower energy systems. An intelligent-based control methodology must
              be
developed to optimize the microgrid system requirements, aiming convergence
              of
adaptive, parameter insensitive and on-line learning capabilities. This
              research
project is concerned with three main issues (1) small distributed
              generation
prototype development of a high frequency ac link (HFAC) microgrid
              system, (2)
analysis and modeling of behavior interactions and architecture
              management and
(3) intelligent control applications.

Power electronic
              systems will be designed to connect distributed sources to the
HFAC.
              Intelligent control techniques will be developed to implement capabilities
of
              learning by sensing the environment in order to reach its objective of
optimum
              power operation, automatic functioning, self-monitoring and
self-checking of
              failures and detection/recovery for efficient user interface. A
behavior based
              hierarchic control capable to generate set-points for optimal
neural network
              controllers based on Adaptive Critic Design will be developed.
An educational
              plan is focused to leverage the interdisciplinary mission of the
Engineering
              Division at Colorado School of Mines. It is proposed the development
of
              educational material will be developed to allow students to have experience
in
              studying theoretical foundations of intelligent control systems,
understanding
              their functional operation through the use of computer for
simulation in
              promising research directions. The five-year, integrated
development plan
              encompasses research, education and outreach activities in
order to
              incorporate intelligent control techniques for performance improvement
of
              distributed energy systems used in residential and small
              business
applications.

