Title       : CAREER: Integrated Modeling and Experimental Evaluations of Competition Between
               PCE-Dehalogenating Populations: Implications for In Situ Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134433

Award Number: 0134433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer G. Becker jgbecker@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0134433  Becker  The chlorinated solvents tetrachloroethene (PCE) and
              trichloroethene (TCE)are among the most common contaminants of groundwater. The
              toxicity and physical properties of these compounds,along with the frequency
              with which they are detected, mean that cleanup of groundwater systems
              contaminated with PCE and TCE is both critical to protecting human health and
              technically challenging. Biological transformation of PCE is limited to
              anaerobic reductive dehalogenation.  From a remediation standpoint,only
              complete dechlorination of PCE to ethene is an acceptable outcome,because
              lightly chlorinated ethenes also pose a health hazard.
Unfortunately, the
              potential for complete detoxification of highly chlorinated ethenes
              is
frequently not realized in situ, resulting in the accumulation of lightly
              chlorinated  ethenes. An improved understanding of the factors that influence
              the extent of PCE transformation that occurs in impacted environments is needed
              to better predict contaminant fate and transport, protect human health,and
              improve the effectiveness of bioremediation strategies.  The proposed research
              addresses a specific type of
microbial interaction, competition between
              dehalogenating populations for chlorinated ethenes and electron donors. 
              Competition between dehalogenating populations may have a major impact on the
              fate of chlorinated ethenes in situ because these organisms differ with respect
              to transformation rates, and even more importantly,the extent of
              dechlorination.  
The goals of the proposed research are:(1)to determine how
              competition among dehalogenating populations is influenced by the intrinsic
              biokinetics of the dehalogenating populations, the nature and concentrations of
              the available electron donors, and chlorinated ethene concentrations; and (2)to
              develop tools for predicting the outcome of competition between dehalogenating
              populations,the impact on chlorinated ethene fate, and the success of
              bioaugmentation strategies.  These goals will be accomplished using an
              integrated approach involving modeling predictions and verification in a series
              of increasingly complex experimental systems, including defined co-culture
              competition experiments and field surveys involving microbiological and
              chemical characterization of groundwater at PCE-impacted sites.  Quantification
              of key PCE-dehalogenating populations in groundwater systems will be achieved
              through 16S rRNA-based methods. ***

