Title       : CEDAR Postdoc: Investigations of Gravity Wave Propagation and Dissipation in the
               Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere Region and Associated OH/O2 Temperature
               Signatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0134150

Award Number: 0134150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Taylor mtaylor@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The union of TIMED (Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics)
              satellite measurements with CEDAR (Coupling Energetics and Dynamics of
              Atmospheric Regions) ground-base measurements offers an unparalleled
              opportunity to explore the energetics and dynamics of the mesosphere and lower
              thermosphere (MLT) region (80-100 km).  In particular, measurements will be
              made using the CEDAR Mesospheric Temperature Mapper (MTM) that is capable of
              quantitative investigations of intensity and temperature perturbations induced
              by a range of long and short-period gravity waves and tides.

As part of this
              CEDAR Post Doctoral application it is proposed that Dr. Alok Taori (a recent
              Ph.D. from the Physical Research Laboratories, India), will join the PI's group
              and will develop a leading role in the operation, analysis and interpretation
              of the MTM data obtained during the CEDAR-TIMED coordination program.  Alok
              Taori has an excellent research record that is highly complementary to the PI's
              current research program and his experience in building, testing and operating
              airglow instrumentation will be most beneficial to the sustained success of
              this research program.  He is already familiar with the methods of analysis of
              OH temperature data and has good computer skills necessary for further
              development of the existing software including new tools for near-simultaneous
              OH/O2 data reduction, analysis and presentation.  Furthermore, his Ph.D.
              research experience with day-time OH instrumentation and measurements will be
              applied to the possible development of a new day-time OH capability at USU to
              complement the existing MTM measurements to provide novel and frequent 24-hr
              measurements of the MLT region.
