Title       : The Human Brain Project (Neuroinformatics): Phase I & Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0134732

Award Number: 0134732
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Koslow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Institutes of Health
	      
	      Washington, DC  20014    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grand challenge in neuroscience is to understand the biological basis of
              information processing at the cellular and network levels.  One major
              technology barrier to continuing progress is the lack of adequate informatics
              and analysis tools to enable exploration of the structural organization of
              complex neural circuits, the discovery and understanding of emergent properties
              of neural ensembles, the formulation of quantitative hypotheses about neural
              computation, and the testing of those hypotheses experimentally.  These
              scientists have developed a prototype database system that provides many of the
              needed capabilities, and have used this software system to study mechanisms
              underlying neural encoding.  The general goals of the work proposed here are to
              extend the capabilities and general utility of this prototype system, to
              interface the database with several additional tools for the analysis of
              structural and time-series data, and to enable more effective data sharing
              between remote collaborators.  The core informatics and neuroscience research
              will be carried out by a group of researchers at Montana State University. 
              Collaborations have also been established with researchers at several other
              research institutions, to insure interoperability of this system with other
              data collections and analysis tools and to facilitate the testing and
              refinement of this system.  The PI and co-investigators all study dynamic
              aspects of sensory processing at the cellular and network levels in a variety
              of preparations, including the cricket, cat, and monkey visual systems.  The
              researchers all share the following general neuroscience research aims: a) to
              understand the relationships between spatio-temporal activity patterns in
              neural ensembles and the information they convey, b) to understand how the
              spatio-temporal patterns at one processing stage are decoded at the next
              processing stage, c) to understand how computations are carried out on that
              decoded morphology, synaptic connectivity, and intrinsic biophysical
              characteristics of the neurons in the ensembles.  The software tools developed
              here will be applied to these ongoing studies, enabling a substantial increase
              in the breadth, depth, rigor, and rate of progress of those research projects. 
              That neuroscience research will, in turn, provide a rigorous basis for the
              refinement, generalization and extension of the informatics tools. 
