Title       : CAREER: Facilitated Ion Transport in Nanostructured Titanosilicates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0134255

Award Number: 0134255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh W. Hillhouse hugh@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0134255
Hillhouse, Hugh W.
Purdue Univesity

Semiconductor
              nanowires that exhibit quantum-size effects are predicted to have revolutionary
              thermoelectric transport properties, potentially resulting in solid-state
              cooling devices with efficiencies greater than vapor-compression refrigeration
              technology. However, in order to realize such devices, continuous wires must be
              synthesized with diameters much smaller than their thermal de Broglie
              wavelength to reach the quantum confinement regime. One technique being
              investigated to synthesize such nanowires is a template assisted approach in
              which ordered nanoporous materials such as microporous zeolites, mesoporous
              silica (i.e. SBA-15, MCM-41), and anodic alumina are used as passive hosts to
              template the diameter and form of the wire. However, nanowires with a
              sufficiently small diameter have not yet been realized, and in the smallest
              pore materials attempts have failed due to mass transport limitations. It is
              proposed that this limitation can be overcome by using electrochemical growth
              techniques with a new class of titanosilicate whose nanostructured framework
              facilitates cation transport. 

This new class of titanosilicate, designated
              as ETS, was first reported in 1989. Several framework topologies have been
              identified that have micropores ranging from just under 0.4 nm up to 0.8 nm.
              One structure in particular (Sr-ETS-4) has recently been shown to be possess
              extraordinary gas separation properties for N2/CH4, N2/O2, and Ar/O2
              separations. A key feature that is unique to all of the ETS structures is the
              presence of continuous titania chains (-O-Ti-O-Ti-) that run parallel to the
              micropores. Each titanium unit in the chain carries two units of negative
              charge and must be balanced by cations in the micropore. This unique
              nanostructure is fundamentally different from classical zeolites, and is
              hypothesized to facilitate cation transport though the structure by acting as a
              rope to pull cations through the framework. This 'rope' may be 'pulled'
              electrochemically by reducing a framework cation at one end of the pore. This
              creates a state of charge imbalance in the structure and induces a series of
              correlated cation hops that pull an additional cation into the framework at the
              opposite end of the pore. In the process, the cathode grows through the
              framework forming an array of nanowires that mimic the pores. This phenomenon
              will be investigated in a body of proposed research that focuses
              on:

Synthesizing high quality single crystals of ETS-10, ETS-4, and related
              structures.

Understanding the fundamentals ion transport in these unique
              nanostructured materials by using complex impedance spectroscopy to examine ion
              conductivities, activation energies, and relaxation frequencies for Group IA,
              Group IIA, gold, lead, bismuth, and tellurium cations.

Electrochemical
              growth of sub-nanometer wires in the pores of ETS frameworks for the
              development of thermoelectric devices. 

This multidisciplinary research is
              at the cross roads of engineering, chemistry, physics, and materials science,
              and is one part of an integrated education and research plan that seeks to: (1)
              train and mentor graduate students in a multidisciplinary environment to become
              creative independent researchers who have the background and skills to discover
              and develop new ideas in the area of nanotechnology, (2) actively encourage and
              support undergraduate research participation, and (3) develop and implement a
              new teaching approach that utilizes student authorship of web based content to
              facilitate lifelong learning and engage student participation in the context of
              a new course on nanostructured materials chemistry.

