Title       : CAREER: Multi-Scale Experiments of Fracture in Elastic-Plastic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a0134226

Award Number: 0134226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Kysar jk2079@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The research and educational program consists of developing a
              multi-scale
experimental program to study the mechanics of fracture in
              elastic-plastic
materials. The research is intended to complement and guide
              multi-scale
simulations of fracture in elastic-plastic materials. The
              experiments will
focus on understanding the behavior of cracks that exist
              along the grain
boundary of symmetric tilt bicrystals of either pure aluminum
              or pure
copper. In such a specimen there is a well known, but poorly
              understood,
phenomenon known as directional dependence of fracture. If a crack
              is
introduced along the grain boundary, the amount it grows
              macroscopically
depends upon the direction within the grain boundary that it
              propagates. A
judicious choice of crystallographic orientation and loading
              techniques
will ensure that the mechanical properties at the macroscopic
              length scale
are identical for both cracks, yet the amount of macroscopic
              growth will
be different. Thus the explanation for the directional dependence
              must
depend upon deformation mechanisms at the smaller length scales as well
              as
the interaction of the deformation mechanisms across length scales.

In
              the experiments, cracks will be introduced and propagated in
              opposite
directions within the grain boundary of symmetric tilt bicrystals.
              The
structure of the asymptotic deformation fields will be measured
              under
plane strain conditions to investigate a certain type of
              strain
discontinuity, known as kink shear discontinuity, that is predicted
              by
theory and observed in some materials under certain conditions.
              The
existence of kink shear discontinuities depends critically upon
              plastic
constitutive relations at very small length scales. The next set
              of
experiments will be to measure the directional dependence of
              fracture
under both a monotonic and cyclic loading to document the degree of
              crack
growth in different directions along a grain boundary. The final set
              of
experiments will measure the lattice curvature of the crystal close to
              the
crack tip to ascertain the density of geometrically necessary
              dislocations
which play an important role in strain gradient plasticity. All
              the
experiments will be simulated with the discrete dislocation
              plasticity
technique in collaboration with other researchers.

The
              educational component is to reach out to secondary schools in
              the
neighborhoods around Columbia University, particularly in Harlem,
              to
develop a science module that is suitable for students in their final
              two
years of high school with the goal of inspiring them to continue
              their
educations. The module will demonstrate that materials are made
              of
discrete atoms by discussing the phenomenon of diffraction. To do so,
              the
students will first gain intuition into the diffraction phenomenon
              by
identifying and matching symmetries in diffraction gratings and
              the
related diffraction patterns that are created with a standard
              laser
pointer. Then the crystallographic aspects of face-centered cubic
              metals
and the symmetries of a cube will be introduced. Finally the students
              will
be asked to identify the two-fold, three-fold, and four-fold
              rotation
symmetries in separate Laue back reflection x-ray diffraction
              patterns and
correlate the patterns with the crystallographic orientations
              that exhibit
the same sets of symmetries. Thus the students will identify
              the
symmetries inherent in crystals without having to understand any of
              the
details of the diffraction process.


