Title       : CAREER: Fate of Contaminants in the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0134759

Award Number: 0134759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $576785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urs Jans ursjans@scisun.sci.ccnu.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Professor Urs Jans, of the Department of Chemistry at CUNY City College, is
              supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies
              to generate data to help in evaluating the persistence and fate of two major
              classes of contaminants in sensitive ecosystems. Phosphorothionate esters and
              carbamates are among the most widely used insecticides in the U.S. Such
              contaminants are of toxicological concern in sensitive coastal ecosystems such
              as estuaries and salt marshes. It is likely that reactions with reduced sulfur
              species (particularly polysulfides) present in anoxic subregions of coastal
              water bodies could have a significant impact on rates of removal of such
              contaminants. Providing the necessary data is the principal objective of this
              research. Some of the products of these reactions may be of environmental
              significance; hence, an additional goal of these studies is to provide data
              related to the ultimate fate of such compounds by examining their ability to
              bind covalently to natural organic matter. Rates of reaction of reduced sulfur
              species with a group of phosphorothionate esters and carbamate insecticides
              will be determined in well-defined systems, additional experiments will be
              conducted using more complex matrices of natural sulfuric waters.

Therefore,
              with this CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Programs
              supports Professor Urs Jans, of the Department of Chemistry CUNY City College
              who will generate data in his research that will help in evaluating the
              persistence and fate of two major classes of contaminants in sensitive
              ecosystems. The results will be useful to EPA for establishing scientifically
              based limits on insecticide usage in coastal areas. Dissemination of the
              results from the proposed curriculum development will benefit other
              universities to modify the ways in which students learn. Being located at a
              minority serving institution this proposed project will promote the training of
              students from underrepresented groups.

