Title       : CAREER: Structure and Dynamics of Negative Ions via Photoelectron Imaging
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0134631

Award Number: 0134631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Sanov sanov@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Sanov will combine  femtosecond spectroscopy with
              photoelectron imaging to monitor the evolution of molecular orbitals in the
              course of chemical reactions. The initial systems to be studied include
              isolated and hydrated sulfur-containing molecular anions, and cluster anions.
              These are chosen for their practical importance and for serving as prototypes
              for the development of the new methodology. Photodissociation and unimolecular
              decomposition, dynamics at conical intersections, microscopic solvation, wave
              packet evolution, and  bimolecular reactions in ionic clusters will be
              investigated.  The results of this research will find immediate application in
              modeling the structure and dynamics of negative ions and solutions. 

Many
              important chemical processes involve ionic reactions, and the reactivity is
              affected strongly by interactions with the environment.  In this research
              cluster ions are used as model micro-solutions for the studies of elementary
              processes relevant to biological and environmental chemistry. The results will
              provide insight into how the intermolecular interactions affect the behavior of
              electrons and chemical bonding. Photoelectron imaging experiments will be
              incorporated in the undergraduate Physical Chemistry program as a way of
              providing the students with hands-on research experience.  A fast-track
              Internet-based mechanism for publishing the results of student research will be
              developed. Students will be trained in research techniques in preparation for
              advanced studies and for entry into the scientific/technical workforce.


