Title       : CAREER: Advanced Control Algorithms for Active Materials Actuators Used in
               Nanoscale Positioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134464

Award Number: 0134464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan Seelecke stefan_seelecke@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   For manipulations at the nanoscale, highly precise positioning capability
              is a very basic, yet indispensable requirement.  Possible applications in this
              area range from the assembly of molecular structures to cell manipulations and
              highly precise machining tasks. Currently employed devices for nanomanipulation
                  commonly rely on the use of actuators from active materials, mostly
              piezoelectrics and magnetostrictives. It is only through these materials and
              their inherent properties that the possibility  of efficient actuation in an
              extremely small volume is offered at all. On the other hand, these materials
              exhibit a highly non-linear behavior characterized by the occurrence of
              hysteresis loops. This greatly afflicts their control performance and limits
              their applicability to low bandwidth and low stroke applications under
              conventional (PID) feedback loops. It is of great relevance for almost every
              nanomanufacturing task to improve speed and efficiency while at the same time
              maintaining high precision.  A way to treat the problem is to incorporate a
              model of the material behavior into the control algorithm. A novel approach in
              the field of shape memory alloys developed by the PI has recently established
              the foundation for an extremely efficient type of algorithm. This approach not
              only extends the range of currently employed methods to account for optimality
              criteria like speed of adjustment or energy consumption; it is clearly
              real-time capable due to its high computational speed. Based on the observation
              that, on the icroscale, the physical mechanisms in shape memory alloys are
              closely related to the ones observed in piezoelectric and magnetostrictive
              materials, a unified model will be developed for all three materials. Based on
              such a unified model, the real-time optimal control approach will be extended
              to account for closed-loop feedback and parameter updating, and it will be
              validated in a real-time hardware environment.

     The educational plan
              involves four initiatives and will promote the development of new
              multi-disciplinary courses from undergraduate to Ph.D. level, as well as active
              undergraduate student research integration. The third effort will increase the
              exposure of students to international issues and increase their foreign
              language proficiency by offering possibilities to work with one of Germany's
              leading institutions in nanotechnology. The final initiative is the development
              of web based course materials, including "virtual lab experiments"    through a
              simulation based on JAVA versions for active materials models.

