Title       : CAREER: Realizing Derived Equivalences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0134938

Award Number: 0134938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304805             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brooke E. Shipley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0134938
Brooke E. Shipley

The research component of this proposal
              involves several questions which fall into two overall projects.  One project
              is to consider 
when an equivalence between derived categories is induced by a
              
more richly structured equivalence.  The goal here is to develop 
an
              obstruction theory for realizing derived equivalences by 
underlying
              structured equivalences.  In particular, this may have applications to the
              question associated to Broue's Conjecture in 
representation theory of which
              stable equivalences lift to derived equivalences.  The second project is to
              develop homotopy theoretic algebraic models.  One piece of this project is to
              continue work 
with John Greenlees on algebraic models for rational
              equivariant cohomology theories.  More generally, the investigator proposes
              
to develop algebraic models for various stable homotopy theories.  

The
              proposed research projects involve the interplay beween the 
study of
              algebraic structures and topology, the study of shapes 
or spaces.  Algebraic
              topologists use algebraic structures to 
describe and simplify topological
              phenomena.  In a project on
realizing derived equivalences, the investigator
              hopes to use techniques developed in algebraic topology to attack questions
              
which originate in algebra.  These techniques include the use 
of a theory
              of obstructions, which determines whether certain constructions are possible.  
              In another project the 
investigator plans on extending existing algebraic
              models to 
include structures involving symmetries.  The educational
              
component of this proposal also includes several parts.  
The investigator
              will be involved in the summer research 
programs for undergraduates at the
              University of Chicago 
and Purdue University.  With Lucho Avramov, she will
              organize 
a workshop on topics related to derived categories of interest 
to
              a broad range of algebraically related fields.  With 
Jim McClure and Guershon
              Harel, the investigator will develop 
a new course for mathematics education
              majors based on Euler's ``Elements of Algebra".  The goals of this course are
              to help mathematical education students master skills in algebra, 
develop
              confidence for teaching algebra, and understand the 
motivation for material
              contained in a standard abstract 
algebra course.  The investigator will also
              participate in several aspects of the Women in Science Program at Purdue
              University. 



