Title       : CAREER: Analysis of Multi-dimensional Coordination Problems in Service Parts
               Logistics Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0134576

Award Number: 0134576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erhan Kutanoglu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1786,9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding for the
              development of models and algorithms for coordination problems in Service Parts
              Logistics (SPL) systems. The challenge in SPL systems is to coordinate
              decisions across business units, time horizons, and geographical locations at
              the same time towards high-quality system-wide solutions. The research first
              will develop a unified framework for integrated logistics network design and
              inventory management and explore decomposition-based solution methodologies for
              the associated problems formulated as mathematical models. The logistics
              network design submodel involves multiple echelons, multiple products and
              time-based service coverage restrictions. The inventory submodel involves
              inventory sharing across multiple facilities and response-time based service
              levels. Motivated by the scale of the problems existing in real SPL systems,
              the research will also investigate different levels of granularity of the
              models, and identify the trade-off between computation and solution accuracy.
              The research will finally address the mechanism design and incentive issues
              that inherently exist in coordination problems: How does one make sure that the
              decision entities have the necessary incentives to coordinate their decisions?
              The closely related educational plan of the award involves the development of a
              teaching case on modern SPL systems, and the development of a course on
              mathematical modeling of supply chain coordination problems.

If successful,
              the results of this research will lead to the solution of problems in SPL, both
              in size and scope, commonly faced by industry, the government and the military.
              The models and their results will be validated and verified with partners in
              SPL. The investigations should contribute in finding scalable solution
              methodologies for large-scale mathematical models with special structure and
              their application to real problems. The results will also provide insights in
              aligning the individual decision entities' goals with the system-wide goals.
              Analyzing these issues simultaneously in a unified framework will improve the
              understanding of how these factors (different levels of coordination and
              incentive issues) affect each other in distributed logistics systems. Another
              contribution will be to undercover the relationship between coordination
              mechanisms and decomposition-based optimization techniques. The educational
              component should enhance teaching in applied operations research, supply chain
              management, and logistics courses.
