Title       : CAREER: Control Design using Data-Driven Models: Exploiting Model Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0134129

Award Number: 0134129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Parker rparker@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Robert S. Parker 
Institution:  University of
              Pittsburgh
Proposal Number: 0134129

Industry is demanding higher and higher
              levels of performance from their processes and little capital investment is
              available for retrofitting or additional sensors.  Thus processes must operate
              in highly nonlinear regimes, likely under linear control algorithms.  This
              CAREER award addresses the integration of research and education with the goal
              of developing tools and students capable of solving problems in nonlinear model
              identification and control.

Specifically, the research will focus on the use
              of control-relevant process models in nonlinear model-based optimal controller
              design.  The modeling studies use third-order Volterra and Volterra-Laguerre
              representations, a subclass of nonlinear polynomial moving-average models.  The
              selection of these model structures is motivated by (i) the ability to tailor
              input sequences to excite (or cancel) particular model dynamics; (ii) the
              opportunity to reduce the coefficient space and noise corruption with little to
              no decrease in model accuracy; (iii) the wide class of systems these model
              structures can approximate (e.g. polymerizers, distillation columns,
              bioreactors); and (iv) the utility of these structures in controller synthesis.
               Based on a polymerization reactor case study, third-order Volterra models will
              be identified using tailored input sequences, design to excite the linear,
              nonliear diagonal, or nonlinear off-diagonal terms.  The resulting model will
              then be projected onto the orthonormal Laguerre basis to reduce coefficient
              dimension and noise effects on the output estimate.  These models will then be
              used to synthesize a nonlinear model predictive control algorithm.  The
              culmination of the project will be the integration of the identification and
              control results into a single algorithm for simultaneous identification and
              control.

The educational component has two primary aims.  The first is to
              help the student retain material from class to class, and to be able to employ
              material from a given class on an application example.  Consistent with ABET
              2000 criteria, these cross-curriculum problems will probe the students'
              mathematical skills.  The type of problems examined serve to vertically
              integrate the curriculum with a recurring case study which draws on earlier
              courses, and therefore reinforces retention of material across classes.  The
              integration of research and education is accomplished through the use of
              research results in the development of two new units for the Process Control
              Modules, case studies that examine data-driven model identification and
              nonlinear model predictive control at a level accessible to the
              undergraduate.

