Title       : CAREER: Physics and Applications of Hyperpolarized Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0134980

Award Number: 0134980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian T. Saam saam@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1248      PHYSICS-OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This career development program combines innovative applications of
              hyperpolarized (HP) noble gases with the development of a new track for
              undergraduate physics majors, Physics of Modern Technology.  Enormous
              non-equilibrium nuclear-spin polarizations (of order 10%) can be achieved in
              He-3  and Xe-129 via spin-exchange optical pumping (SEOP), greatly enhancing
              the NMR sensitivity of  these  nuclei. These hyperpolarized (HP) noble gases
              are being applied to a broad range of problems in physics, chemistry, and
              biomedicine. The recent strong push in applications of HP gases has created
              tremendous cross-disciplinary excitement, but has left in its wake a number of
              important and persistent problems in the physics that must be addressed to
              realize the full potential of the various  applications.  This  research
              program integrates the study of the basic physics of SEOP and several
              applications.  Studies include the  use of highly polarized Xe-129 both for
              polarization transfer to other nuclei of interest, and for the study of a
              highly ordered lattice of spins, and a detailed analysis to determine the
              relaxation mechanism of hyper-polarized gases at wall surfaces.  

Physics of
              Modern Technology:  The educational component of the program consists of
              co-development of a new track for physics majors at the University of Utah,
              Physics of Modern Technology (PMT).  The PMT program is aimed at highly
              motivated students who will not be professional physicists but do need
              preparation for careers and leadership positions in which it will be valuable
              to have technical, quantitative and analytic strengths.  The  PMT  program
              contains a number of innovative pedagogical features,  including a modular
              structure in which important  physical  principles are explained  and
              demonstrated in the context of real-world technical problems, and the
              integration of theory, experiment, and computation in each module. PMT will be
              excellent preparation for careers such as journalism, patent law, and medicine,
              and it will stimulate creative teaching and interaction with the rapidly
              changing and technically oriented industrial world. 

