Title       : CAREER: Self-Assembly Through Water-Mediated Interactions: A New Statistical
               Thermodynamics and Simulations Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0134023

Award Number: 0134023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shekhar Garde gardes@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
CTS-0134255
Garde, Shekhar
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

The
              goal of the CAREER proposal is to develop a successful research program for
              quantitative molecular modeling of biomolecular self-assembly processes in
              solution using fundamental understanding of the underlying water-mediated
              interactions.  It presents a vision for combing statistical mechanical theories
              with novel efficient molecular simulation techniques to develop a generalized
              approach to study thermodynamic, structural, and kinetic aspects of
              biomolecular interactions.  Quantitative modeling of biomolecules in solution,
              in general, and proteins in particular is of interest to chemical engineers
              because of its direct relevance to biotech and pharmaceutical applications,
              designing novel self-assembling materials, and applications in molecular
              medicine.  This project focuses specifically on the T, P, and salt and
              cosolvent effects on protein stability and interactions in solution.  To this
              end, the specific steps in the proposed research are:
1.  (a) To quantify,
              using atomically detailed simulations and theory, interactions between various
              "archetype" (building blocks or protein constituents) solutes mediated by
              water.
     (b) To develop, for the first time, an extensive library of the
              distance dependent free energies of solute-solute interactions in water- the
              potentials of mean force (PMFs) - for archetype solutes as a function of
              temperature, pressure, and salt and cosolvent concentration. 

2. To develop
              a general and highly efficient statistical mechanical approach that integrates
              water-mediated interactions contained in the PMF-library for applications to a
              variety of self-assembly processes in water.

3.  To apply this predictive
              approach to study of protein thermodynamics as a function of various
              environmental stresses.  Perform complementary large-scale explicit water
              simulations for selected test systems for investigation of further mechanistic
              details, assessment of predictions, and fine-tuning.


