Title       : CAREER: Dislocation Mechanics in Strained Heteroepitaxial Layer Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0134446

Award Number: 0134446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guanshui Xu gxu@engr.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The proposed research is to develop mechanism-based multiscale
              modeling and simulation to understand dislocation behavior in strained
              heteroepitaxial layer structures, which has been of central interest in
              developing high-speed microelectronics in the semiconductor industry. Discrete
              dislocation nucleation, motion, and interaction will be studied by
              incorporating atomistic information into a variational boundary integral method
              in the Peierls-Nabarro framework. Critical conditions for dislocation
              nucleation from the perfect surface and surface heterogeneities such as ledges,
              defects, microcracks, and quantum dots will be determined by solving the
              embryonic saddle-point dislocation configurations and their associated thermal
              activation energies. Short-range dislocation interactions and the effect of
              lattice resistance to dislocation motion will be evaluated as well. Collective
              behavior of dislocations will be investigated by incorporating the obtained
              mechanisms of dislocation nucleation, interaction, and motion into a finite
              element enhanced dislocation dynamics simulation, which has been developed in
              collaboration with the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. The emphasis
              will be placed on fundamental mechanisms of threading dislocation density
              reduction and dislocation pattern formation in strained heteroexpitaxial layer
              structures.

The proposed education plan consists of the development of the
              new laboratory and curriculum that emphasize mechanics and materials at the
              small scale and interdisciplinary education at UC Riverside. Extra efforts will
              be made to enhance undergraduate students' interest in science and engineering.
              The objective is to develop a first-rate new mechanics and materials education
              program that meets the future demands of nanoscale science and engineering. The
              proposed education and research plans are integrated to reinforce each
              other.


