Title       : CAREER: Design and Development of Novel Responsive Cutting Tools for
               Laser-Assisted Machining and Diagnosis of Structural Ceramics: A Research
               Integrated Education Career Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0134579

Award Number: 0134579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuting Lei lei@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
              design and establish a research-integrated education program for machining
              difficult-to-machine materials. Machining difficult-to-machine ceramics,
              superalloys, and composites presents numerous challenges. Structural ceramics
              such as silicon nitride are finding applications in aerospace, automobile, and
              related industries. However, machining these materials is expensive and can
              induce subsurface cracks that compromise the strength of the material. The
              research objective is to develop novel laser integrated cutting tools that will
              be used for cost-effective machining of structural ceramics that is insensitive
              to part quantity and geometric shapes. Temperature monitoring capability will
              be built into the cutting tool to provide feedback for process control during
              machining. Micromechanical simulation of the machining process will be
              developed for producing ceramic components with minimal subsurface cracks.  The
              educational components will address the specific educational needs of various
              sectors of the community through innovative means such as a new multifunctional
              laboratory for undergraduate and graduate students and area K-12 students and
              teachers. Integration of research and cooperative learning and effective
              assessment techniques will form a dynamic learning environment for
              undergraduate and graduate students. Short courses in machining
              difficult-to-machine materials will be developed for non-traditional students
              from industry who want to keep current with the new technologies being
              developed in this field.

The potential impact of this project includes new
              cutting tools for machining difficult-to-machine materials, new scientific
              knowledge on thermally assisted machining processes, and the creation of a
              world-class workforce in the area of machining structural ceramics.

