Title       : CAREER: Time-Varying Signal Processing For Wideband Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0134002

Award Number: 0134002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonia Papandreou-Suppappola papandreou@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0134002
Papandreou-Suppappola, Antonia
Arixozona State University

CAREER:
              Time-Varying Signal Processing For Wideband 
        Wireless
              Communications

New and novel signal processing and communication algorithms
              are required to improve the performance of wireless communications systems, and
              to meet major challenges that arise from the escalating demand for new higher
              data rate wireless technologies. These challenges include methodologies to
              reduce channel impairments, higher data rate and higher bandwidth requirements
              to provide ubiquitous access, and schemes to improve multiple access
              transmission.  As the nature of the wireless channel is time-varying, these
              challenges lead to many problems such as multiple access interference and
              fading due to time and frequency selectivity. Thus, the channel requires
              two-dimensional time-frequency processing methodologies especially designed to
              characterize spectral changes with time. Recently, the importance of
              time-frequency techniques in wireless communications has successfully been
              demonstrated for interference suppression and channel diversity.

This
              research involves the development of novel time-frequency methods to address
              problems that surface due to the time-varying nature of the wireless channel.
              Specifically, these methodologies develop time-varying modulation schemes for
              code division and orthogonal frequency division multiple access systems, and
              investigate the effect of the schemes on fading distortions and multiple access
              interference. In addition, they design time-frequency transforms to enhance
              detection performance for multiple access systems and detection techniques for
              the new modulation schemes. They also utilize time-lag and frequency-lag
              techniques to jointly estimate multipath and Doppler fading parameters needed
              to improve detection performance at the receiver. Furthermore, they
              characterize wideband channels and employ the model to reduce fading and
              multiple access interference for broadband systems such as underwater or
              satellite wireless communications and third generation wideband systems. These
              research contributions impact the role and significance of time-varying signal
              processing in advancing knowledge to meet the high demands for wireless
              technological advances.  







