Title       : CAREER: Twinning Induced Grain Boundary Engineering In Ultrafine Grain
               Materials: A Multidisciplinary Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0134554

Award Number: 0134554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ibrahim Karaman Ikaraman@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: "Twinning Induced Grain Boundary Engineering In Ultrafine Grain
              Materials: A Multidisciplinary Approach"

Ibrahim Karaman
Department of
              Mechanical Engineering, Texas A&M University

Abstract
The manipulation of
              the interface content and structure of solids can be considered as one of the
              most important processes in the evolution of materials. This is particularly
              important for controlling the physical and mechanical properties of ultrafine
              grain materials (UFG) (grain size < 1 mm) because of the large volume fraction
              of interfaces. This CAREER program aims at developing new strategies for
              twinning induced grain boundary engineering (GBE), furthering the understanding
              of GBE in UFG materials, and developing predictive and control capabilities for
              the materials properties that are governed by grain boundaries and their
              interiors, utilizing an integrated research and education methodology.

The
              RESEARCH PLAN focuses on three thrust areas: 1) processing: fabrication of UFG
              materials by severe plastic deformation processing followed by thermal
              treatments starting either from powder precursors or bulk precursors to vary
              the structure and fraction of the boundaries and the texture, 2)
              characterization: microstructural characterization of boundary character
              distribution, texture, and internal stress distribution utilizing unique
              experimental techniques such as orientation imaging microscopy and in-situ
              neutron diffraction, 3) modeling: developing a hierarchically structured
              materials modeling approach across length scales to predict the mechanical
              properties and microstructural evolution of UFG materials. Specific emphasis
              will be given to deformation and annealing twinning induced interfaces in low
              stacking fault energy, high strength steels. The research plan is SIGNIFICANT
              because, despite the importance of controlling the grain boundary character,
              there has never been a study combining GBE and bulk UFG materials and
              investigating the effect of twinning.

The EDUCATION PLAN is to strengthen
              the faculty of materials engineering at Texas A&M University (TAMU) by
              developing a rigorous curriculum on metallic materials, and by motivating and
              preparing students who can contribute to UFG materials engineering on a
              long-term basis both as engineers and researchers. Since the micro materials
              world is a stranger to public, particularly the younger ones, in spite of all
              its fascinating developments, a significant effort will be put to bridge this
              gap. A pilot instructional unit will be developed, in collaboration with an
              area high school, to offer students a physical feel and hands-on experience
              with materials.







