Title       : CAREER: Linking Education and Research Through Measurement and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0134188

Award Number: 0134188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580169             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Schroeder john.schroeder@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the years, atmospheric scientists and wind engineers have enjoyed fruitful
              collaborations that have addressed fundamental problems in the two disciplines.
               The majority of the research projects active within the Atmospheric Science
              Group and Wind Science and Engineering (WISE) center at Texas Tech University
              involve field experimentation.  It has been recognized, however, that the link
              between the active research portfolio and the classroom could be stronger.  The
              work under this award will provide new tools to further interactions between
              atmospheric scientists and wind engineers and incorporate these tools into a
              classroom setting.

Under this award, the Principal Investigator will develop
              two new graduate classes, establish a Measurement and Analysis Laboratory (MAL)
              and conduct a research agenda focused on the atmospheric boundary layer in
              non-idealized (extreme) events.  The initial research focus will be on the wind
              structure found within the hurricane planetary boundary layer (HPBL) --
              specifically, documenting the HPBL wind flow characteristics and relating them
              to storm-scale processes.  Special attention will be given to the coastal
              transition region.

The two new graduate classes will focus on providing a
              fundamental foundation in making and analyzing measurements.  The courses will
              provide students a unique and comprehensive experience at building
              instrumentation and acquisition systems, acquiring relevant data sets and
              analyzing them.

The MAL will provide a central resource for students and
              researchers to efficiently learn about and develop instrumentation and data
              acquisition (DAQ) systems both in and out of the classroom.  The MAL will be
              used to teach both of the newly developed courses and will be available to
              students and researchers to assist them in the development and testing of
              instrumentation and DAQ systems. 

The focus of the integrated approach is on
              providing a bridge to the students between the classroom and the field.  The
              strength of existing programs within WISE will be enhanced because the current
              facilities can be brought into the classroom and used as "real world" examples
              and sources for class projects.  This will link the educational aspects with
              the main research thrusts of WISE and provide the graduate students an
              educational foundation to accomplish the goals of their research projects.
              

Successful completion of this research will lend new insights into
              important meteorological phenomena such as the wind structure in the hurricane
              boundary layer.  The educational activities will provide an excellent
              environment for developing the next generation of wind engineers and
              atmospheric scientists and give them an exceptional background in observational
              issues.
