Title       : Modes of Economic Governance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0134891

Award Number: 0134891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avinash K. Dixit dixitak@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the sources of relative advantages and disadvantages of 
              different systems of economic governance, and interactions among them. The
              focus is on questions such as: Which system will be better under what
              circumstances? When can different systems coexist, and when will one supplant
              the others? Will each society select the mode that is optimal for its
              circumstances? Will new systems be adopted when appropriate, or can groups
              remain locked into old modes even though these may be outdated or
              dysfunctional? The methodology of the research combines theoretical analysis,
              and testing this analysis against case studies that are available or
              emerging.

     In advanced western economies, economic contracts are
              enforced by an impartial and effective legal system. This enables strangers to
              deal with each other. In most other countries, and historically in all
              countries, such a legal system may be missing, or corrupt, or too slow. Other
              systems of governance then evolve. One alternative comprises social norms and
              sanctions. Small close-knit groups can use these effectively since they are
              well-informed about each other and in an ongoing relationship. This system is
              common among businesses in many East-Asian countries and among communities of
              traders linked by ethnic or similar ties. Other methods of unofficial
              governance include private profit-motivated third parties who collect and
              convey information about previous violations of contractual obligations;
              credit-rating agencies perform such functions even in advanced economies.
              Finally, they include private third parties who will enforce contracts by
              punishing any breaches; organized crime groups have played this role when the
              official state has broken down, for example in late 19th century Sicily, just
              after World War II in Japan, and just after the collapse of the communist
              regimes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. These third-party alternatives
              have performed acceptably in some circumstances and have proved dysfunctional
              in others. 

     Improving our conceptual understanding of the mechanisms of
              enforcement of economic contracts is of obvious basic importance in the
              theories of law and economics. The research also has practical uses. For
              example, U.S. firms trading with, or investing in, countries with different
              governance practices can better foresee any problems they are likely to face in
              getting their local partners and governments to keep promises, and can devise
              methods to protect themselves against breaches of contract. Multilateral
              organizations like the World Bank and IMF that advise less-developed countries
              on structural reforms can design their recommendations better if they
              understand the governance structures under which the reformed enterprises must
              operate; where necessary, they can recommend simultaneous reforms of the
              methods of governance in these countries.

