Title       : CAREER: Computational Studies of New Metallodielectric Structures for
               Manipulating Light At Sub-wavelengthscales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0134607

Award Number: 0134607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanhui Fan shanhui@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent experimental and theoretical efforts on periodic metallic structures have
              led to the discoveries of a number of extraordinary optical and electromagnetic
              phenomena. Many of these phenomena are pointing towards new possibilities of
              confining, transmitting and manipulating light at a length scale that is far
              smaller than the wavelength of incident photons. Two recent examples include
              the experimental discoveries of plasmon-assisted high transmission through
              sub-wavelength apertures, and the theoretical proposal for constructing a lens
              with a negative refractive index that allows for focusing at infinite
              resolution. These discoveries are leading to new device possibilities in
              nano-fabrication and imaging.

These developments, in turn, raised many
              interesting theoretical questions. A key ingredient in all these phenomena is
              the use of micro and nano-structured metallic objects. Therefore, we need to
              understand in general how micro and nano-structures interact with
              sub-wavelength features in the electromagnetic fields. Since the novel effects
              here directly result from the subtle interplay between the structural and
              geometrical parameters. It is important to undertake theoretical studies that
              take into account the full complexity of the structures in a first-principles
              way.

We propose to undertake a series of large-scale simulations to
              elucidate the basic mechanisms associated with these phenomena, and to explore
              new structures that might exhibit further interesting properties. In
              particular, we will study the effects of microstructure on the resolution of
              focusing, and the detailed mechanisms of using aperiodic structures to assist
              tunneling through a single aperture. We will also explore the use of hybrid
              metal and dielectric periodic structures as a novel negative refractive index
              material that might be scaled down into the optical domain. These studies will
              enhance our understanding in this new regime of optics, and will lead to new
              opportunities for device applications.

This program, in combination with my
              other research programs on photonic crystals and micro-photonic devices, will
              provide excellent research and educational opportunities for students. The
              students will gain a deep theoretical understanding by pursuing research in a
              new regime of optics. At the same time they will have ample opportunities to
              collaborate with experimental groups in optics and in nano-fabrication. The
              students will also learn state-of-the-art computational techniques. In
              addition, the research program is designed so that undergraduate and M. S.
              students can take on short-term projects to carry out sets of well-defined
              simulation studies. Finally, in order to share our excitement in this research
              field with the general public, we will explore the possibility of constructing
              a sculpture of an acoustic crystal, so that a visitor may directly experience
              the remarkable band gap effect.

