Title       : CAREER: Dynamics of Model Biological Membranes and Glass Formation in Liquid
               Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0134881

Award Number: 0134881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Daniel Gezelter gezelter@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER project funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, J. Daniel Gezelter will use theoretical and
              computational methods to investigate phase transitions, structural features,
              and dynamics in complex condensed phases.  Of particular interest are
              biological membranes, glass-forming materials, and bimetallic alloys. The goals
              of this research are to elucidate the fundamental molecular interactions that
              give rise to these phases, to gain an insight into the dynamics of diffusion in
              these systems, and to develop both analytical theory and computational
              methodology to study these phase transitions in a computationally tractable
              manner. Three complementary areas of research will be examined: (1) simple
              models for biological (phospholipid) membranes, (2) efficient computational
              methods for observing rare events in membranes and glass-forming materials, and
              (3) analytical models for the vibrational spectra of amorphous materials.  In
              the educational portion of this project a course will be developed that brings
              the most important intellectual material from theoretical and physical
              chemistry to students who are not majoring in the physical
              sciences.

Computer simulations can answer a number of interesting questions
              and can explain, for example, the mechanism of diffusion and transport or the
              differences between alloys and mixtures.  The theoretical methods developed in
              this project represent a promising strategy for investigating mesoscopic-scale
              phenomena and should be applicable to membranes and liquid crystals as well as
              more complex systems.  The chemical systems studied should be of interest to
              biological and materials scientists and may even have potential biomedical
              application, for example, to drug delivery.  Chemistry courses for nonscience
              majors, particularly those students taking science classes out of intellectual
              curiosity, are often taught at a low level of rigor.  Dr. Gezelter proposes to
              elevate the intellectual level without making the course content more
              quantitative.  Communicating the importance of science to non-scientists is one
              of the chief problems with the current state of the scientific enterprise. 
              Such a course should help improve this communication and make the course a more
              valuable and rewarding experience.

