Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Textual Appropriation and Co-membership in
               Immigration Gatekeeping Interviews
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0134767

Award Number: 0134767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6770               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald T. Scollon scollonr@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ron Scollon, Ms. Alexandra Johnston will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct linguistic research on the
              face-to-face interviews between U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service
              (INS) officers and prospective immigrants who are applying for permanent
              residency visas (green cards). INS officers use information from these
              interviews to approve or deny green cards - decisions with great consequence
              for individual applicants as well as for the U.S. labor force and society. Ms.
              Johnston will investigate how various communicative behaviors during these
              interviews influences these decisions. For example, she will study how people
              ask and answer questions and how they construct explanatory narratives. She
              will also study nonverbal cues such as eye gaze and hand gestures. Because such
              behaviors differ across cultures, they may not be interpreted as they are
              intended. Data for the project include video- and audio-tapes of permanent
              residency interviews conducted in an INS District Office, ethnographic research
              on site, exit interviews with applicants, and playback interviews in which
              officers and applicants view and comment on their videotapes in separate,
              interviews off site. 

This research is significant for both the INS and its
              immigrant clients. For the INS, the results may affect officer training
              materials or become a seminar series on strategies for inter-cultural
              communication. For immigrant clients of the INS, the results may make the
              interview process more transparent - perhaps through informational pamphlets or
              workshops for prospective immigrants about how to navigate these interviews.
              Finally, the research will illuminate the nature of interaction between
              individuals and institutional representatives as well as aspects of
              face-to-face communication across cultural borders.


