Title       : CAREER: An Integrated Transportation Network Reliability Analysis Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0134161

Award Number: 0134161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Chen achen@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Experience with earthquakes has provided compelling evidence of transportation
              infrastructure's critical role in restoring normalcy as well as the need for
              reliable transportation systems under natural or man-made disasters.
              Nonetheless, reliability analysis has received very little attention in
              transportation research. Moreover, increased economic activity and improved
              quality of life have placed a higher value on reducing congestion. Road
              travelers in the 21st century would prefer a more reliable transportation
              system with a higher level of confidence of arriving at their destination on
              schedule. Transportation network reliability analysis will play an important
              role in the planning, design and management of transportation facilities and
              networks particularly in developed countries and/or mega-cities.

The
              research plan entails developing an integrated transportation network
              reliability analysis framework. This integrated analysis framework involves
              modeling, evaluation, design, algorithm development, and implementation. The
              modeling includes estimating the maximum capacity of a transportation network
              and developing stochastic route choice models that account for both the
              traveler perception error as well as the uncertainty of network travel times.
              The evaluation component involves the assessment of transportation reliability
              measures: travel time reliability is concerned with the probability that a trip
              between a given origin-destination pair can be made within a given time
              interval and a specified level-of-service, and capacity reliability is
              concerned with the probability that the network capacity can accommodate a
              certain volume of traffic demand at a required service level. The design
              component addresses roadway network designed reliability and cost-effectiveness
              and includes investigating the role of information and learning in travel
              decisions. Finally, algorithms will be developed and implemented that will
              render the framework operational and successful. 

The education plan focuses
              on two important tasks: (1) enhancing the undergraduate program to better
              prepare our students for engineering/technology careers in the 21st century,
              and (2) developing a graduation transportation curriculum and teaching program
              with emphasis in systems modeling. These objectives will be achieved by (a)
              providing hands-on, team experience through computer lab exercises to our
              students to promote active and collaborative learning, (b) exposing promising
              students at the undergraduate level to research opportunities in
              transportation, (c) building a graduate curriculum and teaching program that
              emphasizes systems modeling, and (d) developing a transportation research
              seminar to provide an informal forum for students to discuss a wide range of
              topics related to transportation issues that do not necessarily fit into the
              course curriculum. In addition to the above educational activities, the PI will
              integrate research into teaching by bringing in new insights and results
              generated by this CAREER project into both undergraduate and graduate courses,
              to broaden the students' educational experience based on the research plan, and
              to recruit and retain traditionally under-represented students to the
              transportation program.


