Title       : CAREER: Fostering Scoped Multi-Device Interaction In Ubiquitous Computing
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0134051

Award Number: 0134051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Han rhan@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Ubiquitous computing offers the vision of a fundamentally more responsive
              physical environment in which users benefit from seamless interaction with a
              pervasively internetworked world of myriad wireless and wired devices, e.g.
              wireless personal digital assistants, video-enabled mobile phones, wearable
              computers, appliances, kiosks, toys, and sensors. A key component of the
              developing infrastructure for ubiquitous computing is based on the discovery
              and advertisement of services. In a typical ubiquitous computing scenario, a
              user who walks into a room is able to interact with a variety of services
              offered by the devices in the room. The goal of the service discovery framework
              is to assist the user's application in determining what services are available
              for interaction in this room.

While the current service discovery framework
              represents an essential initial component of the ubiquitous computing
              infrastructure, additional capabilities are needed to address the challenges
              introduced by multidevice multi-user contexts. The objectives of this CAREER
              proposal are to explore the means for fostering scoped multi-device interaction
              in ubiquitous computing environments. Several key research areas are identified
              in this proposal as challenging problems that must be solved in order to enable
              multidevice multi-user ubiquitous computing:

     Active device resolution
              among multiple devices, with special emphasis on social context
     Active
              user resolution among multiple users, with special emphasis on social context

                  Composing joint wide-area and local-area multi-device meta-services
    
              Beyond remote control: enabling new classes of ubiquitous computing
              applications

The intent of this proposal is to first understand the
              implications and requirements of multi-device multiuser contexts, and to then
              design and develop the mobile computing applications, distributed middleware
              systems, meta-services, and wireless and application-level networking protocols
              that will assist in making the vision of multi-device ubiquitous computing a
              reality.

The initial goal is to build the infrastructure necessary for
              ubiquitous computing in a departmental Smart Spaces Lab. A course taught on
              ubiquitous computing will allow students to make hands-on
contributions to
              building portions of the infrastructure in the Smart Spaces Lab, even as the
              curricula is upgraded to reflect recent research innovations. The
              infrastructure will eventually be able to support remote control applications,
              wireless peer-to-peer applications, and event-notification applications, just
              to name a few. Once the research lab technology matures, the goal is to deploy
              this infrastructure throughout the university campus. The impact on the
              university at large will be highly beneficial, as the most mature technology
              should be immediately available throughout campus. As soon as the event
              notification, wireless message passing and remote-control infrastructures are
              in place, students, professors, and citizens should be able to immediately
              benefit from the fruits of our ubiquitous computing research. Campus-wide
              deployment is expected to begin about halfway through this five year research
              plan.
