Title       : CAREER: Research and Education on Multi-Scale Structure Development in Chaotic
               Mixing of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134106

Award Number: 0134106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sadhan C. Jana janas@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on research and
              education on the subject of evolution of multi-scale structures of polymeric
              material during processing. The influence of these evolving structures on
              mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties in chaotic mixing of miscible
              and immiscible polymers and nanofiller systems under controlled conditions of
              strain rates and temperatures is experimentally investigated.  Chaotic mixing
              offers the following highly desirable attributes: (a) mixing occurs by both
              shear and extensional flow components, (b) polymer-polymer or polymer-filler
              interfacial areas are created at exponential rates, with much less energy
              consumption for the same degree of mixing than in conventional extrusion
              processes, (c) self-similar mixing microstructures are formed by repeated
              stretching and folding of the interfaces, showing nested striations, droplets,
              or layers of one polymer in the other leading to potential morphologies so far
              not achieved in conventional single and twin-screw extrusion schemes and (d)
              mixing uniformity is achieved with retention of self-similar microstructures,
              as opposed to randomization in conventional single- and twin-screw extruders.
              

Rapid interfacial area generation will expedite reactions between
              functional polymers in reactive processing and in compatibilization in addition
              to rapid reduction in dispersed domain sizes.  The self-similar microstructures
              produced will offer preferred orientation of the crystallites/dispersed phases
              for augmentation of anisotropic electrical, mechanical, and chemical properties
              and will act as tools for creating unusual morphologies for design of polymer
              products with tailored properties. The study to be undertaken using twin-rotor
              chaotic batch mixer and continuous chaotic mixer will yield low cost, rapid,
              and energy-efficient mixing technology for scale-up studies, optimization of
              existing products, and process development in association with industrial
              partners. The education program will provide hands-on polymer education to high
              school and undergraduate students, including minority, through summer research
              and senior research projects and through participation in seminars and
              presentations. A new course will be developed on the applications of chaotic
              mixing in materials processing for graduate students and industry, which will
              draw heavily from the proposed research activities. In addition, web based
              course modules will be designed on rheology and polymerization reactor
              engineering to reach a much larger body of students outside conventional
              classrooms.
