Title       : CAREER: Agent-Based Decentralized Control of Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134224

Award Number: 0134224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Frampton ken.frampton@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed effort is to investigate the control of distributed
              systems (i.e. systems with distributed mass, stiffness or other dynamic
              properties) in the presence of decentralized, networked, embedded information
              systems that deeply penetrate the system to be controlled.  The networked
              imbedded system consists of numerous nodes, each consisting of a small
              microprocessor, sensor, and actuator.  Furthermore, all of the nodes will be
              capable of communicating over a wired or wireless network.  This configuration
              means that each node is subject to the following constraints: 1) limited
              computational power and memory; 2) limited information as to overall system
              response; and 3) limited authority over the physical system.  The primary
              challenge of this program will be the development of decentralized control
              algorithms capable of performing successfully under such conditions.  
The
              research objectives will be accomplished through a parallel
              theoretical/experimental effort.  Theoretical work will focus on the
              development of simulation tools and decentralized control algorithms that meet
              the outlined objectives.  The experimental efforts will seek to demonstrate
              this technology on a series of increasingly complex systems.  The research
              program promises to develop new analysis tools and yield new insight into the
              behavior of decentralized control systems and, in particular, their application
              to distributed parameter systems.  Among the many new contributions to the
              field will be: the investigation and development of decentralized control of
              distributed systems; improved knowledge on the global behavior of decentralized
              systems defined by localized actions; methods for constructing global
              performance metrics based on decentralized sensor processing; and the
              development of adaptive control algorithms for the creation of desirable global
              performance based on localized information.     
The primary goal of the
              educational program is to lead the development of a Mechanical Engineering
              curriculum that synergistically integrates a variety of learning/teaching
              approaches in order to reach a more diverse student population.  While
              traditional lecture formats address the majority of individual learning modes,
              the introduction of non-traditional approaches will not only enhance current
              student's learning but also attract and enhance the retention of a more diverse
              student population who's learning needs are not currently met.  The goal will
              be met by introducing several new elements to those aspects of the curriculum
              under the PIs' purview.  These include alternative lecture teaching techniques,
              research oriented laboratory exercises, integration of graduate research
              methods and equipment into undergraduate teaching labs, and improved research
              opportunities for underrepresented individuals.  


