Title       : CAREER: Integrated-Optic Nanoparticle Biosensor Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0134548

Award Number: 0134548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Blair blair@ece.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research world-wide on biosensing is motivated by numerous applications in
              environmental and food testing and clinical diagnostics, for example.  However,
              the important problem of detecting in parallel a large number of molecular
              species from the very small samples typical of most collection procedures
              remains an elusive goal. This CAREER research plan focuses on solving this
              problem by merging the science of nanophotonics with waveguide biosensors and
              microfluidics for the development of a new class of molecular detection
              array.

The immobilization of metallic nanoparticles onto discrete zones of
              an optical waveguide surface makes the parallel detection of a large number of
              molecular species feasible.  In each zone, capture molecules tethered to the
              nanoparticles preferentially bind to a particular molecular species through an
              affinity interaction.  Strong localization of light about each nanoparticle
              allows for dramatic improvement in optical signal transduction, thereby
              facilitating the detection of small numbers of molecules bound within each
              zone.
Microfluidics will be used to deliver small sample volumes to each
              sensing zone and passive mixing structures will be studied in order to increase
              the molecular binding probability within each zone.

The education plan
              focuses on the creation of a summer optics workshop for secondary school
              physics and science teachers.  As more demands are placed on teachers, and as
              technology continues to advance at a rapid pace, teachers need a way in which
              to further their knowledge of science and hands-on teaching methods.  Detailed
              lesson plans and laboratory exercises will be developed for deployment in the
              classroom, with the goal of improving student understanding of and instruction
              in optics and the sciences, and encouraging students to pursue careers in
              engineering and science.  Participation of teachers from Hispanic and Native
              American schools will be strongly encouraged.

