Title       : CAREER: Number Theory Research and Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0134577

Award Number: 0134577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Ahlgren ahlgren@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award funds a wide range of scholarly and educational 
projects related to
              the principal investigator's research interests 
in Number Theory. With
              regards to his own research, the investigator 
plans to study, among other
              topics, partitions and modular forms, 
Gaussian hypergeometric series,
              character sums, varieties over 
finite fields, polynomial-exponential
              equations, and thedivisors of 
modular forms.  In addition to his own
              research, the investigator 
will develop a number of new outreach and
              educational programs at 
the high school and undergraduate levels, and will
              become involved in 
training programs at more advanced levels.  Specifically,
              the 
investigator will direct workshops for high school students and high
              
school teachers, will support programs for talented undergraduate 
students,
              and will provide enhanced opportunities for 
graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows.

Number Theory is a very old branch of mathematics
              which has 
its roots in the study of the whole numbers.  In modern times it
              
has become an important tool in many applied endeavors.  For example,
              
systems which enable secure transmission of data over the internet 
are
              based on Number Theory, as are error correcting codes for 
reliable data
              transmission.  The Faculty Early Career Development 
(CAREER) Program supports
              the early development of academic faculty 
both as educators and as
              researchers.  The program emphasizes the 
development of full, balanced
              academic careers.  This award will 
allow the investigator to further develop
              his ongoing program of 
research in Number Theory.  It will also support the
              investigator's 
broadly based educational and outreach efforts at the high
              school, 
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels.
	
