Title       : CAREER: Dynamics and Control of Integrated Microchemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a0134102

Award Number: 0134102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mayuresh V. Kothare mayuresh.kothare@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


PI: Msayuresh V. Kothare
Institution: Lehigh University
Proposal
              Number: 0134102

Micromechanical systems are a new genergation of minature
              chemical systems that carry out chemical reactions and separations in precisely
              fabricated three dimensional microreactor configurations in the size range of a
              few microns to a few hundred microns.  Typical microchemical systems combine
              fluid handling and reaction capabilities with electronic sensing and actuation,
              are fabricated using integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing techniques and use
              silicon and related IC industry materials, polymers, ceramics, glass or quartz
              as their material of construction.  The goal of this integrated research and
              education program is to study the unique dynamic properties of such integrated
              microchemical systems and develop a framework for designing implementable
              feedback control techniques for this class of microsystems.  The research
              program will evolve around the following four central themes (1) dynamic
              modeling, simulation and dynamical analysis of microchemical systems; (2)
              model-based feedback controller design using fundamental, reduced order and
              empirical input-output models; (3) impact of dynamical considerations on
              microsystem design; and (4) experimental verification of controller design on a
              prototype microchemical system.  The fundamental distributed parameter modles
              will be used to analyze the nonlinear steady-state and dynamic properties of
              the microsystem.  The reduced order models as well as the empirical models will
              be used to synthesize low-order model-based controllers suitble for
              implementation on the experimental microchemical test system.  Concepts from
              distributed and boundary control theory will be employed to study the
              model-based feedback control formulation of microchemical systems and to
              develop a technical framework for microsystem controller design.  Efficient
              implementation of these controller algorithms will be investigated by using the
              experimental prototype microchemical system.
   Complementary to this research
              program will be a signicant educational eort to translate the research results
              to the chemical engineering core curriculum. At the graduate level, (a) lecture
              modules on microchemical systems uid- ow modeling and microreactor phase-plane
              analysis will be developed for incorporation in the core graduate level courses
              in uid mechanics and reactor design; and (b) lecture modules on
              distributed
and boundary control will be developed for incorporation in a
              graduate level cross-listed elective course on multivariable and nonlinear
              control. At the undergraduate level, team-based independent research projects
              will be dened through three avenues: (a) the Opportunities for Student
              Innovation (OSI) undergraduate research program at Lehigh; (b) summer research
              and semester research credit at Lehigh; and (c) summer internships at Sandia
              National Laboratories. In addition, to incorporate microreactor concepts as
              \core" concepts in the undergraduate curriculum, lecture modules will be
              developed for the following courses: (a) reactor design, to introduce a
              microreactor as yet another standard reactor; (b) process control, to
              demonstrate the dynamics and conventional control of microreactors; and (c)
              process design, to demonstrate the issues of micro owsheet design, integration,
              synthesis and control for integrated microplants.

   Collaboration with
              industry will be facilitated through the Pittsburgh Digital Greenhouse, a
              consortiumof microelectronics companies located in Pennsylvania, and a national
              laboratory through a collaborative agreement with the Sandia National
              Laboratories. 




