Title       : CAREER: Synthesis and Characterization of One-Dimensional Chemical
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0134787

Award Number: 0134787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongkun Park HPark@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1984,9161,9179,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this Career
              award to Harvard University to study one-dimensional chemical nanostructures. 
              With this award, Professor Hongkun Park will study the synthesis of
              large-diameter Single Walled carbon Nanotubes (SWNTs) with controlled diameter
              and helicity by chemical vapor deposition using well-isolated catalyst
              nanoparticles with uniform size distributions.  Scanned-probe microscopy (SPM)
              will be used to determine electromechanical properties and the coupling between
              global radial deformation and electron transport properties of these SWNTs. 
              Synthesis of individual single-crystalline nanowires prepared from barium
              titanate and related compounds and their subsequent characterization by
              variable-temperature SPM will also be carried out with this award.  The SPM to
              study ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties of nanowires should provide
              fundamental knowledge that governs the thermodynamics as well as the kinetics
              of phase transition and polarization switching.  Electrostatic force microscopy
              will be used to 'read' and 'write' by measuring the local electric polarization
              on the nanowires.  The PI, with the help of other faculty members, will give
              lectures in materials science and nanotechnology to middle school students as
              part of the "Early College Awareness Program" to attract students to science
              related studies and careers. 

Large-diameter Single Walled carbon Nanotubes
              (SWNTs) with controlled diameter and helicity will be synthesized by chemical
              vapor deposition using well-isolated catalyst nanoparticles with uniform size
              distributions, and these nanotubes may have potential electromechanical
              applications in devices.  In addition, single-crystalline ferroelectric
              nanowires will be prepared from barium titanate and related compounds and their
              ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties determined by variable-temperature
              scanned-probe microscopy.  These experiments will determine phase transitions
              of individual nanowires as a function of temperature and nanowire diameter.
              "Early College Awareness Program" will expose school students in different
              aspects of science, and will attract them for advanced studies in science.
