Title       : CAREER: Measuring Cosmology and the Evolution of Structure Via Gravitational
               Lensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0134753

Award Number: 0134753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $589070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian P. Dell'Antonio ian@het.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0134753
Ian Dell'Antonio

Dr. Dell'Antonio of Brown University is awarded
              funds to conduct the Deep Lens Survey (DLS), for which observations have
              already begun at the four-meter telescopes at Kitt Peak National Observatory
              and Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory. Through this survey, Dr.
              Dell'Antonio will attempt to determine the amount of dark matter (DM) in the
              universe by studying its gravitational lensing signal in a wide-field, deep
              optical imaging survey. The phenomenon of weak gravitational lensing occurs
              when matter along the line of sight, which might otherwise be unobservable, 
              magnifies and distorts the images of background galaxies.  Because
              gravitational lensing is sensitive to all forms of mass, not just luminous
              (ordinary) matter, it is an ideal tool for studying DM.  In addition, because
              the different models for the DM predict different degrees of clustering, the
              actual distribution of mass can offer clues to the nature of the DM. This
              project will determine the 2-dimensional distribution of projected mass in the
              universe with great accuracy, and the 3-dimensional distribution with somewhat
              less accuracy. The 3-dimensional distribution makes it possible to study the
              evolution of clustering with distance from earth (and thus look-back time). 
              The evolution of clustering at redshifts between 0 and 1 depends critically on
              the amount and nature of the dark energy (DE) thought to be responsible for the
              present acceleration of the expansion of the universe, so this proposal will
              differentiate between possible models for the DE. 

Dr. Dell'Antonio will
              also use the data - which will include multi-color imaging of about 25 million
              stars and galaxies -- to design ancillary science projects at several different
              levels.  In addition to the traditional mentoring of undergraduate and graduate
              students in research projects, he will also mentor local high-school students.
              He plans to recruit students who traditionally have not had opportunities for
              furthering their science background by partnering with teachers at Providence
              inner-city schools. The students will present their finished projects at public
              nights at Brown University's Ladd Observatory public nights, so the community
              as a whole (and in particular the families of the students) can see the effects
              of the mentoring program. The PI will also design workshops and laboratories
              for introductory astronomy students that will allow them to work with original
              data collected in the survey.  

