Title       : CAREER: Combinatorial Neoglycopeptide Arrays: Synthesis and Application Toward
               Creating Bioactive Peptides Resistant to Proteolysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0134818

Award Number: 0134818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Carrasco mcarrasco@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor Michael Carrasco, of the Department of Chemistry at Santa Clara
              University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              for his studies to determine how peptides and proteins can be made resistant to
              proteolysis by the attachment of sugars or other small organic molecules. By
              studying arrays of neoglycopeptides synthesized by a recently developed
              combinatorial method, Professor Carrasco hopes to discover general structural
              motifs that confer proteolytic resistance. These motifs will then be tested on
              peptide and protein models of practical and theoretical interest. The stages of
              research will be: (1) synthesizing a combinatorial array of neoglycopeptides,
              (2) determining the proteolysis of the members of the neoglycopeptide array by
              a variety of proteases, (3) analyzing the results to determine general,
              protective structural motifs, and (4) introducing these motifs to bioactive
              peptides and proteins to increase their proteolytic resistance without
              disturbing their function. The results generated will provide new strategies
              for the design of novel peptide and protein pharmaceuticals.

The teaching
              portion of this proposal focuses on extending the culture of research and
              community of scholars present in the sciences to include underrepresented
              students with a special emphasis on Latino students. Four concrete objectives
              will be implemented to foster a network of students and faculty across the
              scientific disciplines that will address both general scientific issues and
              ancillary issues specific to those from multicultural backgrounds. The four
              objectives are: (1) identifying and recruiting research students from
              underrepresented groups, (2) creating a faculty and peer mentoring network, (3)
              establishing a specific program of research presentations and attendance at
              regional and national meetings, and (4) initiating a regular, special seminar
              series given by prominent scientists from underrepresented groups. The main
              emphasis of the program is providing both scientific and personal mentoring for
              the students. Therefore, with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program for this CAREER award, Professor Michael Carrasco, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the Santa Clara University seeks to determine if
              glycosylation can be an effective tool in developing more proteolytic-resistant
              peptide and protein pharmaceutical as part of his research effort and will use
              teaching and mentoring underrepresented students as part of his educational
              goals.


