Title       : CAREER: Stability and Polarization Control of Single Mode Vertical-Cavity
               Surface-Emitting Lasers Exposed to Optical Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0134228

Award Number: 0134228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice A. Hudgings jhudging@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed integrated research and education program focusses
              on
investigation of the notorious polarization instability and sensitivity
to
              optical feedback of single transverse mode vertical cavity surface
emitting
              lasers (VCSELs).  These intertwined difficulties plague ongoing
efforts to
              develop the use of single mode VCSELs for applications such
as wavelength
              division multiplexed communications networks and optical
disk readout.  
              Furthermore, we expect that our work will be relevant to
future investigations
              of other low-dimensional semiconductor nano-lasers
with a large degree of
              symmetry.  The experimental investigations of
polarization stability will be
              analyzed using a novel model that we have
developed to describe VCSELs with
              two polarization eigenstates in the
presence of optical feedback.  This CW
              work will then be extended to an
investigation of the small-signal modulation
              response of VCSELs with
optical feedback.  Finally, the results of these
              investigations will be
used to explore practical strategies for improving the
              stability and
polarization control of single mode VCSELs exposed to optical
              feedback.

The proposed research will be integrated into the education of
              our
undergraduate physics and engineering majors, both in the classroom
              and
via direct participation of undergraduates in my research program. 
              In
order to enable our students to acquire the necessary research skills,
we
              are developing a new investigative, inquiry-driven,
              sophomore-level
instructional optoelectronics lab.  In addition, we are
              introducing into
our introductory sequence pedagogical reforms aimed at
              encouraging
students to engage in the processes of critical analysis that
              are
essential to successful, creative research.  Ultimately, this
integration
              of research and teaching will contribute to the resolution
of a critical
              problem in VCSEL development while preparing our
undergraduates to join the
              ranks of the next generation of women
scientists and engineers.







