Title       : CAREER: New Materials in Condensed Matter Physics - The Case of Quasicrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0134613

Award Number: 0134613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian R. Fisher irfisher@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The search for, and synthesis of, new materials plays a crucial role in
              Condensed Matter Physics.  Quasicrystals are a specific case of interest
              because they possess long-range atomic order but without the translational
              symmetry of conventional crystals. It is therefore possible to explore the
              consequences of an ordered but non-periodic structure on physical, magnetic and
              electronic properties of a material. This Faculty Early Career Development
              (CAREER) award will fund a project that will address outstanding questions in
              the field of quasicrystals via the synthesis and measurement of high-quality,
              single-grain samples. In particular, this work will explore and clarify the
              complex roles of order, periodicity and structural perfection on electronic
              transport, and magnetic ground states and phase transitions in quasicrystals.
              The materials are for the most part incongruently melting, and the self-flux
              technique is a well-suited synthesis route. Experimental techniques used to
              probe the thermodynamic and transport properties include susceptibility, heat
              capacity, resistivity and Hall effect measurements.  The students involved with
              this research will learn synthesis, characterization, and analysis skills that
              will enable them to find future employment in academe, industry, or government
              laboratories.  In addition the PI's research efforts will be integrated into a
              new lecture course that introduces contemporary challenges in the field of
              condensed matter physics via the detailed discussion of canonical materials.
              Specific examples and experimental techniques from the PI's own laboratory will
              be used to motivate and illustrate various aspects of this course. The PI will
              also continue his interest in scientific publication for children.

Advances
              in the field of Condensed Matter Physics often go hand-in-hand with the
              development of new materials. These advances may herald new theoretical
              challenges, a clearer understanding of well-known phenomena or advanced
              applications. In all cases, the search for, and synthesis of, new materials
              plays a crucial role, and this is the focus of the PI's laboratory at Stanford
              University. Quasicrystals are a specific case in point. These exotic materials
              possess long-range atomic order but without the translational symmetry of
              conventional crystals. It is therefore possible to explore the consequences of
              an ordered but non-periodic structure on physical, magnetic and electronic
              properties of a material. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award
              will fund a project that will address outstanding questions in the field of
              quasicrystals via the synthesis and measurement of high-quality, single-grain
              samples. In particular, this work will explore and clarify the complex roles of
              order, periodicity and structural perfection on electronic transport, and
              magnetic ground states and phase transitions in quasicrystals. The students
              involved with this research will learn synthesis, characterization, and
              analysis skills that will enable them to find future employment in academe,
              industry, or government laboratories.  In addition the PI's research efforts
              will be integrated into a new lecture course that introduces contemporary
              challenges in the field of condensed matter physics via the detailed discussion
              of canonical materials. Specific examples and experimental techniques from the
              PI's own laboratory will be used to motivate and illustrate various aspects of
              this course. The PI will also continue his interest in scientific publication
              for children. 
