Title       : CAREER: Deformation Mechanisms at the Materials' Microstructural Length Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0134111

Award Number: 0134111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashraf F. Bastawros bastaw@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Deformation Mechanisms at the Materials' Microstructural Length Scale


The
              objective of this CAREER project is to integrate the study of the microscale
              materials behavior with a modern educational program in the area of the
              mechanical properties of materials. The proposed strategy is to develop an
              integrated experimental-numerical framework, which will attempt to stimulate
              student curiosity to explore the deformation mechanisms at these length
              scales.

The proposed research is to study the evolution of the heterogeneous
              deformation fields and the history of hardening using a unique combination of
              efforts at the proper microstructure length scale. The fundamental principles
              are quite general and may be applied to many advanced materials systems that
              comprise deformation or material removal at the micro/nano scale. The research
              objective will be realized through: 1) development of unique and stable testing
              configurations for advanced materials structures; 2) development of proper
              experimental techniques for full-field, finite-deformation measurements to
              monitor the evolution of the heterogeneous deformation and hardening at the
              proper length scale; and 3) applications of this approach to the deformation
              induced crack tip toughening and the interfacial toughening of layered
              structures.  The measurements will be the benchmark tests against which both
              phenomenological models and discrete dislocation dynamics will be calibrated.
              The provided quantitative understanding will be carried over to: 1) the
              mechanism-based modeling "or better informed continuum models" employing finite
              element analysis, and 2) the possible hierarchies of multi-scale modeling
              through collaborations with Ames National Lab. This will allow a significant
              expansion in our ability to simulate the material behavior and address its
              reliability at such scales. This is a fundamental requirement for achieving
              further technological advancement for these advanced materials' systems.

The
              proposed educational vision integrates a modern view of mechanical properties
              of materials into the Iowa State University mechanics of materials curriculum,
              providing individuals in academia and industry with specialized knowledge in
              mechanical properties in small dimensions and the advanced experimental and
              computational techniques. Utilizing the myriad of web-based instructional
              research and resources, a specialized web-based experimental mechanics
              curriculum will be developed. In addition, a small research oriented group that
              facilitates interaction among honor and special-program students will be
              developed to give them the opportunity to express their curiosity in
              understanding the mechanics of materials and structure behaviors. 


