Title       : Structure and Dynamics in Boron-Containing Oxide Glasses and Liquids:
               High-Resolution and High-Temperature Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9626735

Award Number: 9626735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Stebbins stebbins@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9626735   Stebbins    The  proposed  studies will use nuclear  magnetic 
              resonance  (NMR)  spectroscopy at ambient temperature to determine  the 
              effects  of  varying fictive temperature on glass structure,  which will
              constrain temperature effects on liquid structure  in  the  vicinity  of the
              glass transition.  In  situ,  high  resolution,  high temperature NMR on boron,
              oxygen,  sodium,  aluminum,  and  silicon nuclides will be used  to  determine 
              temperature effects on average coordination environment. The  effects of
              observed structural changes on entropy, enthalpy,  activities,  molar  volumes,
              and other  properties  will  be  assessed   using  simple  thermodynamic 
              models.  At   lower  temperatures but still in the liquid range, static and
              magic  angle  spinning  NMR will be used to observe exchange  among  structural
               species and measure their exchange rates.  Spin-  lattice  relaxation times
              will be measured to gain dynamical  information over wider ranges in
              temperature. These  results  for  molecular-scale  dynamics will  be  compared 
              to  shear  relaxation  times derived from existing data  on  viscosity,  and 
              to  data  on  electrical conductivity and  diffusivity.  Models  linking  the 
              microscopic and  macroscopic  will  be  formulated and tested.  %%%  Silicate 
              and  borosilicate glasses, and their corresponding  high temperature liquids,
              are of wide-ranging importance  in  industry  and  society.   In  order  to 
              formulate  accurate  predictive  models for the properties of glasses  and 
              glass  melts, fundamental data on their atomic-scale structure  and  dynamics 
              are required.  The work proposed here will  extend  our group's extensive
              studies of simple silicate glasses and  liquids  to  borate, borosilicate, and
              boroaluminate-systems  in  order  to address basic, but poorly understood
              questions  about  these  technologically more relevant  materials.  The  focus 
              of  this project is to use nuclear magnetic resonance  (NMR)  spectroscopy to
              acquire quantitative  structural   and  dynamical  information at ambient and
              high temperature,  and  to  interpret  and model existing macroscopic 
              thermodynamic  and transport property data in light of these new findings.  ***
