Title       : Biased Sampling and Confidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1998   
File        : a9626347

Award Number: 9626347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Woodroofe michael@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626347  Woodroofe      The research concerns biased sampling models and  
              exponential time series.  In biased sampling models, the probability   of
              including a subject in the study may depend on variables of   interest--for
              example, the size of the subject.  Interest centers on   cases in which the
              inclusion probabilities depend on the variables of   interest in a monotone
              way, but without assuming that the inclusion   probabilities are known or known
              up to a few parameters.  The   research involves developing tests for the
              presence of bias,   developing estimation procedures when bias is present and  
              studying the properties of both tests and estimators.  Likelihood   and
              penalized likelihood are used to develop the tests and   estimators, and the
              properties are studied through a combination of   asymptotic analysis and
              simulation.  An exponential time series is a   stochastic process whose finite
              dimensional distributions form   exponential families.  For such process, the
              sampling distributions   of normalized maximum likelihood estimators are
              asymptotically  normal, under quite general conditions.  The research involves 
               developing higher order approximations to the these sampling   distributions
              and using the refined approximations to form   corrected confidence sets. 
              Mathematically, the results take the form   of very weak expansions in which a
              Bayesian approach is used   to obtain approximations to sampling distributions.
                   Biased samples arise frequently in investigations that involve   searching
              for hidden objects, since the probability of finding an   object may depend on
              its properties.  For example, astronomers are   more likely to find a large
              bright galaxy than a small dim   one, and geologists are more likely to find a
              large oil well than a   small one.  Previous work on such problems has
              concentrated on   the case in which the inclusion probabilities depend on the
              variables   of interest in a known way.  The new research involves developing  
              data analyses that are appr opriate when the latter   relationship is not known
              and includes methods for estimating the   relationship from observed data.  The
              relationship is important,   because the number of objects not found depends on
              it in crucial   way.  The research considers exponential time series which 
              include classical time series, like stock prices and weather, but also   many
              others like adaptively designed experiments (experiments   that design
              themselves) and sequential clinical trials.
