Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9626523

Award Number: 9626523
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Karolyn K. Eisenstein                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah H. Tolbert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sarah H. Tolbert has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Tolbert received the doctoral degree from   the University
              of California at Berkeley under the supervision of   Professor A. Paul
              Alivisatos.  Dr. Tolbert will continue research at the   University of
              California at Santa Barbara under the sponsorship of   Professor Galen Stucky. 
              The postdoctoral research will focus on the   study of iron oxide mesoporous
              materials.  The systems consist of   surfactant/inorganic composites that
              display long range periodic order   reminiscent of liquid crystals.  The
              synthesis and characterization of   mesopores is accomplished through the use
              of redox chemistry with iron   oxide as the model inorganic.  The materials
              produced are characterized   by Moessbauer spectroscopy as well as by
              examination of magnetic   properties. The work leads toward the overall goal of
              understanding and   predicting the observable states of solids.  The
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an
              important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and
              experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
