Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for
               Continuous Time Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9626692

Award Number: 9626692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Floyd B. Hanson hanson@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hanson  9626692       The investigator and associates develop advanced 
              computational methods to solve large scale dynamic programming  problems in
              uncertain environments.  These methods include  parallel computation, graphical
              visualization, problem mapping,  memory management and data restructuring on
              massively parallel  and massive memory processors to solve large dimensional
              problems  that could not be solved by ordinary methods.  The objective is 
              develop fast algorithms for the optimal feedback control of  large, general,
              continuous time, nonlinear, stochastic dynamical  systems, perturbed by both
              Gaussian and distributed Poisson white  noise.  The treatment of the random
              jumps of Poisson processes  for modeling rare, disastrous events is a special
              and challenging  feature of this research.  The main application of this
              research  is to optimal remediation for groundwater quality in an uncertain 
              environment.  Other applications are to parameter uncertainty in  partially
              observed control systems, i.e., the dual control  problem, and to just-in-time
              manufacturing systems.  The  numerical approach of the investigators directly
              treats the  partial differential equation of stochastic dynamic programming. 
              New algorithms, such as spatial and state finite elements, are  used to
              alleviate both memory and computational demands.  Purely  parallel algorithms
              based on intelligent state space search are  also being developed.  The
              development of graphical visualization  and data management tools are essential
              for analyzing massive  amounts of output in many dimensions.       The
              investigator and associates are developing optimal  solutions to environmental
              and manufacturing problems when there  is some uncertainty involved.  Examples
              of the cause of  uncertainty in the problem are the unexpected introduction of 
              pollution and unknown parameters in the case of the environment,  while in the
              case of manufacturing an example would be the random  failure of machines.  The
              reason for seeking optimal solutio ns is  to minimize costs or wasting precious
              materials or resources.  A  large and important application that the
              investigator studies is  the cleanup of groundwater resources where the source
              of the  pollution or the underground state is uncertain.  Since polluted 
              groundwater sites can costs from millions to billions and more  (there are some
              sites for which cleanup procedures are unknown),  optimal solutions could save
              millions over existing sub-optimal  procedures.  Similar savings can be
              obtained for just-in-time  manufacturing systems that are optimally managed,
              enhancing our  globally competitive capabilities.  The investigator and 
              associates develop advanced computing techniques to compute the  optimal
              solutions using high performance computing, which is  essential when uncertain
              environments or parameters make the  amount of computation for the solution
              very large.  The high  performance computing involves using massive computers
              for fast  optimal solutions and graphical visualization to make the immense 
              amount of output understandable, for instance to the  environmental resource or
              manufacturing plant manager who would  be the prime user.
