Title       : Mathematical Analysis of Epidemiological Models of SEIRS Type with Varying
               Population Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9626128

Award Number: 9626128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Y. Li mli@math.ualberta.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Li  9626128       The investigator studies a variety of new mathematical  models
              in epidemiology with the following three goals: (1).  To  build more realistic
              models. (2).  To search new mechanisms that  can generate new epidemiological
              phenomena. (3).  To stimulate  mathematical development of more effective tools
              for model  analysis.  Many of the previously studied models are special cases 
              of the SEIRS type.  On the one hand, a new analytical method  developed by the
              investigator and his collaborators makes  rigorous mathematical analysis of the
              SEIRS models with varying  populations feasible and is a main tool in this
              project.  On the  other, problems of mathematical interest arising from the
              model  analysis are thoroughly studied in a general mathematical  setting. 
              Computation also plays a important role, complementing  analytical methods and
              testing the model using clinical or  experimental data.       The use of
              mathematical models to describe the spread of an  infectious disease in a human
              or animal population has a long  history.  If the disease spreads through
              direct contact of  individuals, a susceptible individual first becomes infected
               through contact with an infectious member; he then stays in the  latent period
              before becoming infectious; after this he recovers  from the infection with
              temporary immunity and later becomes  susceptible again when the acquired
              immunity is lost.  Death due  to both natural causes and infection may occur
              during the cycle.  The population is divided into four subclasses: 
              susceptibles,  exposed (those in the latent period), infectious, and recovered,
               according to the four stages in the above cycle.  An SEIRS model  for the
              spread of the infection is a system of ordinary  differential equations that
              describes how the number of  individuals in each class changes with time and
              how they  interact, based on various assumptions on the way contacts  between
              individuals are made as well as on various environmental  effects.  Note that
              every member of the p opulation is in one of  these classes, so if the disease
              causes death then the population  size varies with time too.  It is expected
              that research on SEIRS  epidemiological models with varying population size can
               significantly advance our understanding of the transmission  dynamics for many
              diseases and our interpretation of complex  clinical data, foster more accurate
              predictions on the time  course of the spread of an infection, and lead to more
              effective  disease prevention and control strategies.  This is especially 
              significant today, given the alarming global resurgence of many  infectious
              diseases.
