Title       : Acquisition of a X-Ray Powder Diffractometer with High Temperature Attachment
               for Materials Research at the University of New Orleans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9626297

Award Number: 9626297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinke Tang jtang@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok Puri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. O'Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9626297  Tang    This award provides support for the acquisition of an x-ray 
              powder diffractometer with a high temperature attachment for  materials
              research.  This powder diffractometer offers state-  ofthe-art performance for
              crystal structure determination,  particle size analysis, measurements of
              crystallinity and  disorder, identification of impurity phases, and 
              determinations of solid solubility and phase diagram.  It  has a fully
              automatic alignment capability and is equipped  with an advanced software
              system.  It is highly versatile  and can function as a 0/0 goniometer or in
              vertical or  horizontal mode to satisfy any present and future needs.  the
              goniometer radii can be easily adjusted enabling the  selection of the best
              resolution for application.  The high  temperature attachment is designed for
              automatic recording  of crystal structure changes of a specimen at elevated 
              temperatures (up to 1400 C).  It will be mounted on the x-  ray diffractometer
              and can operate in vacuum, air or inert  gasses.  This x-ray diffractometer is
              crucial to the success  of many research projects at the University of New
              Orleans,  including studies of various electronic and Magnetic  materials and
              their processingstructure-property  relationships.  These projects include
              investigation on the  magnetotransport properties of insulatormetal or
              insulator-  semiconductor nanocomposites in which giant  magnetoresistance
              (GMR) may be found; study of a group of  new and very promising high density
              magneto-optical  recording materials CuCr2Se4-x Asx; and study of 
              photomagnetic effects in intermetallic spin glasses.  In  addition,
              diffractometer will enable us to conduct more  effectively research activities
              in high strength permanent  magnets, superconductors, spin glasses, heavy
              fermions,  biomaterials, polymer-nanoparticle composites, microporous  solids,
              carbon and related materials, coatings and their  tribological properties.  the
              development of materials with  novel and useful magnetic and electronic pro
              perties is of  strategic importance for the nation's technological and 
              economic growth.  %%%  The diffractometer will enhance the research
              capabilities of  the faculty at the University of New Orleans and will also  be
              available to the researchers at Tulane University,  Louisiana State University,
              Xavier University and Louisiana  State University Medical Center.  Through the
              acquisition of  this instruments, students will have much greater 
              opportunities to participate in materials research  activities and be provided
              access and training on a state-of-  the-art instrument.  ***
