Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9626454

Award Number: 9626454
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne W. Lukens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Wayne W. Lukens  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Lukens received the doctoral degree from   the University of
              California at Berkeley under the supervision of   Professor Richard Andersen. 
              Dr. Lukens will continue research at the   University of California at Santa
              Barbara under the sponsorship of   Professor Galen Stucky.  The postdoctoral
              research will focus on the   study of transition metal substituted mesoporous
              silicates.  The goal is   to specifically substitute transition metals for
              framework silicon atoms   at the surface of the pores.  Because of the
              substitution, the spectra of   the metal center, especially the EXAFS spectra,
              may be more   straightforwardly interpreted in characterization of the
              mesoporous   materials.  The longterm goal is to prepare and characterize  
              organometallic catalysts which are able to perform sequential reactions   such
              as carbonylation followed by ring-closing metathesis.  The Postdoctoral
              Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important
              infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of
              new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical
              research and teaching.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
