Title       : WORKSHOPS: Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications "Initiative in
               Materials Science"; January 24-26, 1996 and February 1-3, 1996; Minneapolis,
               Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9626139

Award Number: 9626139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Gulliver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9626139  Friedman    This award will provide partial support for two three-day 
              workshops to be   held at the Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications of
              the  University   of Minnesota in late January and early February, 1996, 
              respectively.  The   workshops will focus on the following topics:  (1)
              Microstructure  and Thin   Films and (2) "Smart" Sensing and Control of Thin
              Films.  The  first   workshop will concentrate on thin films.  Computational 
              approaches to   modeling thin films have generally focused either on the 
              atomistic scale or   on the continuum scale.  However, because of the
              drastically  different time   and length scales involved in these disparate
              models, they are  not currently   linked.  This limits the ability of either
              model to describe the  process   adequately for industrial materials
              manufacturing.  Increased  computational   power will not solve this problem
              because strategies for scaling  up or   scaling down from these models do not
              yet exist.  Although  computational   power might allow scaling up in size,
              more sophisticated  techniques must   be developed for dealing with time scale
              issues.  The workshop  will bring   together mathematicians working in
              materials science and  materials   scientists who use modeling and simulation
              in order to jointly  address the   micro-macro linkage needed to understand
              microstructure evolution  in thin   films.  A series of talks and discussions
              are expected to lead to  a set of   suggestions on how to develop models using
              multiscaling  techniques.  The   eventual goals in realizing these suggestions
              are:  (1)  high-fidelity   simulations of thin-film processes which link ab
              initio,  calculations to   continuum microstructure/property models, and (2)
              approaches to  extracting   physical non-empirical models from these full
              simulations that  are suitable   for real-time process control.  The second
              workshop will also  focus on thin   films, but from a different perspective. 
              Controllers operate at  the macro   level.  At this  level the models are at
              the continuum scale and  their   evolution is dictated by partial differential
              equations (PDE).   Solution   techniques for PDE require the most powerful
              computers currently   available.  Models at this level of detail are unsuitable
              for  real-time process   control.  The workshop will explore research ideas on 
              mathematical   approaches for extracting the dominant parameters from the full 
              model.    Understanding the micro-macro linkage will be essential for  success
              in   using feedback control.  A topic of special interest of the  second
              workshop   is "smart" sensors, that is, sensors that "understand" the  process
              models and   are able to determine process parameters either directly or 
              indirectly using   these models.  It will emphasize algorithms which allow
              sensors  to infer   parameters of interest from other parameters for cases
              where one  cannot   directly sense a parameter that the physicochemical models 
              indicates is   critical to the control of the process.
