Title       : Constructing Optical Interconnections for Massively ParallelComputing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9626215

Award Number: 9626215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Si-Qing Zheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626215  Zheng  Massively parallel computation is a frontier computing field. 
              An extremely important aspect of  parallel computation is data communication
              among processing/memory components.  Much research has been centered around
              building point-to-point networks using the VLSI technology.  The VLSI
              technology is not suitable for interconnection intensive circuits due to its
              two- dimensionality, I/O constraints, and electrical properties such as
              resistance, capacitance, and inductance.  The emerging optical technology has
              drastically changed the landscape of interconnection schemes.  There are many
              desirable characteristics of optical interconnects.  Optics can utilize
              free-space interconnects as well as guided wave technology, neither of which
              has the problems mentioned for the VLSI technology.  The characteristics of
              optical interconnects have significant system configuration and complexity
              implications.  Architectural freedom and constraints have shifted when optical
              interconnects are incorporated.  The conventional graph theory, which has been
              successfully used to characterize point-to-point networks, is no longer
              adequate for modeling these interconnect technologies.  Recently, based on the
              hypergraph theory, the P.I. has introduced a new class of network
              architectures, the hypernetworks, that are particularly suitable for optical
              interconnects.  This project will focus on the feasibilties of implementing
              large-scale optical interconnection networks using current and future optical
              technologies. Topological, communication, computation, fault-tolerance, and
              implementation aspects of optical hypernetworks will be investigated.  During
              this project, the P.I. will interact with researchers in the field of optical
              engineering, and develop a joint research plan for further investigations.  It
              is possible that the proposed research will have a significant impact not only
              on the design, implementation and analysis of new generation massively parallel
              computing systems based on current and future V LSI and optical technologies,
              but also on the theory and practice of massively parallel computation as a
              whole.  ***
