Title       : Surface Chemistry of Group VIII Transition Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9626338

Award Number: 9626338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Weinberg whw@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              addresses a broad  range of topics in ultra high vacuum surface chemistry
              carried out in Professor Weinberg's  laboratory at the University of
              California-Santa Barbara.  The use of atomic hydrogen and  atomic oxygen
              sources to probe the details of Eley-Rideal reactions at well characterized 
              Group VIII metal surfaces is a major focus of the work.  Vibrational
              spectroscopic  characterization of intermediates on these surfaces is enabled
              by the development of digital  processing methods for resolution enhancement in
              electron loss spectroscopy.  Time resolved  vibrational spectroscopy is used to
              quantify the process of adsorption assisted desorption of  small molecules on
              these transition metal surfaces, and molecular beam methods are used to  probe
              the flux dependence of adsorption of oxygen and other small molecules.  This
              work  provides the knowledge base necessary for the design and understanding of
              important  catalytic and electronic device processing technologies.  The
              detailed study of the mechanisms of surface reaction chemistry on platinum,
              iridium, and  ruthenium surfaces forms the focus of this work.  A combination
              of experimental method  development and examination of model reaction systems
              provides a clearer understanding of  the mechanisms of surface reactions and
              the intermediates involved.  This knowledge proves  useful in the design and
              implementation of catalytic and electronic device manufacturing  processes.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
