Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Linear and Nonlinear Rigidity of Discrete Subgroups Lie
               Groups and Manifolds of Negative Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9626621

Award Number: 9626621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chengbo Yue   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Yue    The author is currently working on various aspects of the
              geometry and rigidity of negatively curved manifolds and symmetric spaces using
              methods from dynamical  systems, Lie groups, several complex variable,
              quasiconformal mapping, algebraic  geometry: 1) Extensions of Mostow rigidity
              to general discrete subgroups of infinite covolume. The author has achieved
              several key results but still there are important open problems to be solved
              and it seems that one has to combine techniques from ergodic theory, algebraic
              geometry, complex geometry and Heisenberg geometry for further approach.  2)
              Nonlinear extensions of Mostow rigidity--the rigidity of smooth actions of
              lattices in noncompact semisimple Lie groups. In particular, the author will
              further study the obstructions to the existence of an invariant conformal or
              projective or affine structure under a smooth group action and to combine the
              theory of differential invariants with   Zimmer's cocycle superrigidity. 
              3)Geometry and Dynamics around negatively curved manifolds.  The author has
              obtained a number of results concerning negatively curved manifolds by using
              techniques from ergodic theory, global analysis. There are several deep and
              difficult open problems(for example, the Katok entropy conjecture, the marked
              length spectrum problem). The potential of the dynamical and global approach
              deserves to be further explored. 4)Hyperbolization of negatively curved
              3-maifolds. Kleinian groups. The author proved recently that a negatively
              curved closed manifold is either hyperbolic or  the geodesic flow preserves a
              measurable proper invariant distribution by considering quasiconformality in
              the geodesic flow. This seems to be a first nontrivial step towards another
              approach to the hyperbolization of negatively curved closed
              three-manifolds(which is a big open problem in Thurston's program). The author
              is also interested in the Ahlfors area conjecture.    The author's mathematical
              research are centered around the rigidity and flexibilit y of negatively curved
              spaces. From a generic point of view, most spaces are negatively curved. The
              intrinsic property of spaces are closely related to the dynamics of its
              geodesic flow. Therefore to understand these spaces(including the one we are
              living in)--their size, shape, and evolution, it is inevitable to study the
              stability, the rigidity and flexibility of   various dynamical systems(i.e.
              group actions) on them.
