Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9626519

Award Number: 9626519
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal A. Seburg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IN Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Randal A. Seburg has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Seburg received the doctoral degree from   the University of
              Wisconsin at Madison under the supervision of Professor   Robert J. McMahon. 
              Dr. Seburg will continue research at Purdue   University under the sponsorship
              of Professor Robert R. Squires.  The   postdoctoral research will focus on the
              investigation of reactive   intermediates using a flowing afterglow apparatus
              equipped with a   triple-qualrupole mass analyzer.  Such gas phase
              investigations probe the   intrinsic properties of molecules, providing data
              that is free of solvent   and counter-ion effects and directly relevant for
              comparison with theory.    Studies include the thermochemistry of carbynes
              using both theoretical   computations and experimental results, as well as the
              gas phase reactions   of charged biomolecules such as oligopeptides and
              oligonucleotides   generated using the electrospray ion technique.  The
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an
              important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and
              experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
