Title       : Local Electromagnetic Field Characterization for Portable Wireless
               Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9626599

Award Number: 9626599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer T. Bernhard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #:     ECS-9626599    PI Name/Institution:            Jennifer T.
              Bernhard/ University of New Hampshire    The referenced female PI in her first
              year as faculty at University of New Hampshire has requested Research Planning
              Grant Funds to initiate a program to simulate and measure the local
              electromagnetic environments of portable wireless communication units,
              emphasizing the user and the unit's chassis as part of the electromagnetic
              subsystem. Several aspects of the proposed research h are novel and important. 
              The topical area of wireless communications is rapidly growing in importance.
              Research within this field is currently spotty.  Higher volume data and video
              transmission problems are expected in the near future. The proposed research
              will explore one of the most important missing sub-fields, the reverse link
              (the user & the receiving unit electrical sub-system).  The reverse link is
              almost always the weaker than the forward link, hence it is the limiting factor
              in performance.  However very little research has been done on electromagnetics
              configurations other that the base station (the forward link).  At the same
              time, the reverse link is where the heaviest FCC regulation may be expected to
              fall since this is the electromagnetic environment which directly affects the
              user.    This Research Planning Grant proposal is clearly and carefully
              designed as preliminary study to provide important support for a full proposal.
               It includes both finite difference time domain simulation and radiation
              pattern measurement with electromagnetically simulated "human" absorbers as
              well as the receiver systems.  Questions of antenna placement will be explored
              tin the context of a new in-chassis design which could take advantage of new
              dialectic materials.  Special emphasis will be placed on developing connections
              with industry and obtaining real equipment for test during this RPG grant. The
              PI has established expertise in working with electromagnetically simulated
              "human" absorbers during highly re levant post-doctoral research at Duke
              University.  The PI's energetic liaisons with wireless communications industry
              partners can be exepcted to add very much to the proposed effort.  I strongly
              recommend funding at the proposed amount of $18,000.00.
