Title       : Survival Analysis and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9626750

Award Number: 9626750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56553              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiliang Ying   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ying    The research develops statistical models, methodologies and  related
              theory to address issues arising from design,  modeling and analysis of
              survival data,  which are often subject to censoring, truncation and/or  other
              types of missingness. It introduces new hazard-based  regression models for
              survival data that extend and  complement the standard proportional hazards
              regression,  and yet still possess essential good features that the  latter
              has. Besides the usual right-censored data, it  also provides solutions to such
              important and difficult  problems as interval censoring, random effects and 
              multivariate survival times by exploiting model variation  and developing
              suitable analytic tools. It involves finding  computationally convenient
              representations and establishing  sharp theoretical properties for the analysis
              of discrete  (survival) data, particularly of those that can be summarized  by
              two-by-two or more general contingency tables. New methods  and theory tailored
              to retrospective studies, which are often  summarized as the case-control and
              case-cohort regression problems,  are also developed.    Survival data are
              collected in many scientific  investigations, including biomedical follow-up
              studies,  industrial life tests, study of economic durations,  astronomy,
              demography among others. Development of suitable  statistical methods is
              crucial to handling of such data so that  valid scientific conclusions can be
              derived. This project  develops several novel approaches, some of which are
              suitable  for identification of health related risk factors, such as exposure
              to  hazardous environment, consumption of certain foods etc., and  others are
              applicable to evaluation of therapeutic effects as well  cost effectiveness of
              medical treatments. These new methods may impact  other areas of public and
              scientific interests, an example of which is  the study of factors influencing
              unemployment duration.
