Title       : Biodiversity of Pristine Rainforests in Western Amazonia: A Unique and Urgent
               Opportunity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a9626886

Award Number: 9626886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Simmons   (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Duellman  (Principal Investigator former)
              James S. Ashe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Timm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Robbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Prum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9626886  Duellman  The proposed inventory is designed to survey diverse
              taxonomic groups in a largely pristine lowland tropical rainforest in an
              essentially unknown region of the western Amazon Basin in northern Peru. The
              project will inventory terrestrial plants, beetles, lepidopterans, amphibians,
              reptiles, birds, and mammals at six sites in the region. Three geographically
              distinct sites will be in terra firma forest, two will be on the floodplains of
              different rivers, and one will be in a swamp forest. Specimens of plants and
              animals will be prepared in standard ways. Tissues of vertebrates will be
              frozen in liquid nitrogen. Ectoparasites will be collected from mammals and
              birds. Tape recordings will be made of vocalizations of frogs and birds, and
              living individuals of as many species of vertebrates as possible will be
              photographed in color. Data on sites and specimens and observations of plants
              and animals will be entered into an electronic database (BioRap) and the files
              placed on the world wide web.   Results of this inventory will be a unique (for
              the neotropics) set of GIS-based biodiversity data comparable among sites for
              diverse groups of organisms. The integrated data on physiologically and
              trophically diverse major groups of organisms and their physical environments
              will result in estimates of species richness and community distinctness. The
              resulting collections will form a rich resource of material for systematics
              studies. The data base will also be used for monitoring reclamation projects in
              the region by Occidental Peruana Inc, which is supporting the project by
              providing transportation to and among field sites, all lodging and food onsite
              for all participants, and other logistical support. This project represents an
              important partnership incorporating innovative participation by government,
              industry and academia in support of critical biodiversity studies.
