Title       : Estimating Equations and Second-Order Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9626249

Award Number: 9626249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bing Li bing@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 96-266249  Li       The research is  focused on  two problems related to
              second order theories:    one on the  assessment of accuracy and the other on
              the refinement of estimating   equations.  The  accuracy  of an estimate is
              determined  partly by the quality of the estimator and partly by chance. 
              Traditionally  the  chance element was  accounted for by the conditional  or
              the  Bayesian  approach,  which require an ancillary or a prior distribution.
              However, the  chance  element can exist  without either.  The first part of the
              research  tackles this  problem by direct estimation of loss via asymptotic
              expansions and geometric  analyses.  A  particular  result  obtained  in this 
              direction is that  the  inverted  observed information  best approximates  the
              squared  error.  The  second part of the research is concerned with improving
              the  second-order accuracy   of an estimating equation.  Two methods were 
              previously  proposed,  but they are  inapplicable  to an important  type of 
              situations,  which  motivates  this  project.  In addition, several previously
              unknown properties of estimating   equations are investigated in the light of
              their  analogy with the    second-order  properties  of the classical maximum 
              likelihood  estimator.  This research will  yield  deeper  understanding  and 
              more  effective use of semiparametric methods.  %%%       The recent advances
              in science,  particularly in medical, biological,  sociological,  and
              ecological studies, have drastically increased the scale  and complexity  of
              data sets.  This change,  hand in hand with the ever increasing  computer
              power, gives new challenges to traditional statistical methodologies.  One 
              area of  studies  that these challenges  have brought about is that of 
              estimating equations, which is the focus of the present research. Estimating 
              equations  allow scientists  to model directly the  parameters which are of 
              the most  interest  without making  excessive  assumptions  (as traditional 
              methods often do),  whose violat ions would  impair the inference  about the 
              parameters.  Estimating equations are especially useful for data  sets with
              complicated  dependence  structures, such as longitudinal studies  and the
              studies of plants  scattered in a natural environment.  The studies  of
              estimating  equations have  undergone vigorous  advances during the past 
              decades,  most of which,  however,  are concerned with what might be called 
              the coarser-level aspects (or first-order aspects).  Whereas the studies of 
              the  finer-level  aspects (or second-order properties)  have just  begun to 
              catch up. The second-order aspects of estimating equations are systematically 
              investigated in the present research.
