Title       : Collaborative Research: Constraints on EPR Magmatism Through Studies of the
               North Orozco Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1999   
File        : a9626973

Award Number: 9626973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234425             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Bender jfbender@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The  East  Pacific Rise (EPR) north of the Orozco  transform  fault  off the
              coast of Mexico provides unique opportunities  to  further  our understanding
              of the origin  of  the  ocean  crust  and the nature of the upper mantle.  
              This region  is  the  shallowest, most-inflated portion of the northern  EPR, 
              and  extends  the range of axial morphology  that  has  been  examined in
              detail by a factor of two, which allows the test  of  a  number of models
              relating axial morphology  to  magma  chambers,  volcanic  behavior,  and 
              hydrothermal  activity.  Second, this region allows a clarification of the
              nature and  origin of the chemical characteristics of the Pacific  upper 
              mantle.  Basalts recovered from the EPR differ fundamentally  in  their 
              distribution of chemical compositions from  those  recovered  along  the
              mid-Atlantic Ridge.    There  are  two  hypotheses  for  these differences:  
              (1)  that  the  mantle  beneath  the  EPR is ubiquitously "veined"  by  small 
              scale  heterogeneities  that  are a natural  consequence  of  plate 
              recirculation in the upper mantle;  (2) that hot spots under  the  EPR  are 
              smeared out and mixed in to the upper  mantle  more  efficiently than along the
              MAR.    The Orozco  anomaly  is  a  potential small hot spot track near the
              EPR.   If  we  find   that  it  is  a  hot  spot,  and  that  its  chemical 
              characteristics can explain the enriched MORB along the EPR,  then the second
              model will be supported.  If not, then model  (1) is more likely.
