Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symplectic and Contact Geometry and Topology, and Their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9626430

Award Number: 9626430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov Eliashberg eliash@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626430  Eliashberg       This project will concentrate on several areas of
              symplectic and   contact geometry and topology in interaction with other areas
              of   mathematics.  In particular, there will be continuing study of  
              3-dimensional contact structures and the relationship between contact  
              geometry and the theory of codimension-1 foliations.  The theory of  
              confoliations initiated in joint work with W. P. Thurston should help   to
              clarify this relationship.  Another important part of the project   will be
              devoted to symplectic geometry of Stein manifolds, where one of   the main
              tools should be an analog of Morse-Smale theory for   plurisubharmonic
              functions on Stein manifolds.  Yet another focus   (joint with H. Hofer) will
              be contact homology theory, which should   deliver new invariants of contact
              manifolds in dimension 3 and higher.  Finally, a significant part of the
              project (joint with M. Gromov) will   involve the symplectization of Morse
              theory.  The results here should   help in understanding which part of stable
              Morse theory can be generalized   to the problems of Lagrangian intersections. 
                   Symplectic geometry and topology have played an important role in       
              such different areas of mathematics as low-dimensional topology, Hamiltonian  
              dynamics, foliation theory, sub-Riemannian geometry, complex geometry and  the
              theory of functions of several complex variables.  Despite much recent   
              progress, many basic questions remain unanswered.  Moreover, the discovery   of
              new interactions with these other fields creates new demands for the   interior
              development of symplectic geometry and topology.  The research under  this
              project should answer some of the old problems of the field and   discover
              further applications.  ***
