Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Infinite Simple C*-Algebras and TheirInvariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9626592

Award Number: 9626592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuang Zhang zhangs@math.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9626592  PI:  Shuang Zhang   Univ of Cincinnati            During the next 
              three years the Principal Investigator,    Shuang  Zhang, proposes to continue
              his research on the following   three problems. (1) Is  there  a simple
              C*-algebra that contains   both finite and infinite nonzero projections? (2)
              Determine the   K-theory of the simple C*-algebras generated by the reduced
              group   C*-algebras associated with free products of cyclic groups and  
              certain projections, and simple C*-algebras generated by a   weighted bilateral
              shift and an isometry. (3) Classifying these   non-nuclear, purely infinite,
              simple C*-algebras up to isomorphism.   The problem (1) is an outstanding
              problem  in the theory of simple   C*-algebras and the program of  classifying
              separable simple   C*-algebras. The proposer intends to attack this  problem by
              some   techniques in the associated multiplier algebras. The C*-algebras   in
              (2) and (3) include non-nuclear, purely infinite, simple   C*-algebras which
              might serve as  standard models in  certain   classes of non-nuclear simple
              C*-algebras.  Investigation on  the   structure of these C*-algebras will
              supplement the expansion of   classification program to the category of
              non-nuclear simple   C*-algebras.  Encouraged by the interests of several
              leading   researchers on the projects above,  the proposer expects that   this
              investigation will stimulate fruitful research activities   on  the subjects.  
                         The collection of all linear transformations in the three  
              dimensional space, and in any finite dimensional space,  is generated    by
              translations and certain rotations (via  addition, scalar   multiplication, and
              composition). This collection is the basic   example of simple C*-algebras and
              can be identified with the algebra of all   square matrices. These elementary
              simple C*-algebras are fully   classified by the dimension of the space.  Many
              problems in the   quantum physics and in modern technologies (for example,
              computer   programming) are reduced  to the investigation of simple C*-algebras
                of this sort, and more generally, a variety of simple C*-algebras   generated
              by certain linear transformations in the infinite dimensional   space.  The
              proposed project is concerned with the structure of   simple C*-algebras
              generated by some square matrices of infinite   size. In the process of
              increasing knowledge about these simple   C*-algebras, one important step is to
              understand their structure   and then to classify them. The proposed project is
               especially   concerned with studying invariants that distinguish these
              algebras.   The classical dimension is no longer the distinguishing invariant, 
               and thus, finding and studying new distinguishing invariants   become two key
              problems. The proposed project aims at attacking these  outstanding problems in
              this area.
