Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Immersed Interface Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9626645

Award Number: 9626645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall J. LeVeque rjl@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loyce M. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Bube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              LeVeque  9626645  The investigator and his colleagues develop immersed interface
               methods and apply them to a variety of problems.  Immersed  interface methods
              are a class of methods for solving partial  differential equations whose
              solutions have discontinuities or  nonsmoothness across some interface(s).  The
              idea is to use a  uniform Cartesian grid in spite of the fact that the
              interface  may cut between grid points.  The goal of this work is to develop 
              finite difference methods in two and three space dimensions that  give highly
              accurate solutions at all grid points while  maintaining the efficiency and
              ease of implementation of uniform  grid methods.  Pointwise second order
              accurate methods have  already been developed for several classes of problems,
              including  certain elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic equations with 
              discontinuous coefficients across fixed interfaces.  Stokes flow  and
              solidification problems with moving interfaces have also been  solved. 
              Extensions to a number of other problems are currently  underway.  Many
              important practical problems lead to differential equations  in regions of 2-
              or 3-dimensional space that are geometrically  complicated, and that contain
              interfaces across which the nature  of the solution changes.  These equations
              can rarely be solved  exactly, and large-scale computation is required to
              obtain  well-resolved solutions over multi-dimensional regions.  The goal  of
              this work is to develop efficient computational methods to  approximate
              solutions of such problems.  Several specific  problems are studied in depth: 
              (1) One goal is to develop  improved methods for incompressible fluid dynamics
              in regions  with complicated moving elastic boundaries, based on a method of 
              Peskin's that is widely used in biophysical and physiological  modelling, e.g.,
              of the heart, blood vesssels, the inner ear,  etc.  (2) Wave equations in
              heterogeneous materials arise in  numerous applications, including ultrasound
              imaging and therapy,  ocean acoustics, and seismic p ropagation in the earth. 
              The  "forward problem" consists of solving the equations forward in  time given
              the material properties and locations of interfaces.   The harder "inverse
              problem" requires determining the material  properties and locations of
              interfaces from measurements made at  the surface.  Ultrasound imaging requires
              solving the inverse  problem for acoustics equations.  Seismic exploration of
              the  earth, heavily used in the search for oil, for example, requires  solving
              inverse problems for elastic wave equations or for  simplified travel-time
              equations.  The methods developed in this  work are applied to both forward and
              inverse problems.  (3) In  electrical impedance tomography, an inverse problem
              is solved for  the electrical conductivity of an object.  This technique is
              used  in medical imaging and is being studied for the purpose of  locating
              unexploded land mines, a major health risk in many  countries today.  Inverse
              problems of this type are being studied  in this work.  (4) Porous media
              equations arising in oil  reservoir simulation and groundwater transport
              requiremodeling  discontinuities in permeability and porosity at geological 
              interfaces, as well as moving front representing interfaces  between oil and
              water, for example.  Accurate modeling of  groundwater flow is important in
              studying contamination by toxic  wastes and remediation of contaminated sites. 
              (5) Multi-phase  solidification problems involve moving interfaces between the
              two  phases (e.g. ice and water) and may be coupled with fluid  dynamics
              effects as well as heat transfer.  Practical  applications include studying the
              effect of ocean currents on ice  shelves, injection molding in manufacturing
              processes, and  chemical etching.
