Title       : VPW: Sequence Stratigraphic Backstripping: Generating a Cenozoic Eustatic
               Sea-Level Curve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9626177

Award Number: 9626177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle A. Kominz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research establishes the magnitude and timing eustatic sea-  level for much
              of the Cenozoic by studying the subsidence of 3  thermal basins, The Baltimore
              Canyon Trough (offshore New Jersey),  The Northeast Gulf of Mexico and the
              North Sea Basin.  In each  location the eustatic component of accommodation
              space will be  separated from the tectonic and sediment components via a
              sequence  stratigraphic backstripping.  Procedure generation and study of the 
              North Sea Basin are funded by NSF grant EAR-9506572 to the P.I.,  Dr. Michelle
              Kominz.  Sequence stratigraphic data coupled with well  logs and crustal
              thicknesses will be the input.  Flexural  backstripping of this data produces
              accommodation space by removing  the effects of sediment loading.  Separation
              of the eustatic and  tectonic components of accommodation space will be
              possible based  on their unique temporal and spatial properties.  Forward
              modeling  of each basin is required to determine the effects of sediment on 
              the thermal history of the lithosphere and to determine the  flexural rigidity
              of the lithosphere as a function of time.   Finally, the eustatic results of
              each basin will be integrated to  remove regional tectonism and to obtain a
              Pre-Pleistocene Cenozoic  eustatic curve.     Interactive activities include:
              teaching upper level  undergraduate/graduate courses in Marine Geology and
              co-teaching a  graduate course on Sequence Stratigraphy and Backstripping.  In 
              addition, Dr. Kominz will present individual lectures or sets of  lectures in
              additional classes including Introduction to Marine  Science, Introductory
              Geology, Stratigraphy and Geophysics.
