Title       : Modeling Dynamic Processes in the Intracranial System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9626391

Award Number: 9626391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Lakin wlakin@together.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9263,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626391  Lakin       The investigator combines biomathematical modeling, 
              computation, scaling, asymptotics and perturbation techniques to  obtain a more
              complete understanding of basic physical mechanisms  associated with dynamic
              processes in the human intracranial  system.  A consistent, fully
              time-dependent, nonlinear lumped  parameter model describing interactions
              between pressures,  volumes, and flows in intracranial space is refined,
              validated,  and expanded to include additional physiology, such as 
              cerebrovascular autoregulation and links to the spinal  cerebrospinal fluid
              space.  First order processes and relevant  time scales are identified using
              scaling and asymptotic  techniques.  To achieve the higher resolution necessary
              to  consider focal events, dynamic modeling within compartments and  consistent
              linkage of sub-models with the rest of the lumped  parameter system is
              explored.  Computational methods and  strategies for efficient numerical
              solution of the nonlinear  model equations are developed.  In particular,
              results obtained  using hybrid asymptotic-numerical methods show great promise
              in  the present context where processes occur on disparate time  scales.      
              This project seeks to develop a realistic yet tractable  mathematical model for
              pressures and fluid flows in the human  brain.  Toward this end, the current
              model formulation is extended  to include additional human physiology, such as
              cerebrovascular  autoregulation, the mechanism which maintains the blood flow
              in  the brain necessary for adequate oxygen transfer in the face of 
              fluctuating blood pressure.  New hybrid solution techniques are  developed to
              carry out efficient and accurate computer  simulations of pressures and flows
              based on the model equations.  The enhanced model is also validated by
              comparing its  mathematical predictions with physiological data.  Situations 
              involving both normal and pathophysiology are studied.  This  research is part
              of an interdisciplinary effort involving both  applied mathema ticians and
              neurosurgeons.  Although the developing  mathematical model appears to have
              significant clinical utility  in situations involving pathology, clinical
              aspects are not  considered in the present research.  The focus is entirely on 
              increasing our basic understanding of pressures and flows in the  brain.  Once
              developed and validated, the enhanced mathematical  model will be useful to
              researchers studying applications  associated with biotechnology.  For example,
              regulation of the  vascular system in the brain plays a crucial role in
              conditions  such as trauma and stroke.  Currently, nitric oxide is emerging as 
              a key factor in adjusting brain blood flow.  The enhanced  mathematical model,
              which includes a vascular regulation  equation, can be used to study the effect
              of nitric oxide  synthase (NOS) inhibitors on the brain.  The development of
              NOS  inhibitors is a subject of great current interest to U.S.  biotechnology
              companies.
