Title       : Spectroscopic Characterization of Surfactant and Biopolymer Adsorption in
               Liquid/Liquid Interfaces and Chemically Modified Metal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9626607

Award Number: 9626607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Corn corn@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface  Chemistry
              Program, investigates the design and spectroscopic  characterization of
              monolayers formed by the adsorption of  surfactants, polypeptides and
              oligonucleotides at liquid/liquid  interfaces and at chemically modified metal
              surfaces.  During the  tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor
              Corn and  his students at the University of Wisconsin will utilize  molecular
              second harmonic generation (SHG) to probe  spectroscopically the structure of
              the liquid/liquid interface.   This information is useful for developing an
              understanding of ion  transport across biological membranes, for the design of
              systems  for DNA detection and identification, and for the control of 
              biomimetic systems formed from self-assembled monolayers.  The  tools and
              information developed in the course of this research  have wide application in
              a number of areas of fundamental  analytical technology.  Spectroscopic probes
              of the orientation of molecules adsorbed at  the liquid/liquid interface and in
              organic overlayers on metallic  surfaces are being developed in this research
              program.  Non-  linear laser spectroscopic probes, and reflection absorption 
              infrared and plasmon resonance spectroscopies are used to  investigate the
              orientation and structure of molecules at these  interfaces.  Information
              obtained from these studies will be  useful in the development of new
              analytical methodologies, as  well as forming a fundamental base for the
              exploitation of  biological models of information storage and computing.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
