Title       : Chaotic Systems: Reliability of Simulations and Interpretation of Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9626197

Award Number: 9626197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Sauer tsauer@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626197  Sauer       This research focuses on computational aspects of chaotic 
              dynamics, with emphasis on questions that have implications  across the
              sciences and engineering.  The first main area involves  the question of
              whether it is possible, even in principle, for  long-term computer simulations
              of typical nonhyperbolic chaotic  systems to approximately match true system
              behavior.  Part of this  research involves developing quantitative laws of the
              expected  waiting time between breakdowns, or mismatches, between computer 
              simulation trajectories and the trajectories of computer models.  The second
              major area is ongoing work by the investigator on the  interpretation of
              physical and biological experiments that  generate aperiodic time series. 
              Using univariate or multivariate  time series or inter-event time intervals
              produced by a  deterministic physical process, the phase space of the process 
              can be faithfully reconstructed as the basis for applications  such as system
              identification, filtering, prediction and control.  Topological and
              diffeomorphic embedding theorems guaranteeing  this in various physically
              verifiable contexts have been the  results of previous and ongoing research by
              the investigator and  coworkers.       Computer simulations are a staple of
              modern science.  National policy decisions are being made which rely partially
              on  the interpretation of long-term computer simulations of nonlinear  models. 
              The questions explored in the proposal are critical to  the analysis of
              simulations of nonlinear processes.  One goal of  this proposal is to explore
              these questions in physically  relevant models, and in particular to isolate
              and quantify the  limitations of these representations, especially for the
              purpose  of long-term modeling.  The second focus of this research is the 
              interpretation of data collected from chaotic systems in  experiments and
              nature.  Complex deterministic time series are  being identified in physical,
              chemical, engineering and  biological/medical setti ngs.  As an example,
              hippocampal slices  from mammals and other small neural systems are studied by
              the  investigator, in conjunction with a group of medical researchers  headed
              by a neurosurgeon specializing in epilepsy, with the  purpose of detecting
              deterministic information processing in the  brain.  The investigator has done
              previous work on expanding these  conceptual foundations and developing related
              computational  implementations, and works to widen their areas of validity and 
              increase their power for the study of complex systems in natural, 
              experimental, and engineering-related contexts.  New techniques  for these
              applications are developed in this project, involving  methods from numerical
              analysis used in conjunction with existing  signal processing methods.
