Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9626094

Award Number: 9626094
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Sherrill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Charles D. Sherrill has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Sherrill received the doctoral degree from   the
              University of Georgia under the supervision of Professor Henry   Schaefer.  Dr.
              Sherrill will continue research at the University of   California at Berkeley
              under the sponsorship of Professor Martin   Head-Gordon.  The postdoctoral
              research will focus on the investigation   of nonadiabatic energy flow between
              molecules and metal surfaces.  The   approach will take into account
              nuclear-electronic coupling to   investigate nonadiabatic effects on
              gas-surface sticking, diffusion, and   high energy scattering.  Also of
              interest is the process of laser-induced   desorption of gas molecules from
              metal surfaces, which involves   nonadiabatic energy transfer from conduction
              electrons to vibrational   modes of the adsorbate.  Studies are aided by
              high-quality experimental   data on laser-induced desorption now available. 
              The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an
              important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and
              experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
