Title       : Antarctic Geologic Database: Rock Data and Sample Rescue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1996  
File        : a9626819

Award Number: 9626819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Askin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626819  Askin    Abstract  This award supports the design, development, testing
              and  implementation of a computer database for Antarctic geological 
              collections, and to rescue Antarctic geologic data and samples.    There is an
              increasing sense of urgency within the US Antarctic  geologic community over
              the safe curation and accessibility of  rock and fossil collections and data
              acquired during research in  Antarctica.  There is concern over the loss of
              samples obtained  at great expense, including samples which are likely to be 
              valuable for new lines of investigation.  There is also concern  over
              minimizing negative environmental impacts of earth science  research in
              Antarctica, and over the availability of funding for  proper curation of
              samples in the future.  At present the lack of  a centralized curation facility
              for Antarctic samples greatly  inhibits potential use of existing samples for
              new projects.  Unpublished information about samples exists with individual 
              investigators but there has been no attempt to organize this for  the
              betterment of the science.  Development of a database is the  logical first
              step that must be taken toward more responsible  management of Antarctic rock
              and fossil materials.    The Antarctic Geologic Database will be a
              user-friendly system  accessible to the geologic community on Macintosh and
              IBM-based  personal computers via the World-Wide-Web.  It will allow easy 
              search, retrieval and loading of geologic information collected  by US
              geologists in Antarctica.  The design will be based on the  on-line archiving
              and cataloging system for the Synthetic  Aperture Radar images and data in the
              Remote Sensing Laboratory  at Byrd Polar Research Center, but will be
              specifically designed  to handle Antarctic and geologic requirements and
              information.  It will incorporate the best ideas of museum collections 
              management systems and rock repository databases currently used  in the Orton
              Geological Museum at the Ohio State University and  elsewhere in the USA and
              ove rseas.
