Title       : Non-Axial Muscle Stress & Stiffness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9626736

Award Number: 9626736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221668             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Zahalak giz@me.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626736  Zahalak  Striated muscle, whether found in the limb musculature or 
              muscular organs like the diaphragm and the heart, is composed of  thin
              elongated living cells called muscle fibers.  It has been  assumed, almost
              invariably, that such muscle functions as a  uniaxial force generator,
              producing forces and experiences length  changes in the direction of the
              fibers.  With rare exceptions,  experimental investigations of muscle mechanics
              have focused on  contractions and forces in the fiber directions, and all
              current  theories assume that when embedded in a mass of contractile  tissue
              muscle fibers behave exactly as measured in uniaxial  experiments.  But at
              least one class of experiments--those  involving osmotically-induced expansion
              and compression  transverse to the fibers--suggest that non-axial deformations
              of  contractile tissue can greatly reduce muscle force.  At present  there
              exists no method for estimating quantitatively the effects  of non-axial
              deformations, which occur often in normal  physiological function, on the
              active stresses generated by  striated muscle.    The goal of this research is
              to develop a quantitative theory of  non-axial deformation effects in muscle. 
              The proposed theory is  a generalization of the well established mathematical
              theory of  muscle contraction at the molecular level, first formulated by  the
              English biophysicist, A.F. Huxley.  Successful completion of  this work will
              have important implications at both the levels of  applied biomechanics and
              fundamental biophysics.  At the applied  level, an ability to predict
              quantitatively the effects of non-  axial deformations on active muscle stress
              will clearly identify  the circumstances when these effects are important and
              when they  am not, and lead to improved descriptions of muscle function in 
              studies of locomotion, motor control, cardiac mechanics,  respiratory
              mechanics, and related problems.  At the level of  basic biophysics, such a
              quantitative theory may suggest some non-  traditional exper iments--for
              example, those involving axial  shear, transverse shear, or torsion--that will
              provide now  information about the fundamental molecular mechanisms of muscle 
              contraction.  ***
