Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Algebraic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1997   
File        : a9626639

Award Number: 9626639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome P. Levine levine@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edgar H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kiyoshi Igusa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Ruberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626639  Levine       Daniel Ruberman will continue to investigate applications
              of gauge   theory to the topology of four-manifolds. One application is to use 
               Seiberg-Witten equations to describe bounds on the genus of a surface  
              representing a homology class of negative self-intersection.  A second is   to
              use the Seiberg-Witten invariants to give an obstruction to isotopy of 
              diffeomorphisms of certain reducible four-manifolds.  Other projects   involve
              a computation of Casson's invariant in terms of the Yang-Mills   moduli space,
              and joint work with Z. Bizacka on ends of smooth 4-manifolds.  Kiyoshi Igusa
              will study the relationship between the higher Reidemeister   torsion
              invariants (algebraic K-theory invariants associated to the   diffeomorphism
              space of a smooth manifold) and analytically defined   invariants such as the
              Kontsevich integral and the Lott-Bismut analytic   torsion.  Using his
              complexified version of Bokstedt's theorem, he plans to  relate the topology of
              circular and planar oriented graphs to algebraic   K-theory.  The methods to be
              used are Morse theory, algebraic K-theory and   cyclic homology.  Jerome Levine
              will continue his joint study, with   S. Garoufalidis, of finite-type
              invariants of homology 3-spheres, in   particular, their relationship with
              filtrations of various subgroups of the   mapping class group of a surface.  He
              will continue to study the Morse theory   of harmonic 1-forms, in particular,
              the question: for every closed Morse   1-form, is there a harmonic 1-form with
              the same critical points and in the   same cohomology class?  The next case to
              consider is when the associated   foliation has all compact leaves.  He will
              also continue to study invariants   of manifolds arising from previous work on
              jumps of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer   eta-invariant and return to questions about
              link concordance.  Edgar Brown   will attempt to extend his previous work on
              rational homotopy theory to the   mod-p setting, in particular, the
              construction of a minimal model f or   function spaces.  He also plans to study
              the Steenrod operations in an   algebraic setting and the construction of
              minimal models.       To put it less technically, Daniel Ruberman's project is
              concerned with   properties of four-dimensional spaces called manifolds.  Among
              the questions   under study are the existence and geometrical properties of
              two-dimensional   surfaces sitting inside a four-dimensional manifold. 
              Ruberman will also   investigate symmetries of four-dimensional spaces in order
              to determine when   a pair of symmetries can be joined by a one-parameter
              family of symmetries.    The approach to these investigations is via the
              Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten   equations of mathematical physics, which arise
              in studies of the fundamental   particles.  There are several formulas coming
              from various branches of   mathematics and physics that are known to represent
              the same geometric   phenomena that are manifested in many ways, ranging from
              the circles and   lines in the plane to the equations of gravity.  Using his
              knowledge of these   methods, Kiyoshi Igusa will be investigating the
              relationship between these   formulas.  Jerome Levine will be working to
              determine those invariants of   3-dimensional manifolds that are computable in
              a very explicit sense and that   seem to be closely related to invariants
              coming from quantum field theory.  Edgar Brown will be studying various
              algebraic models of spaces that   capture many of their properties but are
              easier to manipulate and understand.  ***
