Title       : The Nucleation of Supersaturated Vapors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9626661

Award Number: 9626661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Katz jlk@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Joseph L. Katz  Johns Hopkins University  CTS-9626661    The goal of
              this continuing research project is to provide a better understanding of
              nucleation processes, and to allow one to make accurate quantitative
              predictions.  The research focuses on three complementary fields of
              investigation;  ion-induced nucleation, homogeneous nucleation of metal vapors,
              and heterogeneous nucleation of water vapor onto uniform surfaces.    Efforts
              in ion-induced nucleation have resulted in the development of a method for
              measuring nucleation rates under conditions where all the important variables
              (supersaturation, temperature, and ion density) are accurately measurable and
              all can be varied.  Initial measurements on n-Nonane have been made. 
              Measurements now will be made on several substances for which ions have a much
              larger nucleation propensity.  These will begin with substances with
              significant dipole moments (1-Pentanol as well as 1-Butanol and 1-Hexanol), and
              will be followed by measurements on substances with significant quadrupole
              moments (Benzene, p-Xylene).    A second major effort is the homogeneous
              nucleation of metal vapors.  Metals in their dilute vapor state are
              non-metallic.  Thus there has to be a non-metal to metal transition which is a
              function of cluster size.  Nucleation studies of metal vapors enable the study
              of this size dependent non-metal to metal transition and also the testing of
              the validity of nucleation theories when they are applied to a class of
              substances which are very different from any studied until now.  This part of
              the project involves collaboration with a research group in Marburg, Germany,
              and to date has focused on the homogeneous nucleation of Cesium vapor.  Results
              obtained thus far suggest that a smooth non-metal to metal transition is being
              observed.  These measurements will be extended to higher temperatures, since
              critical cluster sizes then will be much larger and thus closer to being fully
              metallic.  The homogeneous nucleation of Rubidium then wil l be investigated
              and will be followed by measurements on Cadmium and Mercury, substances which
              are known to have more sharply size-dependent non-metal to metal transitions.  
               The third major effort is the heterogeneous nucleation of water vapor onto the
              surface of water insoluble liquids.  By investigating heterogeneous nucleation
              onto a liquid substrate one takes advantage of the uniformity of the
              substrate's surface properties, thus avoiding many of the uncertainties
              encountered in heterogeneous nucleation onto solid surfaces.  Even more
              important, all surface free energies needed to characterize this process (the
              interfacial tension between the condensing liquid and the liquid that it is
              condensing onto, and the surface tension of each liquid) are experimentally
              measurable.  The critical supersaturations required for water nucleation onto
              Dodecane and Hexadecane will be determined and compared to theory.
