Title       : Iterative Algorithms for the P-Version of the Finite Element Method: Parallel
               Multi-P
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1999   
File        : a9626202

Award Number: 9626202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: I. Norman Katz katz@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626202  Katz       The p and h-p versions of the finite element method are now 
              firmly established as important methods for finite element  analysis (FEA).  A
              major part of the computational burden in FEA  is the solution of the assembled
              system of equations.  Current  practical problems, particularly those in three
              (or higher)  dimensions, may require the determination of hundreds of 
              thousands, even millions of unknowns.  Such problems cannot be  solved on
              serial computers because of excessive computation time  and memory
              requirements.  Implementation on parallel processors  is indispensable because
              of time requirements.  Iterative methods  are indispensable because of memory
              requirements.  Whereas  iterative methods for the h-version of FEA have long
              been the  object of much investigation (e.g. domain decomposition, 
              multi-grid), relatively little is known about iterative schemes  for the
              p-version.  This research addresses that problem.  Multi-p methods can be used
              independently as smoothers, or as  preconditioners for other iterations such as
              conjugate gradient.  The term multi-p processes includes both approaches.  This
               research develops multi-p V cycle methods with particular  emphasis on
              problems in 3D.  Parallelization with respect to both  computation costs, costs
              of communication among processors, and  costs of using auxiliary memory are
              considered.  The use of  multi-p algorithms as preconditioners, which currently
              shows  great promise for 2D problems, is a major area of study.  The  ultimate
              objective of the research is to make the p-version of  FEA a practical tool for
              large scale problems.       Modern engineering design relies heavily on
              computer  simulations, and specifically on high-performance computing.  For 
              example, in structural elastic analysis, it is necessary to solve  (sometimes
              nonlinear) partial differential equations on  complicated geometries.  To solve
              such partial differential  equations numerically on computers, discretization
              techniques are  used.  Such discr etizations may involve thousands or hundreds
              of  thousands unknowns and efficient numerical methods are  indispensable.  The
              numerical techniques being developed in this  project lead to procedures that
              assure the reliability of  engineering decisions based on high-performance
              computing.  The  algorithms being formulated permits solution of (nonlinear) 
              mathematical models in diverse areas including those used in  aircraft and
              automobile structural design, determining elastic  properties of the human
              heart, study of boundary layer effects in  composite materials, and fatigue
              life analysis.
