Title       : Families of Curves on Algebraic Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9626888

Award Number: 9626888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Harris harris@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Harris    The investigator will study the geometry of plane curves, and
              specifically the Severi varieties papametrizing plane curves having given
              degree and genus and satisfying additional geometric conditions. This will
              proceed in three directions. First, the investigator will extend existing work
              on irreducibility and degree of Severi varieties to varieties parametrizing
              plane curves with singularities other than nodes. Second, he will apply
              recently developed techniques to describe certain hyperplane sections of these
              varieties, with possible applications to questions (such as the Enriques
              conjecture) concerning the Picard groups of these varieties and of the
              universal curves over them. Finally, the investigator will attempt to use the
              same ideas to analyze a related question, that of the dimension of the linear
              series of plane curves with singularities at assigned general points.    This
              is research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry deals with
              very basic objects, figures that can be defined in the plane and in space by
              the simplest equations, namely polynomialsis. It is thus one of the oldest
              parts of modern mathematics--it was studied, for example by the ancient Greeks.
              At the same time it is one of the newest, having had a revolutionary flowering
              in the past quarter-century. Within algebraic geometry, perhaps the most basic
              and most thoroughly studied subject is that of algebraic curves, that is,
              curves in the plane defined by a single polynomial equation in two variables.
              For all the work that has been done on these objects classically, however, our
              understanding of them is still developing, and at a rapid pace; it is a very
              active field of investigation.
