Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Experimental Tool for Topological Surface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9626884

Award Number: 9626884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Menasco menasco@tait.math.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Ringland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626884  Menasco       The investigators develop a computer program for studying
               topological properties of maps of punctured surfaces.  A central  component of
              the software tool is the Bestvina-Handel algorithm  for the Thurston-Nielsen
              classification of surface  homoeomorphisms, which yields not only the
              classification, but  also a canonical representative - a "train-track map" - of
              the  isotopy class to which the homeomorphism belongs.  Experimentation  in
              this field, essential to the formulation of theorems and  conjectures, is
              currently hampered by the very large amount of  labor entailed in classifying
              and analyzing even a single example  of a surface homeomorphism.  The software
              removes this roadblock.  It allows the researcher to rapidly generate
              train-track maps,  and representations and characterizations (both algebraic
              and  graphical) of their suspensions.  The software is made available  via the
              World Wide Web.       One studies dynamical systems to explain and make 
              predictions about a vast range of phenomena, from the motions of  the stars and
              planets, to the circulation of the Earth's  atmosphere, to the behavior of
              machinery such as drilling rigs  and human hearts, to the self-propulsion of
              bacteria.  In  describing such phenomena, which are repetitive in character, 
              models in the form of iterated maps from some space to itself  frequently have
              great explanatory and predictive power.  Perhaps  the simplest class of
              realistic models is that of continuous maps  of two-dimensional surfaces.  Even
              simple members of this class  can exhibit a bewildering complexity of behavior,
              and many  questions about these systems have yet to be answered.  Maps of 
              punctured surfaces are of interest because of their bearing on  the
              relationships among periodic orbits and on long-standing  problems of the
              theory of knots.  The purpose of this project is  to develop a software tool
              for experimentation in the topological  properties of maps of punctured
              surfaces.  Topological properties,  those that ar e persistent under
              distortions of the surface or  map, are the most fundamental.  The software is
              made available via  the World Wide Web.
