Title       : Nonlinear Differential Equations & Linear Equations in Physiology & Cell
               Biology.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9626728

Award Number: 9626728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Bard Ermentrout bard@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1022,1096,9107,9263,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ermentrout  9626728       The investigator continues his work on the
              applications of  nonlinear dynamics to cell biology and physiology.  He studies
               the effects of dendritic, axonal, and synaptic delays on the  behavior of
              coupled neural oscillators.  He develops and analyzes  models of neural
              oscillators in the presence of noise.  He  proposes and analyzes a variety of
              models for synaptic wave  propagation in neural tissue including:       1. 
              Systematic numerical exploration of models for spindle  waves in the nucleus
              reticularis.  Software developed in the  previous grant is capable of
              interactively solving these  integrodifferential equations.       2.  Analysis
              of synaptically induced bistability; how do  synaptic time constants and
              synaptic strengths effect the ability  of a group of synapses to maintain two
              modes of behavior: resting  and oscillatory       3.  Formal reduction of
              synaptically coupled biophysical  models to simplified models that are
              tractable to mathematical  analysis.  Both synaptic and intrinsic slow currents
              are  incorporated in these models.       4.  Rigorous and formal mathematical
              analysis of the above  reduced models with particular attention to maintaining 
              quantitative similarity to the full equations.       He extends his model of
              vasomotion in collaboration with Dr.  Jose Gonzalez-Fernandez to incorporate
              spatial aspects and  coupling via the tissue bed.  The goal is an explanation
              for the  classic results of Krogh on recruitment of capillaries and to 
              understand the dynamic regulation of blood flow at the  microvascular level. 
              He and Gonzalez-Fernandez intend to compare  the results with some recent data
              of Segal's as well as older  studies.  As a side benefit, they hope to develop
              some new methods  for analyzing systems of oscillators coupled though spatially
               continuous, but nonoscillatory media.  He continues his  collaboration with
              George Oster, using prior results on linear  molecular motors and rotary motors
              to develop and analyze models  of (i) the p ortal protein of bacteriophages,
              (ii) proton-driven  motors, (iii) proton pumps.  He collaborates with Leah 
              Edelstein-Keshet on models for distribution of the lengths of  actin filaments
              and their spatial variation within the cell.       This work attempts to apply
              mathematical methods to aid in  the understanding of physiological rhythms. 
              Many human  biological processes are governed by waxing and waning of 
              different quantities.  Some examples are the voltage of the heart  pacemaker,
              the regular drifting in and out of different brain  states during sleep and the
              control of oxygen flow in muscles by  rhythmic contractions of small arteries
              during periods of  exercise.  The approach of this work is to use computer and 
              mathematical models.  Computing tools and tools for the  visualization of
              simulations are developed as part of this work.  The main goal is to use the
              models to bridge the gap between  details about the microscopic workings of
              cells and their  consequences for behavior.   For example, when muscles work
              hard,  they consume oxygen and thus need more oxygen from the arteries.  Within
              the cells that form the arteries are special gates that  sense the amount of
              "fuel" so that as this fuel decreases, the  gates tell the artery to open up. 
              This feedback loop provides a  way to dynamically alter the rhythm of the
              artery in order to  insure that the tissue is evenly oxygenated.  Thus, by
              starting  at the microscopic level of these gates or channels, a model is 
              built that can explain how the consumption of oxygen is regulated  in tissues. 
              Another example occurs in the nervous system.  Information from different parts
              of the brain is transmitted  through special connections between nerve cells
              called synapses.  Reaction times and cognitive abilities depend on the speed of
               this propagation as well as the prevention of propagation into  other regions
              of the brain.  Much is known about the reactions of  individual nerve cells to
              stimuli.  Models provide a way of  coupling many such cells  together in order
              to understand the  behavioral consequences of the individual cell properties. 
              Is  the whole greater than the sum of the parts?  The goal of this  proposal is
              to try to answer this question for a variety of  rhythmically controlled
              physiological processes.
