Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9626633

Award Number: 9626633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mladen Bestvina bestvina@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Kapovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626633  Bestvina       The goal of this project is to understand large-scale
              geometry of  spaces of nonpositive curvature, boundaries of finitely generated 
              groups and groups of automorphisms of free groups of finite rank.  Other
              directions of research are study of configuration spaces of  line arrangements
              and mechanical linkages in homogeneous metric  spaces in relation with the
              representation theory of certain classes  of finitely generated groups (Artin
              and Coxeter groups) and  investigation of the ``Riemann-Hilbert problem'' from
              the  topological point of view.       The project focuses in part on the
              structure of symmetries of  objects naturally arising in geometry, algebra, and
              differential  equations.  The ancient Greeks understood symmetries of Platonic 
              solids, e.g., a cube.  Platonic solids are positively curved, and they  have a
              finite number of symmetries.  At the opposite end of the  spectrum are
              negatively curved objects, such as the Lobachevsky  hyperbolic plane (featured
              frequently in Escher paintings), and  these typically have infinitely many
              symmetries.  Consequently, the  structure of these symmetries is both more
              interesting and harder to  understand.       Another part of the project is the
              study of linkages.  These are  mechanical devices constructed from rigid rods
              connected at joints.  It is a classical problem to describe the possible shapes
              traced out  by an end of a linkage after affixing another end with a nail.  For
               example, a compass can be regarded as a (very simple) linkage, and it  traces
              out a circle.  This project explores the surprising  relationship between the
              shapes traced out by a linkage and  certain symmetries of spaces of solutions
              of algebraic equations.       The final part of the project is concerned with
              symmetries arising  from a system of differential equations.  ***
