Title       : Computational Methods in Mathematics and the Physical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9626804

Award Number: 9626804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Norman norman@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Franz Pedit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kusner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Meeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Markos A. Katsoulakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathaniel Whitaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Norman  9626804       The investigator and his colleagues pursue
              interdisciplinary research and training in an environment supporting modern
              scientific computation and advanced computer graphics.  The areas  of
              investigation involve partial differential equations, integrable systems, and
              variational problems in geometry and topology.  Particular topics include: spin
              structures on surfaces  with applications to the geometry of immersions,
              particularly to rigidity and period problems; surfaces that minimize bending
              energy subject to natural constraints; the moduli spaces of  constant mean
              curvature embeddings and immersions, using mechanics, symplectic geometry and
              integrable systems; construction of embedded minimal surfaces by
              desingularizing  immersed minimal surfaces; elastic curves and their higher
              order soliton analogues; electrostatic energies associated with knots and
              links, and the behavior of their gradient flows; curve and  surface interfaces
              between distinct thermodynamic phases in disequilibrium; and statistical
              equilibrium solutions to the Euler equations for incompressible fluid flow.    
                  The Center for Geometry, Analysis, Numerics & Graphics (GANG) pursues
              interdisciplinary research and training in an environment supporting modern
              scientific computation and advanced computer graphics.  The mathematical work
              at GANG is motivated by - and can shed light upon - many interesting natural
              systems that arise in both "applied" and "basic" research.  For example, the
              folding and entanglement of long molecules, like proteins, DNA or synthetic
              polymers, can be dynamically modeled using elastic and electrostatic curve
              energies that were originally developed at GANG to study the geometry and
              topology of knots and links; such models may be useful in predicting the
              strength of polymer materials or the biochemical effect of pharmaceuticals. 
              And a quite unexpected and fundamental new phenomenon - the "conformal
              diffusion" of tiny phospholipid vesicles, reported by French physicists in the
              Augu st 1995 issue of Science - was stimulated by work at GANG on the bending
              energy of surfaces.  The computation and visualization facilities at the GANG
              laboratory serve an important and interrelated triple duty by permitting the
              pioneering mathematical experiments to be carried out in the first place,
              providing a fertile environment for the education and training of students, and
              aiding communication with the general public (to paraphrase the late physicist,
              Eugene Wigner) on the remarkable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
              world.
