Title       : Evaluation and Application of the ETA Adjoint Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9626380

Award Number: 9626380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126068             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Horel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9626380  Horel        The National Science Foundation and the National Oceanic
              and Atmospheric   Administration (NOAA) have established a joint program to
              support research of  mutual interest.  Generally, research supported under this
              program involves activities  that are interesting research efforts, address a
              need of NOAA, and ones that can  benefit from the resources and computer models
              of the NOAA National Center for  Environmental Predictions.        This
              research will be supported under this joint program and is aimed at  evaluating
              and using the NOAA Eta forecast model and its associated adjoint model  that
              have been developed at the NOAA NCEP.  The ongoing development of the 
              mesoscale Eta model makes it possible to evaluate mesoscale weather phenomena 
              that have not been adequately documented before, especially in the western
              United  States, where mesoscale atmospheric motions are tightly coupled to the
              underlying  complex terrain. The Principal Investigator will build and expand
              on research  underway now and continue to evaluate the performance of the
              mesoscale Eta modal  over the Western United States.        The adjoint of the
              Eta model has been developed at NCEP for using an  advanced data assimilation
              method know as 4-dimensional variational (4DVAR) data  assimilation.  4DVAR
              assimilation has been shown in several case studies to lead to  improved
              forecast skill for Eta model forecasts.  As this data assimilation procedure 
              begins to be tested on a routine basis at NCEP, additional information will be 
              available to model developers and, eventually, operational personnel regarding
              the  sensitivity of the model forecasts to initial observational error and
              other factors.  The  major goal of the proposed work is to participate in the
              development and application  of the Eta adjoint model and associated data
              assimilation methods.  Specifically, the  solutions in terms of both the
              initial conditions and adjoint sensitivities obtained as  part of the data
              assimilation method will be evalua ted as a function of differing  synoptic
              situations.  ***
