Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorial and Measure-Theoretic Structure of
               Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9626303

Award Number: 9626303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander M. Blokh ablokh@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Blokh      We study attractors in the sense of Milnor in complex
              dynamics and for piecewise-continuous interval maps. The latter requires the
              proof of the absence of wandering intervals for such maps as well as developing
              for them new analytical and dynamical methods. In the case of
              polynomial/rational maps we hope to combine ideas which led to the solution of
              the problem in question for smooth interval maps with tools from complex
              dynamics. We plan to work on the specification property and the space of limit
              sets with Hausdorff metric. Also we pose the problem of introducing new kinds
              of rotation numbers for orbit portraits of quadratic maps. A series of problems
              deals with the growth of pointwise itineraries, multipliers at periodic points
              and Lyapunov exponents in smooth families of interval maps. Another topic is
              studying rotation numbers for one-dimensional maps. We define rotation numbers
              as ergodic averages of a function. A specific choice of this function allows
              one to compute the union of all rotation numbers in interval case. This
              generalizes the Sharkovskii theorem and gives rise to a number of problems
              (connections to surface and graph/tree dynamics, rotation sets with respect to
              a periodic orbit, forcing relation, analogs of circle rotations and their
              connection with Fibonacci maps, growth and typical behavior of the rotation set
              in spaces of smooth interval maps in connection with the problem of
              hyperbolicity of a typical map, the monotonicity of the entropy in one- and
              multi-parameter families including unimodal families and cubic family).   
              Dynamical systems theory describes processes that develop over time. In
              particular, dynamical systems arise in physics (Lorenz map), biology and
              environmental studies (population dynamics) and chemistry (e.g. modeling the
              Belousov-Zhabotinskii reaction). The development of the system depends on its
              initial state and parameters coming from the "environment."  It is of great
              importance that we understand the future behavior which may  be exhibited by
              the system for the "majority" of its initial states; this corresponds to the
              description of so-called attractors to which the first part of the project is
              devoted. Also in the first part of the proposal we study how properties of some
              important dynamical systems depend on "environmental" parameters. Sometimes
              phenomena exhibited by a system are related to one another and information
              about some of them allows one to make a judgment about the existence of others;
              in other words phenomena coexist. A good example here is periodicity, i.e.
              cyclic occurrence of the same states in the system. It turns out that the
              existence of a cyclic process with a given period for some initial state
              guarantees that another cyclic process with a different period can be realized
              for a different initial state and the same environment.  In the second part of
              the project we plan to thoroughly study this relationship between different
              periods of cyclic processes in the same system.
