Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory and Its Geometric Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1998    
File        : a9626856

Award Number: 9626856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Marker marker@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626856  Marker       In studying the real numbers with exponentiation, van den
              Dries,  Macintyre and Marker gave an algebraic construction of a nonstandard 
              model.  This model has proved useful in understanding the asymptotic  behavior
              of functions.  Marker's work concentrates on the relationship  between formally
              solving differential equations in this model and the  problem of finding actual
              solutions at infinity.  Marker will also  work on problems in the model theory
              of differential fields.  This is  a fascinating area, requiring a sophisticated
              mixture of ideas from  model theory, differential algebra and algebraic
              geometry.  (Through  the work of Buium and Hrushovski, differential algebra has
              had  significant number theoretic applications.)  Marker studies the  geometry
              of solutions to algebraic differential equations,  concentrating on the use of
              model theoretic dimensions to develop  intersection theory.       Model theory
              is a branch of mathematical logic where one studies  mathematical structures by
              looking at their properties expressed in  formal languages.  For example, in
              the real numbers one can say that  every number is a cube, but one cannot say
              that every bounded set has  a least upper bound.  Nonstandard models of the
              real numbers share all  their formal properties.  Studying nonstandard models
              often leads to  fresh insights into the real numbers themselves.  Recently,
              model  theorists have been studying the exponential function.  These 
              investigations have led to important new insights into the geometry of 
              solution sets of equations involving exponentials.  This work has  already
              found applications in analysis, control theory and neural  networks.  ***
