Title       : Computation of Periodic Orbits and Verification of Chaos in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9626211

Award Number: 9626211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Huseyin Kocak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleague use the technique of  shadowing to devise
              rigorous computational methods for chaotic  dynamical systems.  In particular,
              they develop algorithms for the  determination of periodic orbits and their
              Lyapunov exponents.  Given the significant role the stable and unstable
              manifolds of  periodic orbits play in determining the global dynamics, a method
               to compute these manifolds reliably is developed.  Moreover, they  develop a
              method of establishing chaotic behavior just from finite  computed orbits and
              an algorithm for measuring sensitivity to  initial data, which is the hallmark
              of chaos.  All the  computational algorithms are developed in the context of 
              autonomous ordinary differential equations.    Despite the recent major
              advances in dynamical systems  theory, analysis of specific equations arising
              in applications  must still largely rely on numerical computations.  Therefore,
              it  is important to devise computational techniques whose reliability  can be
              verified.  Indispensability of rigor is particularly acute  in the numerical
              studies of chaotic systems, which naturally  amplify even small computational
              errors.  Chaotic systems possess,  in the mist of bewildering complexity, many
              unstable periodic  orbits.  The main goal of the project is to develop
              computational  methods for locating such periodic orbits and their associated 
              structures.  Periodic orbits of chaotic systems, although  unstable, are of
              practical significance in, for example, designing  flight paths for spacecraft.
               The investigators are beginning to  cooperate with Jet Propulsion Laboratory
              scientists on efficient  and reliable computations of suitable paths.
