Title       : Polymeric Surfactants in Supercritical Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9626828

Award Number: 9626828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith P. Johnston kpj@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9626828  Johnston    The objectives are (1) to combine experiment and theory to
              provide a fundamental understanding of the effects of surfactants on
              interfacial properties in systems containing compresses carbon dioxide, and (2)
              to use these surfactants as steric stabilizers to form uniformly sized polymer
              microparticles and microfibers by precipitation into carbon dioxide.    Carbon
              dioxide is an environmentally benign solvent that is being used to replace
              organic solvents for waste minimization.  In future materials formation and
              heterogeneous polymerization processes, surfactants will play an important
              role.  Because Co2 has very different properties than either hydrophilic or
              lipophilic solvents, innovative new types of surfactants will be required.   
              The interfacial tension between liquids and carbon dioxide, and the adsorption
              of surfactants at these interfaces, will be measured with a novel tandem
              variable-volume tensionmeter for the first time and also calculated with a new
              lattice fluid self-consistent field model.  The experimental studies and the
              model will be used to design polymeric surfactants at the molecular level to
              stabilize the interface between Co2 and liquids of varying polarity including
              water, and oligomers of poly(ethylene glycol), polyacrylates and polystyrene. 
              The solvation of polymer chains by supercritical fluids will be studied by
              Monte Carlo computer simulation.  Specifically, the transition from solvated
              chains to collapsed chains with the approach to a lower critical solution
              temperature phase boundary will be determined.    The above fundamental
              knowledge will be used to design surfactants to produce polymeric materials by
              precipitation into liquid and supercritical fluid carbon dioxide.  Here, a
              polymer solution is sprayed through a capillary into CO2 to precipitate
              microparticles, microspheres, and microfibers, with dimensions as small as
              100nm.  The surfactant will sterically stabilize the precipitating polymer
              microstructure to minimize flocculation and agg lomeration, which is often a
              major limitation in the current technology.      Interfacial properties play a
              key role in materials formation processes and heterogeneous polymerizations. 
              Surfactant adsorption has not yet been addresses for CO2 soluble surfactants. 
              The interfacial tension and adsorption influence many phenomena including
              nucleation, growth, stability and coalescence of dispersed phases, atomization
              of sprays, and fiber formation from sprays.  A knowledge of surfactant
              adsorption at CO2 liquid interfaces will be high beneficial to both fundamental
              studies of these phenomena and the development of new materials formation and
              polymerization processes.  ***
