Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Superstability in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1999   
File        : a9626112

Award Number: 9626112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48324              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Schmerl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ambar Chowdhury  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    DMS 9626112   Ambar Chowdhury, U. Connecticut    Classification
              theory is concerned with determining whether a given class of mathematical
              objects admits a "structure theory".  In the best cases, a structure theory
              assigns certain dimensions which determine each object in the class up to
              isomorphism.  The class of vector spaces over a given field, with the usual
              notion of dimension, is a simple example of a good case.  More generally a
              structure theory aims to describe how each member of the class is built from
              smaller objects in the same class, or even from simpler objects belonging to a
              second, well understood class.  Shelah has isolated certain properties of a
              countable, complete first order theory which are necessary and sufficient for
              the class models of T to admit a structure theory.  One key property is that of
              being superstable, a guarantee that certain subsets of the models of T can be
              viewed as pregeometries, and thus carry the desired dimensions.  Investigating
              the precise nature of the aforementioned pregeometries, and the way in which
              they interact, can yield very deep information about the fine structure of the
              models; such investigation has become known as geometric stability theory. 
              Chowdhuiy will apply the methods of geometric stability theory to gain further
              information about superstable theories.  In particular, his work is aimed at
              extending Shelah's classification results to uncountable theories.  This should
              result in new structural information regarding the models of superstable
              theories, countable or not.  In addition, Chowdhury plans to examine which
              properties of superstable theories can be generalised to a broader class,
              called supersimple theories.  Supersimple theories, though not necessarily
              stable, exhibit some of the important characteristics of superstable theories. 
                    In model theory one studies those mathematical objects (called 'models")
              which satisfy a given collection of axioms.  While one may think of a group as
              the set of transformations , or symmetries, of a particular object - such as an
              organic molecule, the general class of objects known as groups are precisely
              the models of the three group axioms.  In algebra, one attempts to understand
              complicated objects (e.g., groups) in terms of how they are built from
              well-understood objects; when this succeeds, this is called a "structure
              theory".  In model theory, one considers a general set of axioms and the
              collection of models, and asks whether there are properties inherent in the set
              of axioms which guarantee the existence of a structure theory.  Rather
              remarkably, it turns out that certain abstract properties of a set of axioms do
              indeed imply certain structural features for the corresponding objects; one
              such property is called "superstability".  The principal investigator proposes
              to continue the study of superstability (and its variations) and of its
              structural implications for a broader array of objects, one which includes
              interesting and important mathematical classes.
