Title       : Nonparametric Estimation in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9626762

Award Number: 9626762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Ruppert davidr@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626762  Ruppert    The research is on nonparametric estimation of
              conditional  expectations, conditional variances, and conditional densities,
              i.e.,  estimation without assuming that these functions belong to a  parametric
              family.  The work uses local regression, a particularly  simple and effective
              nonparametric method, where one fits parametric  models locally at each point
              in the domain of the function in order to  estimate the function at that point.
               By varying the point one achieves  a globally nonparametric estimator.  The
              degree of  "localness" is  achieved by a bandwidth or smoothing parameter.  The
              work includes (a)  multivariate local polynomial regression where the local
              neighborhoods  are determined by a symmetric, positive definite bandwidth
              matrix that  must be estimated; (b) non-polynomial local models for estimating 
              functions with poles, jump discontinuities, or discontinuous  derivatives; and
              (c) semiparametric estimation of correlation functions  and other functions of
              scientific interest by local fitting of  estimating equations.  %%%  Present
              applications of this research on nonparametric estimation are  mostly in
              engineering but include nutrition.  These applications  include
              density-estimation radiosity in computer graphics, analysis of  simulation data
              from the pdf method of modeling turbulence, estimating  volatilities in
              financial engineering, combining local regression  smoothing and kriging for
              spatial data analysis, and modeling the  correlation between nutrient uptake as
              measured by both food frequency  questionnaires and more accurate, but also
              more expensive, food records.  In the strategic area of environmental science,
              this work has been  applied to two very different methods of monitoring air
              pollution,  LIDAR and biomonitoring.  ***
