Title       : Development and Analysis of Models for the Spread and Control of Weeds and
               Infectious Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9626417

Award Number: 9626417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. S. Allen lallen@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McGinley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Allen  9626417       The goals of this research involve two different but
              related  biological areas; one area is weed control and the other is  control
              of infectious diseases.  By their very nature, weeds and  infectious disease
              agents are unwanted invaders in a host system;  their introduction frequently
              has adverse effects.  Practical  methods for control of weeds and infectious
              diseases are under  continual research and development.  However, there is a
              need for  theoretical justification and predictability of these control 
              procedures.  This project develops and analyzes mathematical  models that
              provide quantitive and qualitative means for  evaluation of these control
              procedures.  Integrodifference  equations provide a realistic starting point
              for modeling the  biological dynamics of these two processes; the time variable
              is  discrete but the spatial and state variables are continuous.  Discrete-time
              models describe plant populations whose generations  are nonoverlapping and
              epidemics where the observation of cases  or the seasonal movement and
              population densities of animals  relate to the discrete time interval. 
              Mathematical models for  weeds and infectious diseases are analyzed to
              determine the  effects of spatial dispersal, age or stage structure, 
              multi-population interactions, and general growth assumptions on  model
              behavior.  Two important questions are addressed: (i) How  fast does the weed
              or disease spread? and, (ii) What are the  short- and long-term effects of a
              control procedure?       Determining effective control procedures for weeds and
               infectious diseases has become a significant global environmental  problem. 
              Around the world, native plant communities are being  displaced by nonnative
              plants and enzootic wildlife diseases are  becoming a threat to humans.  In
              particular, agricultural land and  rangeland, where the native plant community
              structure has been  altered, are especially vulnerable to invasions by
              introduced  plant species.  Humans living in close proximity to  an animal 
              reservoir of a disease are at an increased risk of contracting  the disease. 
              It is the goal of this research to apply the  mathematical models and
              theoretical techniques that are developed  in this project to two important and
              timely biological problems:  (1) control of weeds in agricultural fields or
              rangeland and (2)  control of rabies in wildlife populations.  Formulation,
              analysis,  and numerical simulation of mathematical models provide a greater 
              understanding of effective methods for the control of the spread  of weeds in
              fields or rangeland and of rabies in wildlife.  Various control strategies are
              compared to determine the most  effective short- and long-term strategies that
              prevent or reduce  the spread while causing minimal damage or change to the 
              environment and minimal risk to humans.
