Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stark's Conjectures on Number Fields and Theory Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9626381

Award Number: 9626381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Hayes dhayes@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     Hayes 9626381   Stark's conjectures provide a major new insight into
              class field theory. They are an ingenious and highly original answer to the
              questions raised by the famous 12th problem of Hilbert. Hayes has given
              constructive proofs of the abelian Stark conjectures in function fields using
              the theory of Drinfield modules. He hopes to apply insights gained from the
              function field setting to number fields. Hayes has shown that the Brumer-Stark
              units over a number field satisfying Leopoldt's conjecture can be aligned into
              a Hecke character. In this project, he will attempt to prove the existence of
              further Hecke characters analogous to the well-known Jacobi sum  characters
              introduced by A. Weil. The existence of such character is intimately related to
              the invariance under base change of the Brumer-Stark axioms, which is as yet
              unproved. Since Stark's conjectures are based upon the special value of partial
              zeta functions at zero, it is important to understand what such special values
              mean. Haye has given one  interpertation of this special value over a real
              quadratic number field. He will try to extend this interpertation to the
              special values at  negative integers and to arbitrary totally real number
              fields. Finallly, Hayes will also continue his work with Drinfield modules of
              rank one using the insights gained from the computation of Drinfield modules
              associated to hyperelliptic functions fields.   This research falls into the
              general mathematical field of Number Theory.  Number theory has its historical
              roots in the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those
              dealing with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is among the
              oldest branches of mathematics and  was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and  communication systems.
