Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9626817

Award Number: 9626817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvain E. Cappell cappell@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626817  Cappell       Technical summary: In this project the investigator will
              study   several problems about topological invariants of singular varieties and
                their relation to symplectic geometry and algebraic geometry.  General 
              formulae for invariants of singular varieties will be developed and  will be
              applied, using toric varieties, to obtain precise comparisons  of lattice
              summation and integration.  Analytical, combinatorial and  number theoretical
              aspects of these comparisons will be explored with  a view to many possible
              applications.  Another line of investigation  will be the use of symplectic
              geometrical methods in the study of  representation-theoretic invariants of
              three-manifolds.  This will  include a series of studies of Maslov indices and
              analytical formulae  for Casson's SU(2) invariant as well as a study of SU(n)
              invariants.  A third area of investigation will be the development of a 
              satisfactory general theory for the topological classification of  finite group
              actions on manifolds; this will encompass such  foundational questions as the
              appropriate notion of functoriality for  this classification problem in a given
              homotopy type.       Non-technical summary: In this project, constructions and
              ideas   drawn from topology and geometry will be used to get precise formulae  
              that compare multidimensional integration with lattice summations.  Such  
              comparison formulae have been available for several centuries for 
              one-dimensional integrals and sums, i.e., in the Euler-MacLaurin  expansion,
              but have not been available in adequate generality in the  higher dimensional
              settings needed for many applications.  Through a  series of intermediate
              steps, such problems have been translated into  questions about the topology of
              spaces which have singularities (that  is, which are not uniform) and the
              measurement of how such  singularities contribute to the computation of
              invariants of such  spaces.  The deep methods of modern topology will be
              applied to  resolve these geometrical ques tions and hence ultimately to solve
              the  concrete problems of precise comparisons of integrals and sums. 
              Envisioned applications include new approaches to rapid integration  and to
              discrete optimization.  ***
