Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Atiyah's Conjectures on Floer Homology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9626166

Award Number: 9626166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiping Li wli@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626166  Li       The problems addressed in this project are in the area of
              Topology.  The main theme is to study conjectures of Sir Michael Atiyah on 
              (homology) three-spheres, using invariants obtained from mathematical  physics,
              especially conformal field theory and string theory, and  symplectic topology. 
              The investigator and R. Lee have studied the  first conjecture of Sir Michael
              Atiyah on identifying these invariants  of three-spheres, and also extended the
              invariants to slightly larger  classes of three-spheres.  The major part of
              this project is, not only  to identify these invariants (the first Atiyah
              conjecture), but also  to identify the way to relate these invariants to each
              other (the  second Atiyah conjecture).  Such an identification suggests a
              "hidden  duality" between conformal field theory and four-dimensional 
              Yang-Mills theory.  The other part of this project is to study  intrinsic
              properties for the invariants of larger classes of  three-spheres.  It is a
              fundamental aim to investigate the change of  the new invariants under certain
              topological operations.  The project  will lead to a study of relations between
              Floer theory, which is an  invariant from mathematical physics, and other
              constructions of knot  theory, as well as the generalization of the invariants
              to general  three-manifolds.       A three-dimensional manifold is a space
              where a nearsighted person  sees a standard three-dimensional space everywhere.
               (Homology)  three-spheres are those three-manifolds that one cannot tell from
              the  standard three-sphere by using the usual topological tools.  That such
              exist  indicates the complexity of the world we live in, even ignoring the time
               dimension, thus making three-spheres of cosmological and physical  interest. 
              The topological invariants in the project are intended to  distinguish
              manifolds by systematically studying their properties with  respect to several
              quantum field theories.  It is therefore valuable  to investigate these new
              invariants and their structure s for  three-spheres and general
              three-manifolds.  This project addresses  some of the most fundamental problems
              in this subject.  ***
