Title       : Application of Information Technology to Engineering and Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9626653

Award Number: 9626653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE
	      445 HOES LANE
	      Piscataway, NJ  088544103    /   -

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                           IEEE Education Society's for Proposal a Special Issue on the  
              "Applications of Information Technologies to Engineering and Science           
                                 Education"     1. Executive Summary             In August of
              1996, the IEEE Education Society will publish a special issue of its
              Transactions,  accompanied by a CD-ROM, tided "Applications of Information
              Technologies to Engineering and  Science Education" to demonstrate how WWW/CD
              ROM technology can be used by engineering and  science societies to review,
              disseminate, and most importandy, archive software and multi-media  material.
              Although the CD-ROM may contain electronic versions of the printed
              contributions, its main  role is to permit distribution and archiving of
              special material related to the printed articles, such as  software, color
              graphics, video files, sound files and postscript files. There is no doubt that
              such  material will become an integral part of all future publications. The EEE
              Vice President for Publications  has already approved placing the special issue
              on a widely publicized, carefully monitored WWW server  for four months
              starting two months before publication to assess the success of dhe use of
              information  technology in publishing archival journals             To
              maxirnize the usefulness and impact of dhe special issue, cross-platform
              compatibility will be  achieved by treating the CD-ROM as a World Wide Web
              (WWW) server so dhat WWW browsers (such  as Mosaic, Netscape and others)
              running on Microsoft Windows machines, Macintoshes or X-Windows  machines can
              view the files on dhe same CD-ROM. This approach to cross-platform
              compatibility  exploits the cross-platform de facto standard that has been
              generated by dhe recent explosive use of the  WWW.             Although the
              Ii4.141< Education Society is leading dhe effort, dle EEE Computer Society, the
               American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and other societies and entities are
              being invited to join the  effort as co-sponsors. Co-sponsors will i nsure dhe
              multidisciplinary scope of the effort will guarantee  that the special issue
              experiment receives widespread visibility and distribution, and answers many of
              the  questions now being posed about dhe benefits of using inforamtion
              technology in this way. However,  since there are added costs for the
              production of the issue, financial support from the co-sponsors and the 
              NATIONAL SCENCE FOUNDATION is needed. The projected need for financial support
              from the  Foundation is $10,000.00.
