Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Second Magma Conference on Computational Algebra; May
               12-16, 1996; Milwaukee, WI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9626327

Award Number: 9626327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Slattery mikes@sylow.mscs.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626327  Slattery       The investigator and colleagues organize the Second
              Magma  Conference on Computational Algebra.  In the past few years a  number of
              significant advances have taken place in several  different branches of
              computational algebra and number theory.  Because of the growing
              interdependence between the different  branches, an algorithmic advance in one
              area often has a major  impact on the performance of algorithms in other areas.
               Consequently, the meeting brings together workers from some of the  key areas,
              including researchers working on software development  as well as those using
              these tools.  The conference is intended to  inform algorithm designers and
              users of recent developments in  cognate areas of computational algebra, number
              theory, and  geometry and inform key theoretical mathematicians of the 
              possibilities offered by the computational algebra tools that are  now becoming
              available.  It is also expected to identify desirable  algorithm and software
              developments that would result in  significant new applications in the near
              future.  The conference  promotes the use of the techniques of computational
              algebra in  application areas such as digital signal processing, complex 
              system design, network design, cryptography, coding theory and  applied
              combinatorics.       Algebra studies basic questions about discrete structure
              and  symmetry in the world.  Theoretical results from this branch of 
              mathematics help chemists understand the spectra of organic  molecules,
              physicists organize families of elementary particles,  and engineers solve
              systems of equations.  Algebraic invariants  are used to answer biochemists'
              questions about knotting in DNA  and anthropologists have even used algebraic
              classifications to  organize native artifacts in the southwestern U.S.  For
              many years  mathematicians have studied algebra with little more than their 
              imaginations and a pencil and paper.  But now, computers allow  researchers to
              work with larger and more complicated situations  tha n were possible in the
              past.  Computational algebra is the  general title given to these research
              efforts.  However, to use a  computer in mathematical research requires the
              development of  specialized software -- a task that can be time-consuming for
              the  typical researcher.  One way to address this need is through  systems such
              as Magma which provide easy access to  state-of-the-art algorithms in a number
              of fields of study.  Another important process is to encourage researchers to
              share  their experiences (and even software) through conferences such as  this;
              the interaction at a conference often leads to adaptation of  ideas and
              development of new directions.  These tools enable  theoretical researchers to
              explore more complicated situations, to  gain insight in unfamiliar settings,
              and to compute answers to  larger problems.  Computer-based work on primality
              testing and  factoring of large numbers is showing direct application to 
              cryptography and security.  Work in finite geometries and designs  are
              providing improved techniques for error-detection and data  compression.  These
              have a large impact on everyone's use of  computers and communications.
