Title       : NSF/Sloan Foundation Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Molecular Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9626014

Award Number: 9626014
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Braverman braver@porthos.bio.ub.es  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1159      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN MOL EVO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1033,1174,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program of fellowships is a joint activity of the  Directorate for
              Biological Sciences of NSF and the Alfred P.  Sloan Foundation of New York
              City.  The five-year program is  in its third year.  Eighteen two-year
              fellowships are  offered each year for research and training in theoretical, 
              comparative, computational, and /or experimental analyses of  biological
              patterns and processes at the molecular level,  within the framework of
              evolutionary change and adaptation  of organisms, or in the use of molecular
              data to address  broad evolutionary questions.  Fellows are encouraged to 
              broaden their scientific experience and perspective in  molecular evolution by
              selecting a host laboratory where new  conceptual approaches and experimental
              techniques can be  learned.    The research and training plan supported by this
              fellowship  is entitled "the role of epistatic selection and pre-mRNA 
              secondary structures in molecular evolution."    Epistasis is the interaction
              among different genes or gene  regions to produce a single phenotype; epistatic
              selection  refers to selection acting on such a phenotype.  Ten species  of
              Drosophila are under study to determine if a cluster of  linkage disequilibria
              observed in the 3' end of the first  intron of the Drosophila melanogaster
              white locus is due to  epistatic selection conserving precursor mRNA secondary 
              structures.  Empirical methods will be used to test for  secondary structures
              with long-range pairings in the  precursor m-RNA for D. melanogaster alcohol
              dehydrogenase.  Lastly, computer simulations will be used to test  alternative
              hypotheses explaining the observed clustering of  linkage disequilibria.  The
              null hypothesis is neutral  mutation and genetic drift.
