Title       : Numerical Analysis Problems in Radiotherapy Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1996    
File        : a9626696

Award Number: 9626696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Borgers christoph.borgers@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Borgers  9626696       The investigator studies grid-based computational methods
               for the simulation of steady particle beams penetrating passively  scattering
              backgrounds.  Such beams are of interest in several  fields; the application
              motivating the parameter choices in this  project is radiation therapy using
              electron beams.  Mathematically, the problem is modeled by a linear Boltzmann 
              equation with inflow boundary conditions.  The linear Boltzmann  equation
              resembles a convection-diffusion equation in  six-dimensional position/velocity
              space.  Particles are convected,  while their direction vector undergoes a
              process resembling  diffusion on the unit sphere, and their energy undergoes a 
              process resembling convection-diffusion.  The boundary data in a  beam problem
              have singularities corresponding to sharp beam edges  and monodirectionality of
              incident beams.  The first half of the  project concerns accurate ways of
              dealing with these  singularities.  Difference schemes designed for convection 
              problems with discontinuous solutions are used to resolve beam  edges. 
              Explicit-implicit schemes with implicit treatment of the  directional diffusion
              are used to deal with the  monodirectionality of incident beams.  The second
              half of the  project concerns the treatment plan optimization problem in 
              radiation therapy.  Specifically, the investigator studies the  application of
              methods using second derivatives and of multilevel  methods.  At its present
              stage, the project focuses on model  problems in two space dimensions with one
              additional independent  variable denoting particle direction.      
              Computational techniques are extensively used for radiation  therapy treatment
              planning in current clinical practice.  The  numerical methods underlying
              current treatment planning systems  have been developed by the medical physics
              community; the  radiotherapy planning problem has received little attention
              from  mathematicians and numerical analysts.  However, numerical  techniques
              developed for particle b eam problems by the nuclear  engineering community,
              and techniques developed in different  contexts by numerical analysts, have a
              strong potential of being  helpful in the development of more accurate
              treatment planning  algorithms.  In the judgement of medical physicists,
              advances in  the accuracy of treatment planning algorithms may translate into 
              greater success in the radiation treatment of cancer.  The  investigator, whose
              background is in numerical analysis, studies  the application of approaches
              developed by numerical analysts to  the radiotherapy planning problem.
