Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Definable in o-minimal Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9626377

Award Number: 9626377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei Starchenko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   DMS 9626377   Sergei Starchenko, Vanderbilt University      The
              project concerns the classification of groups definable in o-minimal
              structures.  While "an o-minimal structure" is a notion of model theory, it
              turns out that many important expansions of real numbers are o-minimal, and
              this model theoretical notion provides a natural framework for the study of
              "analytic-geometric" categories.  Tools of model theory have been successfully
              applied to these categories yielding interesting theorems about the real
              numbers.  The starting point for this project is the observation that groups
              definable in o-minimal structures can be viewed as Lie groups over real closed
              fields.  Certain aspects of these groups are easily overlooked when treated
              only over the field of real numbers.  These aspects come into full view,
              however, when we regard the groups as definable in model-theoretically
              well-behaved structures.  The main goal of Starchenko's project is to obtain a
              reasonable classification of o-minimal groups, in order to develop a
              model-theoretical analogue of Lie theory.  He conjectures that locally
              o-minimal groups are algebraic and Lie morphisms are, essentially, Nash
              morphisms.  If this is the case, then many properties of algebraic groups can
              be transferred to o-minimal groups, thus providing new tools to study such
              groups.  Since the field of algebraic real numbers is o-minimal, these tools
              can then be applied to study groups definable in expansions of number fields. 
              On the other hand, any negative example will provide new information about
              interactions between geometric and algebraic properties of Euclidean groups. 
              The second part of the project concerns some open questions in stability
              theory.  It has been shown that many ideas and tools of model theory have
              natural geometric analogues in o-minimal structures.  The investigator hopes
              that the presence of a nice geometry can help to solve o-minimal versions of
              the two most famous questions in stability theory.    This project employs l
              ogical tools of model theory, and specifically a notion called o-minimality, to
              deepen the mathematical understanding of several important number systems,
              including the real numbers.  An understanding of the real numbers and of their
              geometric properties is basic to mathematics, and also to many applications of
              mathematics, e.g. to manufacturing.  Model theory provides a valuable
              perspective in this understanding.
