Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Geometry of 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9626676

Award Number: 9626676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Shalen shalen@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Culler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626676  Shalen       One objective of this research project is to understand as
              much as   possible about the incompressible surfaces in the exterior of a knot
              in a  homotopy 3-sphere.  This is an important aspect of classical knot  theory
              and has potential applications to the Poincare conjecture.  A  second goal is
              to improve the known bounds for the distance between  various types of
              exceptional Dehn fillings of a 3-manifold with torus  boundary.  This amounts
              to achieving a quantitative understanding of  the phenomenon that a generic
              Dehn surgery on a hyperbolic knot  produces a hyperbolic manifold.  A third
              objective is to improve some  of the known lower bounds for volumes of
              hyperbolic manifolds under  various topological restrictions.  Such bounds give
              a quantitative  understanding of the Mostow Rigidity Theorem, which implies
              that the  volume of a hyperbolic manifold is a topological invariant.      
              Topology is the branch of mathematics that deals with properties of  geometric
              objects that are so universal that they are unaffected by  any distortion of
              the shape of the object.  A simple example of such a  property is the winding
              number of a closed circuit in the plane.  If  the circuit does not pass through
              the origin, then it winds around the  origin a certain number of times, and
              that number is not affected by  any distortion of the circuit (just so long as
              it never passes through the  origin during its deformation).  This was the main
              idea in Gauss's  first proof that every polynomial equation has a solution in
              the  complex numbers and was the origin of the subject of topology.  The 
              geometric objects being studied by Culler and Shalen are 3-dimensional  spaces,
              one example of which is our physical universe.  (The  geometric and topological
              properties of the physical universe are  not yet understood, but modern physics
              has shown that it is definitely  not the 3-dimensional Euclidean space that we
              study in high school.)  This research focuses on various numerical quantities
              that are   determined by the geometric properties of the space.  The goal is to
               understand how the fundamental topological properties of the space are 
              reflected in these quantities.  In very general terms, this is  analogous to
              the process by which the chemical composition of a star  can be deduced by
              studying its spectrogram.  ***
