Title       : VPW: Chemical Studies of Natural Inducers of Larval Settlement and Metamorphosis
               in Tropical Marine Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9626896

Award Number: 9626896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie J. Paul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9178,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research involves the chemical characterization of natural  inducers of
              larval settlement and metamorphosis in several species  of marine
              invertebrates.  The goal is to isolate and characterize  the active molecules
              that function as natural inducers.  Natural  inducers will be studied for the
              nudibranch Phestilla sibogae  (Opisthobranchia:  Nudibranchia) that specializes
              on Porites  corals; the tube-building polychaete worm Hydroides elegans, a 
              ubiquitous fouling organism that settles in response to chemical  cues from
              microbial films; and the herbivorous sea hares  Stylocheilus longicauda,
              Aplysia juliana and Aplysia parvula  (Opisthobranchia:  Anaspidea) that
              specialize on certain seaweeds.    Isolation of active compounds will be
              carried out by  chromatographic separations of active extracts with subsequent 
              bioassays of larval settlement to determine which fractions induce  settlement
              and metamorphosis.  Once purified, NMR and other  spectroscopic methods will be
              used to elucidate the structures of  active inducers.  This approach to
              isolating and elucidating the  structures of natural inducers will work best
              for relatively small  organic molecules or peptides, and may require
              modification to use  chemical or enzymatic degradation techniques if inducers
              are  proteins or other large macromolecules.  Understanding the chemical 
              nature of specific cues for settlement and metamorphosis of marine 
              invertebrate larvae is important for different fields including  developmental
              biology, marine benthic community ecology, and  aquaculture.    Interactive
              activities include developing and teaching a graduate  course in Chemical
              Ecology and a graduate seminar in Marine  Chemical Ecology at the University of
              Hawaii Department of Zoology;  participating in Natural Products Chemistry and
              Organic seminar  courses at the University of Hawaii Department of Chemistry;
              and  mentoring undergraduate students and interacting with graduate  students
              and postdoctoral researchers at the Kewalo Marine  Laboratory  and the Zoology
              and Chemistry Departments at the  University of Hawaii.
