Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9626330

Award Number: 9626330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Stern rstern@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626330  Stern       The goal of this project is better to understand
              simply-connected  smooth four-dimensional manifolds.  In the early 1990's
              difficult  techniques were developed and used by the principal investigator  
              and others to prove sharp statements about the computations  and structure of
              the Donaldson invariants (which were introduced in  1984).  The October 1994
              introduction of the brilliantly conceived  and more easily handled
              Seiberg-Witten invariants has made clear  the role of these Donaldson
              invariants in the study of smooth  4-manifolds.  Now that the dust has begun to
              settle, it is time to  review our understanding of smooth 4-manifolds. 
              Surprisingly, most  of the questions and problems related to the topology of
              smooth  4-manifolds present in September 1994 remain open.  In particular,  we
              still do not know how to classify simply-connected smooth  4-manifolds.  The
              first part of this project is to determine the  fundamental building blocks and
              to determine the operations  performed on these building blocks to recover any
              given smooth  4-manifold.  As a focal point, given a simply-connected
              irreducible  smooth 4-manifold X, does there exist a finite collection of 
              complex surfaces, each of which carries a pencil of curves from  which X is
              obtained by using the following three operations: (1) fiber  sum along a
              general fiber of the pencils; (2) local fiber sum  along tori of square zero;
              (3) performing a topological log  transform on tori of square zero?  The second
              part of this project  is to determine the effectiveness of the Seiberg-Witten
              and  Donaldson invariants.  In particular, does the deformation type of  a
              complex surface determine its diffeomorphism type?  This project  will begin to
              focus on explicit examples (the Horikawa surfaces)  that have the same
              Seiberg-Witten and Donaldson invariants, are  known to be deformation
              inequivalent (i.e., not the same as complex  manifolds), but are not known to
              be diffeomorphic.  One disturbing  feature of the Seiberg-Witten and  Donaldson
              invariants is that they  are defined only for manifolds for which the sum of
              its signature  and Euler characteristic is divisible by an odd multiple of 4. 
              The  final part of this project will focus on those simply-connected 
              4-manifolds for which the sum of the signature and Euler  characteristic is
              divisible by an even multiple of 4, and about  which virtually nothing is
              known.       At bottom, this project centers on the classification of objects 
              that are locally modeled on 4-dimensional Euclidean space and upon  which one
              can do differential calculus for real-valued functions.     These objects are
              the so-called smooth four-dimensional manifolds.    The basic technique is to
              extract algebraic topological data   from the solution space on these manifolds
              of partial   differential equations that arise in theoretical physics,  i.e.,
              to use gauge-theoretic techniques.  It is known that one  cannot expect simply
              to give a complete list of smooth 4-manifolds.   However, one can expect to
              determine classifiable fundamental  objects and a list of operations that one
              can perform on these  objects in order to obtain any smooth 4-manifold.  It is
              the goal  of this project to provide these building blocks and assembly  rules.
               Further, the behavior under these operations of known and  future invariants
              of smooth 4-manifolds should be easily determined.    Success of the project
              will create another strong tie between  topology and theoretical physics,
              partly because, as noted above, the   topological tools involved come from
              gauge theory, i.e., from quantum   mechanics, and partly because any light shed
              on 4-manifolds bears on   our understanding of the 4-dimensional space-time of
              relativity theory.  ***
