Title       : The Study of Supertransients in Spatiotemporal Chaotic Dynamical Systems with
               Applications to Nonequilibrial Species Coexistence in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9626529

Award Number: 9626529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ying-Cheng Lai   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Lai  9626529    The study of chaotic dynamics provides a new paradigm for
              understanding complicated dynamics in a wide range of disciplines, ranging from
              physics to meteorology to the biological sciences.  This proposal focuses on
              one problem that is of fundamental importance in nonlinear dynamics, and is
              potentially of great importance in ecological systems: the phenomenon of
              supertransients in spatially-extended chaotic systems.  Specifically, we will
              investigate the origin of supertransients, and develop a quantitative scaling
              theory to explain how and why the lifetime of supertransients increases with
              system size.  This theory will be developed first for a simple, analyzable
              model, then to test this theory on a number of model spatiotempral chaotic
              systems.  We will investigate supertransients in several realistic ecological
              model systems, and focus on the potential for supertransiency to promote the
              long term (though not indefinite) coexistence of competing species, and how
              such coexistence is influenced by system size.  'Me models involve competition
              among species in patches, with localized dispersal among patches.  This work
              will contribute to a long-standing debate in ecology about the importance of
              nonequilibrial dynamics in understanding patterns in species diversity, and the
              influence of spatial scale on species coexistence.    A full understanding of
              the dynamics of physical and biological systems requires a consideration of
              transient dynamics away from equilibrium.  Recently, it has become recognized
              that realistic models of spatially-distributed ecological systems can exhibit
              superlong 'chaotic' transients before equilibrium is reached, wherein for all
              practical purposes a system never reaches its ultimate equilibrium.  Our
              research focuses on characterizing quantitatively the phenomenon of
              supertransient behaviors in mathematical models, using both mathematical
              analyses and extensive numerical simulations, and on ascertaining the potential
              relevance of supertransients for import ant, unresolved questions in ecology,
              in particular the long-term coexistence of species competing for limiting
              resources, but able to disperse in space in heterogeneous, patchy landscapes.
