Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topology of Generalized Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9626624

Award Number: 9626624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Washington Mio mio@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626624  Mio       Topological n-manifolds are separable metric spaces that are 
              locally homeomorphic to euclidean n-space.  They occur ubiquitously in 
              mathematics and its applications and are among the most important  objects of
              study in all of mathematics.  Their most observable  topological properties are
              that of being finite dimensional, locally  contractible, having the local
              homology of euclidean n-space, and  allowing nicely embedded subspaces to be
              put in general position.  A  space is called a generalized n-manifold if it
              satisfies all of these  properties, except possibly the last.  If in addition,
              n is at least 5  and X allows general position, X is said to satisfy the
              disjoint disks  property (DDP).  The long standing conjecture that a
              generalized  n-manifold X having the DDP must be a topological manifold was 
              disproved recently by the investigators in joint work with S. C. Ferry  and
              Shmuel Weinberger.  Among the most significant questions that  remain
              concerning generalized manifolds and that are the subject of  this project is
              the question of whether generalized manifolds are  topologically homogeneous. 
              Other goals are to establish other  structure theorems for DDP generalized
              manifolds that are known to  hold for topological manifolds, such as the
              s-cobordism theorem,  various splitting theorems, and regular neighborhood
              theorems.  Splitting theorems, in particular, would be useful in attacking the 
              conjecture that the pathology exhibited by generalized manifolds  resides in
              dimension 4.       It has been quite a shock for topologists to learn that 
              n-dimensional manifolds are not characterized by a small collection of  their
              most obvious properties, as had been conjectured.  Since these  spaces are the
              most heavily used in mathematics, it is highly  desirable to understand this
              phenomenon better.  The two  co-investigators, who were among the four who
              dispatched the  conjecture several years ago, are now intent on doing just
              this.  As  mentioned above, they will attempt to le arn whether, like ordinary 
              topological manifolds, generalized manifolds exhibit the same  topological
              structure in the vicinity of each of their points.  The  interest of these
              spaces arises from their potential as models for  several phenomena observed in
              the study of dynamical systems,  geometric group theory, and other areas, but
              lack of such homogeneity  would seriously limit this potential.  ***
