Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Large Cardinals, Forcing,and Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9626713

Award Number: 9626713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Laver laver@euclid.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626713  Richard Laver      The strong infinite Halpern-Lauchli Conjecture
              (a partition relation about a product of perfect trees) is still open, but
              progress has been made assuming the existence of a measurable cardinal. 
              Namely, a game theoretic version of the conjecture has been proved under that
              assumption.  It will be investigated whether these techniques can be applied to
              prove the entire conjecture.  Also, the necessity of the measurable will be
              studied.  In other work involving large cardinals, it has been proved that a
              very large cardinal assumption implies a combinatorial statement about a tower
              of finite left distributive algebras (algebras satisfying the law a(bc) =
              (ab)(ac)).  It will be studied whether the large cardinals are needed.  Also
              the possibility of implications of the combinatorial result for the classical
              braid groups will be investigated.    This research links large cardinal theory
              with some classical mathematics.  A "cardinal" is the mathematical notion of
              size as it applies to finite and infinite sets.  A "large cardinal" is an
              extremely large such size, with additional technical features.  It is known
              that large cardinals are so large that their existence can't be proved by the
              usual methods of proof.  This makes it very surprising that large cardinals
              have implications for the finite world, but they do.  Indeed, there are
              mathematical assertions about finite structures which, surprisingly, need a
              large cardinal for their proof.  Recently some finite statements which are in
              the vein of classical mathematics have been proved using large cardinals.  One
              of the statements is related to the "braid groups" (a subject which as been
              studied by mathematicians, with very intensive investigations since the
              mid-1980's upon discovery of its connections with physics).  The research in
              this project is twofold:  to determine if the large cardinal is necessary, and
              to pursue the fascinating possibility of implications of large cardinal theory
              for the braid groups and beyond.
