Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Three Topics in Mathematical Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9626118

Award Number: 9626118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence D. Brown lbrown@stat.wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626118   Brown      This research involves three statistical topics. i) 
              There are  several useful formulations involving nonparametric function 
              estimation including nonparmetric regression, nonparametric  density estimation
              and the standard nonparametric signal  processing model.  Recently the
              investigator and others have  proved the asymptotic equivalence of these models
              in settings  involving observation of one dimensional response variables.  The 
              investigators propose to construct a formulation for asymptotic  equivalence to
              enable obtaining effective equivalence results   for multidimensional response
              variables. ii) One standard method  for constructing statistical tests in
              certain complex parametric  situations involves conditioning on an ancillary
              statistic and  constructing a test within the (simpler) conditional problem at 
              the desired level of statistical significance.  Unfortunately  this procedure
              entails some peculiar statistical decision  theoretic consequences.  These are
              investigated more fully and  alternatives are proposed to this standard
              methodology which are  nearly as simple to implement but avoid these
              undesirable  consequences. iii) Standard tests for bioequivalence are 
              inherently one - dimensional in that they look at only one  performance aspect
              at a time.  This research constructs  multidimensional bioequivalence
              procedures based in part on  principles contained in recent research by the
              investigator and   collaborators.    Statistical procedures are often
              classified as single parameter,  multiparameter, or nonparametric depending
              whether the research  looks respectively at one performance characteristic,
              several  related ones, or an unstructured continuum of them, such as a 
              response function over time of unspecified shape. i) An important  component of
              the modem biotechnology enterprise involves testing   whether newly developed
              replicas of existing technologies have  the same effect as the original.  For
              example, does a (cheaper)  generic drug work exactly t he same as the original
              prescription  drug it is intended to replace.  Standard statistical tests of 
              "bioequivalence" have been formulated to test this hypothesis  based on data
              gathered about the two technologies.  These  standard tests are inherently
              one-dimensional, and can examine  only one performance facet at a time.  This
              research involves the  construction of general statistical tests of
              bioequivalence which  can simultaneously examine several related performance
              aspects.  ii) Nonparametric function estimation lies at another extreme in 
              statistical methodology.  Such techniques involve little prior  structure and
              few apriori assumptions.  They are thus extremely  valuable in a variety of
              modern scientific enterprises involving  analysis of masses of complex data
              including research on the  environment and on global change.  One technical
              problem  impacting this area has been the existence of several apparently  
              different mathematical formulations for such problems.  This  research involves
              the creation of a unified theory for such  problems which will enable more
              efficient research and more  effective use of these methods. iii) A third
              aspect of this  research involves the notion of asymptotically ancillary 
              statistics.  These are a technical device invented in part to  simplify the
              analysis of complex multiparameter models.  Modern  data collection and
              computing have vastly increased the  importance of analyzing such models, but
              more familiarity with  them reveals certain peculiarities and deficiencies
              which result  from using this technical device.  This research proposes 
              alternate technical advice which is nearly as simple to use but  avoids these
              peculiarities.
