Title       : Moving Mesh Methods for Numerical Solution of Time Dependent Partial
               Differential Equations in Two and Three Spatial Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9626107

Award Number: 9626107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weizhang Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626107  Huang       The investigator develops a moving mesh method for the 
              numerical solution of two- and three-dimensional time-dependent  PDEs (partial
              differential equations) that extends the MMPDE  (Moving Mesh PDE) approach
              introduced by the investigator and his  coworkers for PDEs in one spatial
              dimension.  With this approach,  an MMPDE is formulated explicitly based upon
              the heat flow  equation and the theory of harmonic maps.  The MMPDE is employed
               to move the mesh, to concentrate nodes in regions where the  physical solution
              has large variations, and to control certain  mesh qualities, in particular the
              skewness.  Techniques are  investigated to discretize and solve efficiently the
              extended  system consisting of the underlying physical PDE and the MMPDE.  A 
              number of related issues are considered - e.g., the computation  of a reference
              mesh for an arbitrary connected domain, the use of  flow directional control,
              the study of preconditioning  techniques, the examination of the space-time
              finite element  method, and the investigation of robustness and reliability of 
              the method.  Moreover, the method is applied to problems in  airfoil analysis
              and wing design, moving boundary problems, and  problems involving blow-up
              solutions.  The new algorithms and  computational techniques are simultaneously
              implemented in  mathematical software that could find widespread usage among 
              scientists and engineers.       This project is concerned with the development
              of new  computational methods that are essential to enhance the ability  of
              scientists and engineers to solve large scale computational  problems that are
              crucial to our economy, environment, and  security.  The research is focused on
              development of so-called  adaptive numerical techniques, where the special
              features of the  particular problem being solved are adapted to.  More 
              specifically, the places (mesh points) where the solution to the  scientific
              problem is being approximated are moved with time to  adapt to the changes in
              the solu tion.  Mesh adaptation has  recently played an indispensable role in
              the numerical solution  of the problems, as, supercomputers notwithstanding,
              such  problems can generally not otherwise be solved satisfactorily.  This is
              because in many problems of science and engineering,  there is a small portion
              of the physical domain where large  changes in the solution occur over very
              small separations in the  mesh.  Numerical solution of these problems using
              fixed uniform  meshes is formidable because millions of mesh points are
              required  to resolve the physical phenomena.  On the other hand, use of 
              adaptive mesh methods can significantly reduce the number of mesh  points and
              thus economies can be gained.  Unlike other adaptive  mesh methods, the moving
              mesh method under study changes the mesh  smoothly in time to adapt to the key
              solution features.  It is  suitable for parallel computing.  The moving mesh
              method should be  very useful in the numerical simulation of many industrial 
              manufacturing problems.  A particular area is airfoil analysis and  wing
              design.  For example, in the airfoil and wing design the  airfoil or wing shape
              is computed when a pressure distribution is  specified.  It will save computing
              resources tremendously if the  flow solution and the computational mesh, and
              hence the airfoil  shape, can be updated simultaneously, as these methods do. 
              This  advantage holds for a variety of other applications as well, such  as the
              problem of studying how and why industrial and house fires  start.  The
              investigator believes that a `moving mesh' approach is  the best way to reduce
              computing time and improve accuracy, and  that the actual technology transfer
              for these methods is close at  hand.
