Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry of Groups and Real Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9626699

Award Number: 9626699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Feighn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626699  Feighn       In the current project, the Principal Investigator will
              continue   his work, joint with M. Bestvina and M. Handel, on the structure of 
               the outer automorphism group of a free group.  The methods used are a  mixture
              of techniques from E. Rips's theory of real trees and from the  train track
              theory of Bestvina and Handel.  The Principal Investigator  will also examine
              to what extent the JSJ theorem of Rips and Z. Sela  can be extended to
              splittings over other than cyclic groups.       Now is an exciting time to be a
              geometric group theorist.  Much  beautiful mathematics is devoted to
              classification results.  For  example, the classification of surfaces (spaces,
              such as the sphere, that  are locally the same as a plane) is classical.  This
              classification is  akin to Mendeleev's periodic table of the elements -- each
              surface  appears once and only once.  In recent years, due in large part to the
               geometric ideas of W. Thurston, there has been great progress towards a 
              classification theorem for 3-manifolds (spaces that are locally like 3- 
              dimensional space).  Inspired by these manifold successes,  mathematicians have
              begun to look at groups from a geometric viewpoint.  (A group is a fundamental
              object found throughout mathematics and the  sciences.  Roughly speaking, a
              group is the set of symmetries of some  object.)  Mathematics has arrived at
              the point where the possibility of a  classification theorem for (geometric)
              groups can be envisioned.  For  example, a recent result of E. Rips and Z. Sela
              describes how to break  a group into more fundamental pieces.  In the current
              project, the  Principal Investigator will continue his research along these
              lines.  More specifically, he will show how to break up groups into fundamental
               pieces in ways other than that of Rips and Sela.  Also, he will continue  his
              work with M. Bestvina and M. Handel undertaking a detailed study of  some of
              the groups that will play a key role in this classification.  ***
