Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Mathematics Issues in Nonlinear Diffusion
               Modules in Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9626755

Award Number: 9626755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony F. Chan chan@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Chan  9626755       The investigator and his colleagues study computational 
              mathematics issues in nonlinear diffusion models in image  processing.  These
              problems are computationally intensive and  accurate and efficient methods are
              needed.  Traditionally, the  standard methods involve computation in the
              frequency domain,  facilitated by efficient FFT and wavelet algorithms. 
              Recently,  there has been a new movement towards a partial differential 
              equation (PDE) based approach, which is motivated by a more  systematic
              approach to restoring images with sharp edges, as well  as for image
              segmentation.  The image is diffused (denoised)  according to a nonlinear
              anisotropic diffusion PDE, designed to  diffuse less near edges.  Moreover, the
              PDEs are designed to  possess certain desirable geometrical properties such as
              affine  invariance and causality.  From a computational standpoint, the  PDE
              formulations call for new computational techniques that are  different from the
              traditional frequency domain and algebraic  approaches.  As yet, the nonlinear
              diffusion models are considered  somewhat expensive compared to traditional
              methods, and it is one  of the goals of this project to make them more
              efficient while  retaining their desirable geometric properties.  Additionally,
               attempts are made to improve and extend these methods to color  and other
              vector-valued images.  Specific computational algorithms  being studied include
              primal-dual minimization methods,  preconditioning techniques, and wavelet
              algorithms.       Image processing has many important applications in both the 
              physical and the medical sciences.  In the current revolution in  communication
              and the advent of the information highway, more  and more images are being
              transmitted and better mathematical  algorithms are needed to compress and
              remove noise and other  distortions occurring in the transmission. 
              Applications in the  medical sciences and biotechnology field range from
              computer  topography to processing of microscopic images of  molecular 
              structures.  In the environmental area, satellite imaging has been  used to map
              natural resources as well as environmental pollution.  In the area of
              manufacturing, imaging systems are used to detect  defects automatically.  In
              all of these applications, a key  process is that of image restoration, namely,
              cleaning up an  image polluted by noise and blurring.  This is the main subject
              of  this project.  These problems are very computationally intensive  due to
              the large number of pixels and the possibility of  sequences of images (e.g.
              videos), solving them requires clever  mathematical algorithms as well as high
              performance computers.
