Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Finite Element Superconvergence in Computational
               Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9626193

Award Number: 9626193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhimin Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626193  Zhang  The investigator studies: (1) Superconvergence points for  some
              typical equations in computational mechanics on different  mesh patterns and
              for various finite element bases; (2)  Theoretical justification for
              superconvergence phenomena for  newly developed, highly effective patch
              recovery techniques in  the engineering community; (3) Superconvergence and its
              recovery  for equations with small parameters that model some typical 
              mechanical problems, such as beams, plates, shells, and the  Stokes problem;
              (4) Superconvergence recovery technique for  equations with singular solutions,
              and interior or local  estimates for recovery techniques in the presence of
              boundary  singularities.  Extensive numerical tests are performed to  evaluate
              the effectness of the proposed recovery techniques for  the Poisson equation,
              the nearly incompressible elasticity  equation, the Reissner-Mindlin plate
              model, and the Stokes  equation for different finite element bases.  The
              computational  experimentation consider various mesh geometries and some
              domains  with reentrant corners, such as the L-shaped domain and the  cracked
              domain.  The primary objective of this project is the study of  derivative
              superconvergence and its recovery in finite element  computations.  Such study
              is of fundamental importance in  computational mechanics, because engineers are
              interested in more  effective ways to estimate the stress, strain energy, etc. 
              At  present, most of the commercial codes used by the engineering  community
              are required to have adaptive capabilities, which allow  computations to be
              carried out in the most efficient way.  A  knowledge of superconvergence is
              essential for this adaptivity  design through a posteriori error estimates. 
              This project  provides a firm theoretical basis for developing reliable and 
              computationally inexpensive superconvergent recovery techniques.  The results
              of this research affect large-scale scientific  computing on problems of
              practical interest arising in structural  me chanics.
