Title       : Mathematical Models of Molecular Motors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9626104

Award Number: 9626104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Oster goster@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9162,9183,9216,9263,AMPP,BIOT,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Oster  9626104       The investigator and his colleague construct mathematical 
              models to describe three important classes of protein molecular  motors. (1)
              'Linear' motors driven by nucleotide hydrolysis,  including (i) the kinesin and
              myosin superfamily which move along  microtubules and actin filaments,
              respectively, and (ii) HSP70,  which drives the translocation of proteins
              across intracellular  membranes; (ii) RNA and DNA polymerase, which move along
              the DNA  double helix. (2) 'Rotary' motors driven by electrochemical 
              gradients, including (i) ATP synthase, the mechanochemical engine  that
              synthesizes ATP, and (ii) the bacterial flagellar motor,  which drives the
              motion of many prokaryotic organisms. (3) Motors  driven by polymerization free
              energy, including the microtubule  depolymerization process that moves
              chromosomes during anaphase  mitosis, and the polymerization motors which drive
              the motion of  certain pathogenic bacteria and viruses, such as Listeria and 
              Vaccinia.  The approach in each case is to begin by formulating  analytical
              stochastic models consisting of Langevin mechanical  equations or Fokker-Planck
              diffusion equations that describe the  mechanochemical and statistical behavior
              of the molecular  machinery.  These models then are analyzed mathematically
              where  possible and by numerical simulation in all cases.  The mean  mechanical
              properties of these protein motors are derived, such  as force-velocity curves,
              along with their stochastic properties  such as trajectory variances.  Results
              are presented in a visual  format that facilitates comprehension by biologists
              and  comparison with experimental data.       The most striking feature of
              biological cells, and indeed  the hallmark of life itself, is their constant
              motion.  These  motions are of two kinds: those that move the cell from one
              place  to another, and those that move vital material from one place to 
              another within the cell.  Both kinds of motions are driven by  specialized
              protein molecules that function as ti ny robotic  motors, powered by chemical
              energy.  The world in which these  protein machines operate is dominated by
              Brownian motion, which  gives their movements a statistical character. 
              Although these  molecular machines operate on a length scale of nanometers and
              a  force scale of piconewtons, they are absolutely essential to the  life of
              the cell.  Recent advances in instrumentation have made it  possible to measure
              the mechanical properties of individual  protein motors, and recent advances in
              high-performance computing  have enabled their simulation in realistic detail,
              including the  effects of thermal fluctuations.  Taken together, these advances
               provide an unprecedented opportunity to deduce how biomolecular  motors work. 
              This is done through the formulation of mathematical  models, and through the
              careful comparison of model predictions  with experimental data.
