Title       : Estimation and Testing in Non-regular Likelihood Problems Via Adapting Spacing
               Method and Empirical Process Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9626658

Award Number: 9626658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80681              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongzhao Shao yshao@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 96-26658  Shao  The methods of maximum likelihood estimation and likelihood
              ratio  test have constituted the cornerstone of statistical inference.  In
              numerous cases, the maximum likelihood method generates  estimates  with
              optimal asymptotic properties and the likelihood  ratio test is known to be
              powerful.  However, there are many  important practical situations where these
              methods break down.  This research focuses on investigating non-regular
              likelihood  problems including estimation problems where likelihood functions 
              may be unbounded (e.g., efficient estimation of a unimodal  distribution) as
              well as hypothesis testing problems where the  likelihood ratio test statistics
              do not have chi-square type  limiting distributions (e.g., testing homogeneity
              in Tukey  models).  This research involves generalizing the maximum product  of
              spacings method, which is a natural way to rectify the  problems caused by the
              unboundedness of likelihood functions and  to preserve the essential asymptotic
              optimalities usually  possessed by the maximum likelihood method.  In addition,
              the  research involves adapting and extending modern empirical process 
              techniques to characterize the asymptotic behavior of the  rescaled likelihood
              ratio statistic.  Scientists and engineers often build models based upon
              various  prior assumptions about the underlying conditions.  Very often,  these
              assumptions fail to  hold in real applications.  If the  model is too sensitive
              to small departures from those prior  assumptions, the results from such models
              will not be reliable,  and may be misleading with far-reaching adverse
              consequences.  It  is, therefore, very important to develop efficient methods
              to  check the validity of model assumptions, and to develop  techniques that
              are not constrained by unrealistic assumptions.  This research concerns
              efficient procedures for testing model  validity and introduces "robust"
              statistical models which remain  effective even when prior assumptions are not
              exactly true.  Such  proced ures have broad applications ranging from
              biotechnology to  high-speed computing system.  In particular, advancement in
              this  research area would be crucial in fostering modern manufacturing,  for it
              relates to developing optimal procedures for assessing  reliability and quality
              control.  In this respect, the research  plays an integral role in the
              promotion of economic growth by  improving manufacturing processes, thereby
              ensuring U.S.  competitiveness in world markets.
