Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Innovative Finite Element Methods for Modeling Multiphase
               Contaminant Flows in Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9626179

Award Number: 9626179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Ewing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9187,9216,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9626179  Ewing    The simulation of fluid flow in porous media related to
              groundwater   modeling, subsurface transport of contaminants, and petroleum
              reservoir   simulation requires the numerical approximation of large coupled
              systems   of nonlinear time-dependent partial differential equations.  The  
              development of efficient numerical techniques for the large-scale simulation  
              is extremely important in understanding these porous media flows.  Due to  
              wave-like or traveling front problems and highly localized natures in the  
              coupled differential systems and the enormous size of many reservoir  
              simulation problems, an important goal of efficient numerical modeling is   the
              ability to effectively model these effects and the utilization of new  
              supercomputer architectures.  This project will  concentrate on the  
              development of finite element methods, computational codes, and   supporting
              mathematical analysis for underground contamination flows.    The numerical
              methods will be designed to simulate such complex features   of the flows as
              shock-line saturation fronts and steep composition gradients,   to produce
              accurate fluid velocities, to conserve mass locally, and to take   advantage of
              new parallel supercomputers. Self-adaptive local grid-  refinement methods and
              efficient implementation techniques for iterative   solution of large linear
              systems are also studied.    A three-year program of research is proposed into
              the development of   accurate numerical techniques, efficient computational
              codes, and   supporting mathematical analysis for  modeling of multiphase flows
              and   transport in groundwater hydrology which has applications in design of  
              remediation and cleanup technologies.  The development of improved   methods
              for assessing groundwater contamination by hazardous wastes  has become
              increasingly important.  Indeed, groundwater supplies are   increasingly
              threatened by organic, inorganic, and radioactive contaminants   introduced
              into the environment by improper disposal or acci dental release.    Estimates
              of remediation costs at U.S. government sites alone range into the   hundreds
              of billions of dollars. Protecting the quality of groundwater   supplies is a
              grand challenge problem of broad societal importance.  There   are also a
              number of industrial applications of the proposed research.  The   production
              and management of oil reservoirs are governed by equations and  technologies
              that are nearly identical to those exploited in groundwater   hydrology.  The
              manufacture of high quality fiber reinforced plastic   composites for
              automotive and aerospace applications is controlled by   technology similar to
              that studied in this project.  Design of semiconductors   uses equations very
              analogous to those for groundwater transport.  In these   areas, technology
              transfer can be easily carried out: use of the codes   developed for,
              industrial collaboration with the researchers of, and   employment of students
              trained on this project.
