Title       : The Structure, Design and Application of M-band Symmetric Wavelets and Filter
               Banks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9626563

Award Number: 9626563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Truong Nguyen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The wavelet transform with symmetric basis functions is emerging as a next- 
              generation standard for still-image compression.  Wavelet methods outperform
              the  current JPEG standard at low bitrates, and degrade gracefully with
              decreasing  bitrate.  The new M-channel symmetric wavelets are used in image
              and video  coders, with particular attention to quantization strategies and
              motion  compensation.  This research is addressing the theory, design, and
              application  of orthogonal and biorthogonal linear-phase M-channel filter banks
              and M-band  symmetric wavelets.  Multirate filter banks are the fundamental
              building blocks  for subband and wavelet decompositions, as well as
              frequency-domain/time-domain  multiplexing.  Theoretical questions being
              addressed by the research include the  structure of linear-phase M-channel
              filter banks and wavelets, including a  comprehensive theory of permissible
              lengths, minimal structures for  parametrization and fast computation, and
              mappings for two-dimensional signal  processing.  Criteria for wavelet filter
              design are also being addressed,  including vanishing moments, smoothness and
              nonnegativity of the scaling  function, and unequal length filters.    The
              investigators are studying applications of the above to perceptually-based 
              data compression of image, video and seismic data, multicarrier modulation, and
               multiscale feature detections.  They are also investigating the use of the
              M-band  wavelet transform for multitone modulation.  The frequency partitioning
               properties of the M-channel filter bank enable high efficiency for channels
              such  as twisted-pair copper wire and hybrid fiber-coax, with reduced
              susceptibility  to narrow-band interference.
