Title       : Acquisition of an Automated Digital Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9626279

Award Number: 9626279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $709300             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Williams dbw1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Smith  (Principal Investigator former)
              Helen M. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katayun Barmak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miltiadis K. Hatalis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed S. El-Aasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9626279  Smith  The transmission electron microscope (TEM) has been a mainstay
              of  materials research for about forty years and remains one of the  world's
              most important scientific instruments.  Over the last 20  years Lehigh has
              maintained a leadership position in analytical  TEM research and in the
              education of TEM users.  This award  provides funds in partial support of the
              purchase of an automated  digital transmission electron microscope (ADTEM) for
              chemical and  structural imaging of materials with an emphasis on in-situ 
              studies.  The ADTEM will combine better than 0.23 nm resolution  with  30  of
              tilt in a variety of side entry specimen holders.  The microscope will feature
              an electron energy filter which can  produce high clarity energy-filtered
              images and diffraction  patterns.  Included is support for enhancing and
              up-grading the  specimen preparation equipment and image analysis facilities. 
              The digitally acquired images will be accessible from any  networked terminal
              on or off campus.  %%%  The acquisition of the proposed ADTEM will impact these
              ongoing  or planned research programs in the four thrust areas of:  1)  thin
              films, 2)  amorphous and nanoscale structures, 3)  ceramics  and ceramic
              composites, and 4)  environment-sensitive fracture.  The research programs of
              more than 20 faculty will be impacted by  the proposed ADTEM.  The research
              programs in the area of thin  films include a study of CoPt for magnetic
              information storage  and the role of grain structure and grain boundary
              diffusion in  the reaction of Nb/Al, Ni/Al and Ti/Al multilayers.  Under the 
              thrust area of amorphous and nanoscale structures a variety of  studies in
              inorganic and organic materials are being pursed:  crystallization of amorphous
              silicon, development of copper  interconnects with optimized grain structures,
              determination of  structure around light atoms in inorganic glasses by EXELFS, 
              novel design concepts in core/shell particles for toughening  engineering
              plastics, and energy filtered diffracti on of beam  sensitive catalyst
              materials.  In the thrust area of ceramics and  ceramic composites, tailoring
              of grain boundary chemistry for the  development of super creep-resistant
              oxides, processing and  properties of nanocomposites, and reaction forming of 
              functionally gradient aluminum oxide/aluminum composites for  optimal
              mechanical properties are under investigation.  The  research programs in the
              last thrust area of environment-  sensitive fracture address environmental and
              stochastic aspects  of creep crack growth in super-alloys and corrosion and
              fatigue  of aluminum alloys.    The educational role of the ADTEM will be to
              demonstrate high  resolution structure imaging, advanced diffraction, and
              energy  filtered microscopy in the laboratory section of a variety of 
              undergraduate and graduate courses.  Digital images from this  microscope will
              be analyzed by students off-line in our existing  cluster of IBM RS6000s and
              proposed cluster of Macintosh 8100s.  ***
