Title       : GET REAL! Science Strand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9626959

Award Number: 9626959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen S. Hoitomt owen.hoitomt@mail.admin.wis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Steinbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9626959  Hoitomt    Wisconsin Public Broadcasting will continue the
              incorporation of a science strand into "Get Real!," their television series for
              children 8-12 year old.  The series presents positive images of children
              involved in, and succeeding in, a variety of areas.  The stories are
              field-produced; and kids are involved on-screen and off as hosts, reporters,
              subjects of stories, as interns during production, and as sources of story
              ideas.  The series is broadcast on both public and commercial stations and
              receives multiple repeats.      The science and technology strand:     connects
              science concepts to children's known experiences and activities and tells
              stories about kids involved in science-related activities;     models and
              reinforces positive attitudes towards, and involvement in science and
              technology and affirms the value of children's ideas, and the importance of
              asking why?; and     reinforces viewers' active connection to the science
              content by making suggestions for projects to get involved with, and by
              encouraging children to discuss and question their knowledge of science and the
              world around them.    In this third season of the series, the producers will
              expand coverage of the series to five additional states adjoining Wisconsin. 
              They are convinced they can do this without losing the local interest and
              participation of local institutions which has been a great factor in attracting
              and holding viewers.    James Steinbach, the creator, original producer, and
              executive producer of "Newton's Apple," will be the co-PI with overall
              responsibility for the project.  The series is produced in the three Wisconsin
              Public Television studios -- in Madison, Green Bay, and Menomonie -- and,
              therefore, can find and produce stories which reach out into a wide geographic
              area.
