Title       : Nonparametric Modeling and Prediction for Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9626113

Award Number: 9626113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS9626113  Chen  This research is concerned with nonparametric model building 
              procedures and nonparametric prediction methods in nonlinear time  series
              analysis.  The first objective of  this research is to  develop a new
              nonparametric modeling procedure for nonlinear time  series.  The investigator
              studies the functional coefficient  autoregressive models and makes the model
              easier to use in  practice.  In particular, a weighted local linear regression 
              procedure is studied.  This procedure differs from the classical  local linear
              regression for curve fitting  where the response  function is of interest. 
              Here, estimating the coefficient  functions are of main interest.  A procedure
              for detecting  discontinuities in the coefficient functions is studied as well.
               The second objective of this research is concerned with   multi-step
              predictions using nonparametric smoothing techniques.  The investigator studies
              the properties of a multi-stage  nonparametric predictor, which is closely
              related to the  iterative integration procedures for multi-step prediction. 
              Preliminary study shows that the new method does improve the  accuracy of the
              prediction.  The first goal is to show that the  predictor is applicable to a
              wide class of nonlinear AR models.  The second goal is to investigate the
              practical implementation of  the method, particularly the automatic bandwidth
              selection method  and prediction strategy.  This research is concerned with
              model building procedures and  prediction methods in nonlinear time series
              analysis.  A time  series is a set of data observed over a period of time.  For
               example, daily ozone and pollutant readings for environmental  study,
              quarterly unemployment rate or GNP for economical study  and noisy
              telecommunication signals are all subjects of time  series analysis.  Time
              series analysis tries to reveal the   generating mechanism of the observed time
              series and to provide  sensible methods to predict future observations based on
              current  and past information.  Linear ti me series models assumes the  future
              observations relate to the current and past observations  in simple linear
              functions while nonlinear models assume complex  relationship.  In this
              research, the investigator follows the  principle of `letting the data speak
              for themselves' and develops  modeling procedures for nonlinear time series. 
              It is used to  overcome the difficulty encountered in real applications of 
              choosing an appropriate model.  The second objective of this  research is
              concerned with multi-step predictions for nonlinear  time series. Nonlinear
              time series models have been shown to have  certain advantages in multi-step
              forecasting over linear models.  In this research, the investigator studies the
              properties of a  new predictor that improves the prediction accuracy.  There
              are  sufficient reasons to believe that the results of this research  should
              have significant contributions in nonlinear time series  analysis, which has
              many important applications in the fields of  economics, telecommunication,
              meteorology, environment and many  others.
