Title       : Spatial and Spatial-temporal Bayesian Point Process Models for Bioabudance and
               Other Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9626829

Award Number: 9626829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Wolpert wolpert@isds.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1057,9169,CVIS,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626819  Wolpert  Bayesian hierarchical models are introduced to account for
              uncertainty and spatial variation in the underlying intensity measure for point
              process models.  Inhomogeneous gamma process random fields and, more generally,
              Markov random fields with infinitely-divisible distributions are used to
              construct positively autocorrelated intensity measures for spatial Poisson
              point processes, used in turn to model the number and location of individual
              events.  A data augmentation scheme and Markov chain Monte Carlo numerical
              methods are employed to generate samples from Bayesian posterior and predictive
              distributions.  The methods are developed in both continuous and discrete
              settings, and are applied to problems in forest ecology and other fields. 
              Spatial patterns are an important aspect of statistical data in many fields of
              investigation-- disease mapping, where spatial patterns may help us learn about
              causes or patterns of susceptibility to specific diseases; agriculture, where
              spatial patterns, influenced by soil types, economics, and regional
              agricultural traditions, may help us predict yield; and forest management,
              where spatial patterns help us learn about past land-use and help us anticipate
              problems (for example, susceptibility to insect infestations) and management
              opportunities (the harvesting of overly populous species).  The present
              research exploits recent advances in computing hardware and algorithms and in
              mathematical probability theory to develop new and better statistical models
              and numerical algorithms for exploring spatial pattern data.  The new
              statistical models and numerical algorithms are applied to problems in the
              Environment (studying changing patterns of forest speciation and biodiversity
              in this Federal Strategic Area), Disease Mapping, and Transportation Theory
              (helping to predict commuter traffic flow in an evolving urban environment,
              supporting the Federal Strategic Area of Civil Infrastructure).
