Title       : Theorectical Studies of van der Waals Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9626739

Award Number: 9626739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Szalewicz szalewic@brahms.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, supported by the NSF Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              Program,  investigates the phenomenon of intermolecular   interactions.   Prof.
               Krzysztof  Szalewicz of the University of Delaware   and collaborators will
              further improve symmetry-adapted perturbation   theory (SAPT) developed by them
              for dimer interactions, and a new version   applicable to trimers will be
              derived.  This theory allows transparent   physical interpretation of
              intermolecular potentials in terms of four   fundamental interactions: 
              electrostatic, exchange, induction, and   dispersion.  The theory is free from
              basis set superposition problems and   is computationally more efficient than
              the supermolecular many-body   perturbation theory approach.   High-level
              calculations of   state-of-the-art intermolecular potential energy surfaces for
                experimentally relevant van der Waals dimers and trimers will be   performed.
               These studies will help provide an understanding of the real   physical
              mechanism for the formation of van der Waals bonds and the   physical
              interactions that are responsible for minima, tunneling   barriers, and
              anisotropies of the potentials.  This work is expected to   assist
              interpretation of experimental data, particularly in the case of   three-body
              nonadditivities.   An important part of the project will   involve applications
              aimed at resolving current problems in the field   concerning interactions of
              rare gas atoms with various molecules such as   nitrogen, carbon dioxide,
              water, or ammonia, as well as dimers of those   molecules.  The trimers will
              include rare gas atoms, Ar2-HF, and the   water trimer. The current theoretical
              understanding of three-body   interactions is very unsatisfactory, in
              particular in view of recent   experimental activity in this field.  The SAPT
              method offers the   possibility of physical analysis of nonadditivities and of
              obtaining   accurate numerical values for them.  This project investigates the
              phenomenon of interactions between   molecules.  These interactions, much
              weaker than the chemical forces   binding atoms in molecules, are responsible
              for an extensive range of   physical, chemical, and biological phenomena: from
              the boiling of water   to the genetic code.  Standard computational chemistry
              methods, which are   very successful in describing chemical bonds, are
              inadequate in   describing these intermolecular forces.  Szalewicz and
              collaborators will   develop and use rigorous methods based on a quantum
              mechanical   description of these systems in order to provide a more complete  
              understanding of these molecular interactions.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
