Title       : The SkyTour Expansion Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9626906

Award Number: 9626906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derrick H. Pitts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WHYY TV Channel 12
	      150 North 6th Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191061508    215/351-1248

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               9626906  Pitts    ABSTRACT: WHYY, Inc., in cooperation with the Franklin
              Institute Science Museum, is producing and implementing a radio-based science
              education program for families.  Skytour is a live radio program designed to
              involve the public in observing astronomical phenomena and engaging in science
              activities related to the sciences of the sky.  Each program centers on a
              particular science theme and includes short pre-produced pieces designed to
              capture listeners interest, a live orientation to the night sky with specific
              instructions to listeners about how to locate the phenomenon being discussed,
              and discussion with a guest astronomy expert.  During the broadcast, listeners
              can call in to ask questions and to discuss their observations on-air.    The
              program has been successfully piloted in Philadelphia.  The current project
              will enable the applicants to increase the number of shows to six, two-hour
              shows each year of the project and to expand broadcast to at least three other
              areas.  WHYY currently has definite commitments to participate in the project
              from four radio station/planetarium partners:    New York City:  WFUV and The
              Hayden Planetarium  Pittsburgh:  WDUQ and the Buhl Planetarium  Raleigh-Durham:
              WUNC and The Morehead Planetarium  Vermont:  Vermont Public Radio and The
              Fairbanks Museum and Planetarium    Outreach components of the project will
              include a newsletter, local sky parties organized on the evenings of the
              Skytour broadcasts, related hands-on science activities and workshops at each
              of the participating planetaria, and a Skytour World Wide Web site.    The PI
              will be Derrick Pitts, Vice President and Chief Astronomer at the Franklin
              Institute.  Neil Tickner, WHYY Special Projects Producer, will direct all
              production activities.  Dale McCreedy, the project director for the Franklin
              Institute's National Science Partnership and Girls At the Center, and Minda
              Borun, the Franklin Institute's Director of Research, Evaluation and Planning,
              will both work with the project  in their respective areas of expertise in
              outreach and evaluation.   The project team will work closely with an advisory
              team of astronomers, informal science educators, and parents.
