Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Simple and Complex Block Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9626115

Award Number: 9626115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Morgan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626115  Morgan     This project examines design problems for comparing a
              set of   treatments under a variety of blocking structures.  The simplest of  
              these is that of a single blocking variable which partitions   n experimental
              units into blocks of  k units each, k being less than   the total number of
              treatments. It has long been believed that a   necessary condition for a good
              design for this structure is that    the assignment be binary. This project is
              expanding the scope for   which the alternative idea of  nonbinary  treatment
              assignment can   yield  good designs, where "good" may be expressed in terms of
              the   standard mathematically formulated optimality criteria    and, in some
              cases, ability of the design to maintain important   treatment structure in the
              information matrix. For situations with   more than one blocking factor
              present, the range of conceivable   relationships among them is quite large.
              The investigator is also   studying the interplay between nesting, crossing, 
              and other   blocking factors, with the goal of identifying classes of these
              more   complex structures for which optimal design conditions can be  
              determined with existing methods. Design constructions are being   formulated
              for each setting as well.   %%%   The general problem of comparing a set of
              experimental conditions,   or  "treatments," when faced with heterogeneity in
              the available   units of material on which the experiment is to be performed,
              is   common to many disparate fields of scientific and industrial inquiry.  
              The technique of  blocking, one of the early great contributions of   
              statistics and the experimental process, specifically addresses this   problem.
              Typically using values of some identifiable nuisance   factor, the experimental
              units are partitioned into homogeneous   subsets called blocks. Comparison of
              measurements occurring in   the same block can then be made with greater
              precision than those   in different blocks, the heterogeneity having  been
              eliminated from   such compar isons. Thus the experiment  is improved, in the
              very   practical sense that it gives information  that is more reliable. The  
              design problem itself,  which is the topic of this study, is to   determine
              which treatments are assigned to which units in which   blocks, said assignment
              being driven by the desire to maximize the   overall quality of  information
              the experiment will ultimately   produce. The problem naturally becomes more
              complicated as more   nuisance factors, with various relationships among one
              another, are   introduced or identified. By studying the situation
              mathematically,   large families of good designs are produced which are then  
              applicable to a host of experimental situations. Applications run the   gamut
              of experimental inquiry, from the manufacturing realm to the   agricultural.  
              ***
