Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Models and Methods in Nonlinear Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9626306

Award Number: 9626306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Ercolani ercolani@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626306  Ercolani    In the projects proposed here, the PI intends to
              concentrate on two  particular areas where geometric methods are playing a
              fundamental role.  The methods to be applied here are, first, soliton and  
              near-integrable systems theory and, second, geometric singularity  theory.The
              first concerns the modelling of dispersive difference schemes. The  equations
              of nonlinear optics frequently operate in regimes where  dispersive effects
              tend to dominate over those of viscosity. A particularly  relevant example of
              this is the effects of numerical dispersion in modelling   carrier wave
              shocking of femtosecond pulses. An appropriate model that can  provide a
              benchmark for these effects is the integrable discrete   nonlinear Schrodinger
              equations. The integrability of this model enables  one to entertain a precise
              analysis of continuum limits for this system.  The PI proposes to use the
              underlying Kahler geometry of this model  to deduce convexity estimates which
              should enable one to derive a valid  characterization of these limits including
              the appearance of modulational  instabilities. These characterizations will
              then be compared to modulation  equations derived by formal averaging as well
              as to numerical simulations  of non-integrable discretizations of the nonlinear
              Schrodinger (NLS) pde.  The second topic concerns pattern formation in
              nonlinear optics.  Experiments reveal a rich variety of transverse patterns for
              coherent  fields in a nonlinear optical cavity. The Nonlinear Optics group  of
              the Arizona Center for Mathematical Sciences has derived  mean field models for
              a cavity filled with an isotropic,   nonlinear Kerr medium, and driven by a
              linearly polarised input field.  The equations for this model have the form of
              a damped, driven coupled   pair of defocussing NLS equations and have  been
              numerically demonstrated to produce patterns and defects of the  type seen
              experimentally.  The PI and his collaborators are particularly   interested to
              understand the formation and evolut ion of defects in   pattern forming
              evolution equations and have developed order parameter   equations which model
              the behaviour of modulated roll paterns in a variety  of such evolution
              equations. The PI proposes to derive and study such  modulation equations for
              the above mentioned mean field model. The  PI has also developed a general
              approach, based on geometric singularity  theory,  for the description of
              singularties in systems of pde's. The   goals of this project will be first, to
               classify generic types of  defects for the nonlinear optics model and assess
              their temporal  stability; second, to control the formation of defects to the
              end of  either eliminating them or using them to encode information in
              patterns.  Expectations concerning this second goal are supportied by recent
              sucess  in controlling pattern irregularities in one dimensional models.   %%% 
                Nonlinear optics, which may be defined as the study of the interaction  of
              intense light with matter, was born with the invention of the laser  in the
              1960's. In those early days such interactions required very large  intensities;
              however, nowadays such systems can be constructed with only  modest power
              requirements.  Along with this has come the possibility of  constructing large,
              so-called wide aperture, devices such as semiconductor  lasers. Such devices
              will play an important role in many areas of  technology such as satellite
              communications systems with an ultrafast switching  capacity. With the
              introduction of these  larger physical scales   one expects to see the
              formation of  patterns as well as defects in these patterns (analogous to
              crystalline  defects) which can be  modelled by the equations developed in this
                proposal. Understanding how such patterns arise and evolve can play an 
              important role in efficiently operating and controlling these devices.  In the
              second project of this   proposal oscillatory  solutions in a special class of
              interacting lattice   systems will be investigated.  These systems have
              modelling app lications   which range from theoretical biology to the numerical
              methods used in   numerically simulating  optical systems. The goal is to
              obtain, rigorously,   a continuum description, given by partial differential
              equations and valid   on long spatial and temporal scales, of the microscopic
              variations in these  lattice systems. Such models can help to explain how a
              microscopic system,  such as an alpha-helix protein molecule or a coupled laser
              array,  can behave collectively, and hence macroscopically, in order to
              contribute  to phenomena on scales much larger than those orignally present in
              the  microscopic system.   ***
