Title       : Experimental Studies of Organic Charge Transfer Salts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1999    
File        : a9626291

Award Number: 9626291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Chaikin chaikin@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9626291  Chaikin  A series of experiments are proposed to understand some of the
               basic properties of states of matter in organic conductors, and  to gain
              insights into several current problems in condensed  matter physics.  For
              example, the Bechgaard salts are the only  materials which exhibit the quantum
              Hall effect as a bulk three  dimensional phenomenon.  They are therefore unique
              systems for  studying what happens when the conventional two dimensional 
              electron gas layers are coupled.  Questions as to the  perpendicular
              conductivity and the coupling of edge states are  open and testable.  As
              superconductors these systems are at least  as anisotropic as any others and
              they have much longer mean free  paths.  They are excellent candidates for
              investigating flux  pinning, dynamics and Josephson vortices.  Investigation
              also are  proposed on the nature of the superconducting state. The magnetic 
              field effects in both the"normal" metal and field induced spin  density wave
              states have proven so unusual that there are a  wealth of new phenomena to be
              explained.  Coupled with the fact  that questions of commensurability, magnetic
              breakdown, competing  order parameters and frustration leave the limiting high
              field  ground state an open question theoretically as well as  experimentally,
              there is much to fuel continued excitement in  this field.  %%%  This proposal
              is for continuation of a mostly experimental study  of how low-dimensional
              strong interactions and frustration from  applied fields act together to
              produce some quite interesting  states of matter in organic conductors.  The
              Bechgaard salts are  among the most interesting electronic materials ever
              discovered.  At room temperature they are highly anisotropic metals, but upon 
              cooling they undergo a variety of transitions to a remarkable  number of low
              temperature states.  They were the first organic  superconductors, but that is
              arguably their least interesting  property.  Depending on the anion and the
              pressure the ground  states may be var ied from charge or spin density wave
              insulator  to metal or superconductor.  However, the properties discovered  in
              moderate magnetic fields are even more unusual and striking.  The normal metal
              phase also is extremely unusual showing angular  dependent resonances and large
              magnetoresistances completely  unexplainable from the known bandstructure.
