Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weak Expansion in Real and Complex Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9626874

Award Number: 9626874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek Graczyk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Graczyk    The main goal of the project is to study geometric and
              measure theoretic properties of one dimensional real and complex dynamical
              systems satisfying weak expansion properties  either  of analytical
              (Collet-Eckmann condition) or topological nature (box construction).  The focus
              is on describing and explaining the geometric structure of fractals which arise
              in non-hyperbolic dynamics. In the holomorphic part of the project, the P.I. is
              particularly interested in the dynamical characterization of Holder regularity
              of the Fatou components and the persistence of hyperbolic subsets in Julia sets
              of rational functions. Holder regularity seems to be closely related to the
              Collet-Eckmann condition which requires exponential expansion only along the
              critical orbits. This direction of study was originated by Carleson, Jones and
              Yoccoz in their work on the dynamical classification of Fatou components which
              are John domains. The recent work of Jones and Makarov would imply that the
              Holder Julia sets are metrically small.  Generally, very little is known about
              the Hausdorff dimension of Julia sets which do not satisfy the
              Misiurewicz-Thurston condition. The P.I. has a method of estimating Hausdorff
              dimension for quadratic polynomials which uses induced hyperbolicity. In
              general,  possible methods involve:  Poincare series, conformal measures and
              analytical regularity of Julia sets. The second part of the project concerns
              real 1-dimensional systems.  The objective for S-unimodal Collet-Eckmann
              mappings of the interval is to prove that they induce hyperbolicity and their
              topological and quasisymmetrical classes coincide. The other series of problems
              in which progress is possible concerns the geometric properties of the
              distribution of the orbits and the fractal  structure of the frequency locus in
              the parameter space for non-invertible circle maps.    Many objects and
              phenomena in  nature can be described through ``fractal'' geometry which
              involves self-similarity of consecutive  scales and  sets of fractional
              dimension. Fractal shapes are not compatible with regular geometry of lines and
              circles.  A good example here is a very chaotic coastline shape seen on
              satellite pictures. Such highly complicated sets occur as the domains of
              attractors, locci of chaotic or bifurcational behavior in non-linear systems
              and are often  crucial in understanding the underlying dynamics.One of the aims
              of this project is to show that in many non-linear systems - these model
              phenomena in physics, chemistry, and biology ( Josephson junction, charge
              density waves, population growth in ecosystems, diode-resonators, etc ) - the
              chaotic region is a fractal of small dimension. For example, the resistively
              shunted Josephson junction in microwave fields or charge-density waves in
              radio-frequency electric fields can be described by the differential equation
              of the damped driven pendulum with a periodic force. The two-dimensional return
              map for this equation collapses to a one-dimensional map in a parameter regime
              including transition to chaos.  Frequency locking, noise, and histeresis in
              these systems can thus be described by the dynamical properties of critical
              circle maps, which are studied in this project.
