Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hyperbolic Geometry and Rigidity in Three Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9626233

Award Number: 9626233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair N. Minsky yair@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626233  Minsky            Minsky will investigate a collection of problems
              centered on  the basic classification conjectures in the field of hyperbolic 
              3-manifolds and Kleinian groups, and their connections to holomorphic 
              dynamics.  A prominent open question in this field is Thurston's Ending 
              Lamination Conjecture, which states that a hyperbolic 3-manifold is  uniquely
              determined by its topological type and a list of invariants  that describe the
              asymptotic geometry of its ends.  Consequences of  this conjecture include a
              rigidity theorem for Kleinian group actions  on the sphere, directly analogous
              to outstanding rigidity conjectures  in holomorphic dynamics, and a topological
              description of parameter  spaces of isomorphic Kleinian groups.  Minsky
              previously established  these conjectures in special cases, and the techniques
              developed show  promise for extension to the general case.  A number of
              projects have  grown out of this program, whose successful completion should 
              contribute to the solution of the conjecture, as well as being of  independent
              interest.  These projects investigate topological  characterizations of
              Kleinian group actions on the sphere, some  phenomena associated with geometric
              limits of Kleinian groups (with  R. Canary and J. Brock), and the large scale
              geometry and  combinatorics of the Teichmueller space of a surface (with H.
              Masur).  Minsky is also considering (with M. Lyubich) a new construction that 
              associates to a rational map a 3-dimensional hyperbolic object  analogous to
              the quotient 3-orbifold of a Kleinian group.  This object  renders more
              explicit the powerful analogies between Kleinian groups  and other holomorphic
              dynamical systems.       In the study of low-dimensional geometry, topology and
              dynamics,   one witnesses the depth of interconnection between fields of 
              mathematics.  Henri Poincare, who studied both celestial dynamics and  complex
              analysis (among many other things), observed in the 19th  century that the
              conformal transformations of the Riema nn sphere --  some of the building
              blocks of complex analysis -- extend to act on  the three-dimensional ball
              bounded by the sphere, and their action  preserves a complete, homogeneous
              metric, the metric of Hyperbolic or  Non-Euclidean Space.  This opened the door
              to a beautiful theory  relating topology, geometry, and complex dynamics, which
              was only  seriously explored in the latter part of this century.  The rigidity 
              problem mentioned above is essentially the question of to what extent  the
              topological, or combinatorial, properties of a system determine  its geometric
              properties.  This and other basic questions in the field  can be phrased in
              geometric, topological or dynamical terms, and are  still linked to some of the
              motivating questions about physical  systems of which Poincare was aware a
              hundred years ago.  Issues such  as classification of systems, mapping out
              regions of stability and  instability, deformation and bifurcation of families
              of systems, and  probabilistic properties such as ergodicity, all have
              significance in  both pure and applied mathematics.  Topology and geometry have
              already  provided deep insights into such issues, and one hopes that further 
              study of these interactions will continue to bear fruit.  ***
