Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9626984

Award Number: 9626984
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Rozema   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David B. Rozema has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Rozema received the doctoral degree from   the University of
              Wisconsin at Madison under the supervision of Professor   Samuel H. Gellman. 
              Dr. Rozema will continue research at the University   of Utah under the
              sponsorship of Professor Dale Poulter.  The   postdoctoral research
              investigates of  the mechanism of the enzyme,   protein farnesyl transferase, a
              member of the general family of protein   isoprenyl transferases that catalyze
              the posttranslation modification of   many membrane-bound proteins.  The
              research focuses on the role of zinc   in substrate binding, the nature of the
              interaction between zinc and   peptide substrate, and the participation of zinc
              in the transition state   of the reaction.  The enzyme is a target for
              anticancer therapies.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
              Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed to broaden
              the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful
              careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
