Title       : Stochastic Spatial Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9626675

Award Number: 9626675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Theodore Cox jtcox@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628290 Cox  ABSTRACT  This proposal involves research on several topics in the
              theory and application of interacting particle systems.  Among the phenomena
              these systems model are: competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic
              traits, catalytic chemical reactions, as well as many others.  The investigator
              will pursue research on several specific problems.  The first project involves
              the parabolic Anderson model as an interacting diffusion, and associated
              critical phenomena.  The second project concerns the behavior of
              one-dimensional interfaces regions.  This continues work on a model for hybrid
              zones or "narrow" coexistence zones of different species.  The third project
              attempts to model species abundance distributions with an interacting particle
              system model.  This builds on related work modeling the relationship between
              species number and area.  The fourth project involves possible extensions of a
              recently discovered comparison technique for interacting systems.  Since exact
              calculations are usually difficult or impossible to make, comparison methods
              are important tools for analyzing new systems.  This proposal involves research
              on several topics in the theory and application of interacting particle
              systems. .  Among the phenomena these systems model are: competition of
              species, epidemics, spread of genetic traits, catalytic chemical reactions, as
              well as many others.  The goal of this research is to obtain a better
              qualitative understanding of various complex phenomena that interacting
              particle systems model well. For example, a simple model for the evolution and
              extinction of species, to study species abundance questions, fits into this
              framework.  It is based on the birth, death, movement, and reproduction, with a
              small mutation rate, of individuals.  The investigator hopes to show that this
              type of model can explain the data patterns observed in the field.  Part of the
              proposed research concerns very specific models and questions such as this one,
              and part of the proposed researc h will aim at developing general mathematical
              techniques for handling models of this type.
