Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Survey of Settlement Patterns in the Banda
               Region, West-Central Ghana: Exploring External Influences and Internal
               Responses in West Africa.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9626775

Award Number: 9626775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. DeCorse crdecors@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program of research consists of a six month archaeological survey of the
              Banda region in  western central Ghana.  Investigations are driven by the
              recognition that this area was a political  and economic `frontier,` serving as
              a refuge for populations fleeing potential enslavement by  surrounding states. 
              Frontier zones such as Banda, are now believed to have played a major role  in
              the development of complex societies, making their exploration and
              understanding of critical  importance.  Few research efforts to date, however,
              have addressed these interstitial or frontier  regions. During the last five
              centuries, Banda experienced a series of external pressures arising  from the
              expansion of neighboring states and colonial powers in conjunction with the 
              establishment of long distance trade and the economic incentives to provide
              trade goods  including slaves.  The people of Banda are believed to have
              responded in various ways to these  pressures. The archaeological exploration
              of regional settlement patterning provides an excellent  means to explore the
              issues of political unrest and external economic pressure.  This is because 
              such archaeologically relevant variables as settlement size and makeup,
              location on the  landscape and length of occupation, are strongly influenced by
              a population's economic needs  and pressures as well as its political strength
              and security. Thus, archaeological patterns unique  to frontiers will be sought
              through evidence of abandonment and defensive behaviors and  economic
              interactions.  In this light, the field objectives of the proposed research are
              to perform  a systematic regional survey which will locate and characterize a
              representative sample of  settlements from the last five centuries using the
              variables described above. The survey will  focus on two previously unexplored
              portions of the Banda region.  This research will make contributions on a
              number of different levels.  First, it will provide a  better understanding of
              the region's culture history as well as the range of behaviors  characteristic
              of peoples inhabiting frontier zones.  Second, it will provide a means of 
              establishing whether sites in these frontier areas have distinctive
              archaeological signatures.   Finally, employing a regional approach will afford
              an understanding of the impact of  extra-regional developments and the
              variability of responses to those processes, including long  distance trade and
              incorporation into larger states and ultimately global systems.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
