Title       : Dinofest International: Innovative Science Education Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9626879

Award Number: 9626879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund Stump ed.stump@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Wolberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              STUMP  9626879     Capturing the popularity of dinosaurs and other fossils,
              Dinofest International will be a major science education event inspiring
              interest in science by everyone who attends or otherwise participates. 
              Dinofest International is unique in that it transcends and builds bridges
              across the boundaries between scientists and nonscientists, students and
              teachers, and the interested public.  Through displays of fossils from the
              seven continents, the public will gain an understanding of their world wide
              distribution and the international nature of science beyond political
              boundaries.  Three primary and interrelated components will be presented at
              Dinofest International:  1) science education centering on a spectacular
              exhibit of dinosaurs and other fossils, 2) a symposium of dinosaur experts
              presenting papers intelligible to non-specialists, and 3) an interactive
              broadcast linking a panel of dinosaur experts with audiences of school children
              at remote sites throughout North America.   The prime focus of Dinofest
              International will be tens of thousands of square feet of dinosaurs and other
              striking fossils, many never seen before, organized about the theme of hands-on
              exhibits and demonstrations, for school children and their teachers.  Study
              guides and opportunities for teacher training will be provided.  A symposium
              involving the world's leading dinosaur experts will cover all aspects of
              dinosaurs, such as how they functioned and behaved, theories of extinction, and
              DNA cloning.  The emphasis will be on clear, understandable presentations
              geared for the literate public, as well as the experts.  A special session on
              Science Education and Policy will be featured.  A proceedings volume will also
              be published.  The third major component of Dinofest International will be a
              live broadcast from Arizona State University involving a panel of dinosaur
              experts responding to questions and comments from school children at a number
              of selected sites across North America and possibly elsewhere in th e world.  
              Additional components of Dinofest International include a large, multi-media
              art exhibit displaying pictorial and three dimensional art with a natural
              history/dinosaur theme, and a film festival during which the classics of
              dinosaur-centered films will be shown.
