Title       : Artificial and Approximate Likelihoods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9626266

Award Number: 9626266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Mykland mykland@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS 9626266  Mykland    The project seeks to extend the use of likelihood
              methods to  semi- and nonparametric situations.  Important questions include 
              how to define and assess the accuracy of the likelihood ratio and  R-star
              statistics.  Of particular interest so far has been the  development of the
              dual likelihood, of Bartlett identities for  martingales, and of embedding
              techniques which permit the  derivation of asymptotic expansions for
              martingales.  Currently,  the investigators are expanding the theory to cover 
              non-martingale situations, by considering criterion functions  which are
              approximately likelihoods.  This covers a much broader  spectrum of data
              analysis problems.  It is desirable to describe  what types of inference can be
              covered by this, and what  corrections over likelihood inference that ought to
              be used when  carrying out procedures based on this approach.  The study 
              concerns both existing procedures (such as empirical and point  process
              "likelihoods"), and at new constructions which arise from  the artificial
              likelihood point of view.  In particular, the  "design-your-own likelihood" is
              being investigated, with  particular reference to resampling based criterion
              functions.   The implications for problems in financial engineering and 
              investment under uncertainty are being studied as part of the  project.  Policy
              makers in both business and goverment are faced  with the need to take
              decisions under uncertainty.  Firms invest  in new plants, for instance, with
              imperfect knowledge of current  and future market conditions for their
              products.  Regulations  concerning the environment, as another example, often
              try to  affect systems that are so complex that even with the best models  and
              scientific studies, there is tremendous uncertainty about the  effects of one's
              actions.  Decisions in such circumstances not  only require estimates and
              predictions, but also a maximally  accurate quantification of how far away such
              estimates are likely  to be from the actual figures.  This  project is about a
              new  technology for doing this, one that substantially improves the 
              reliability of such assessments.  It is based on a statistical  theory
              ("likelihood inference") first developed in Britain in the  1920s, but which
              has only in the last few years been opened up to  the more complex and vaguely
              specified systems often faced by  policy makers.
