Title       : Limit Theorems and Inequalities in Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9626778

Award Number: 9626778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Zinn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626778 Zinn  ABSTRACT  This investigator works on structural  problems
              concerning U-statistics and U-processes, correlation  inequalities for
              symmetric convex sets and hypercontractivity for  functions (other than sums).
              The project on U-statistics and  processes follows up on fairly recent work of
              this investigator,  J. Cuzick and E. Gine as well as some work of Anda Gadidov
              (who  has just obtained her Ph.D. under the direction of this  investigator).
              The project on correlation inequalities work has  been under way for some time
              and several results have already  been obtained. In particular, Schechtman,
              Schlumprecht and this  investigator obtained the desired inequality for
              ellipsoids.  The  third project follows up on a recently submitted paper (with 
              Hitczenko, Kwapien, Li, Schechtman, Schlumprecht) on  hypercontractivity of
              alternating maxima and minima of  multi-indexed independent, identically
              distributed random  variables.    Classical empirical processes can and have
              been  used by statisticians to obtain information about basic  characteristicq
              of a ``population'' using samples collected from  the population. The modern
              theory, developed over the last twenty  or so years, allows one to study many
              such characteristics  simultaneously  A component of both the classical and
              modern  theory studied by this investigator is U-processes, which are, in  a
              sense, building blocks for general statistical functionals.   Such
              investigations will help to better assess the accuracy of  statistical
              procedures currently used in the study of censored  and/or truncated data in
              Medicine, Astronomy and other fields.  The modern theory of empirical processes
              has also made  connections with another field of probability, namely, the study
               of Gaussian processes. Inequalities for such processes have  played a major
              role not only in probability--as well as many  other fields of mathematics,
              such as harmonic analysis, Banach  space theory and, more recently, operator
              theory--but also in  Theoretical Physics (Quant um field theory).  The Gaussian
               Correlation Conjecture is one such outstanding problem in this  area. Many
              correlation results in, for example, statistical  mechanics, attack one-sided
              problems. This particular conjecture  attacks a two-sided barrier problem. One
              hoped for by-product of  a solution to this problem is to other two-sided
              problems present  in a variety of fields. One of the approaches to this
              problem,  led to the third project under study by this investigator,  namely,
              hypercontractivity. In our context hypercontractivity  allows one to change the
              original formulation of the problem, to  a problem more amenable to some recent
              advances in the theory of  inequalities for Gaussian processes..
