Title       : A Probabilistic Theory of Positional Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9626151

Award Number: 9626151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jozsef Beck jbeck@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9626151 Beck  ABSTRACT  In this proposal the investigator outlines a new,
              probabilistic approach to positional games (i.e. board-games, or combinatorial
              games). The straightforward way to analyze a position is to examine all of its
              options and all the options of these options and all the options of the options
              of these options and all the.... The obvious difficulty is that this exhausting
              search through the game-tree takes an enormous amount of time even for very
              simple games (exponential running time in terms of the board-size). Note that
              the game-matrix approach, the set-up of traditional game theory, is much worse:
              usually requiring double exponential time. A desperate attempt to make up for
              the lack  of time is to study the random walk on the game-tree. Now the basic
              idea of the probabilistic theory of the investigator is that  the probabilistic
              analysis of the random walk (i.e. the random game)  is often a tractable
              problem, and also what one has learned from this analysis can often be
              converted, via potential arguments (like resource counting with
              loss-probabilities), into deterministic optimal strategies. The probabilistic
              theory is basically a game-theoretic  adaptation of the so-called Probabilistic
              Method in Combinatorics  applied to hopelessly complicated games where
              algebraic and other exact methods fail to work. The surprising thing is that
              this desperate attempt turns out to be very successful for large, interesting
              classes of positional games. The main chapters of the proposal are: the
              foundations of positional games (a surprisingly non-trivial task),
              game-theoretic Ramsey theory, game-theoretic random graph theory,
              game-theoretic Lovasz Local Lemma, and applications in algorithms and
              complexity.  Traditional game theory, i.e. von Neumann's theory, is basically
              the theory of games of incomplete information. It provides good insights to
              Economics, and many areas of social science (Management, Military Strategy,
              etc.). Similarly, one can expect many new applications from a successfu l
              theory of games of complete information (i.e. positional games). This is
              exactly what the investigator's proposal is all about. An extremely exciting
              aspect of studying positional games is that it might give a better
              understanding of how human intelligence works. It might have some impact on
              fundamental questions like whether human understanding is a computational or a
              non-computational process. Note that in Japan there are several "perfect"
              players who, when playing first, can consistently win Go-Moku (5-in-a-row on
              the 19 by 19 Go board), but nobody can turn these heuristics into precise
              arguments. Similarly, 6-in-a-row on a sufficiently large board between two
              reasonably good players is always a boring draw-game, but again we cannot
              precisely explain why. Or what is the reason that Go-playing computer programs
              are nowhere close to the best human players? These are just three of many
              examples where the human mind "knows" something beyond rigorous mathematics.
              One more thing: in contrast to Go, the best Chess-playing computer programs
              have now reached the level of human Grandmasters. But there is a basic
              difference. Computer programs examine millions of positions before deciding
              what to do next. On the other hand, even the best Grandmasters do not search
              more than 100 positions per move. In human Chess, pattern recognition plays a
              more important role than search. How to supply this human knowledge to a
              computer is a puzzle that no one has solved yet. Beside its theoretical
              importance, the investigator's project could be a crucial step toward the
              solution of these questions, too.
