Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9626101

Award Number: 9626101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Ferry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626101  Ferry       The investigator plans to study a number of topics in
              controlled  topology and differential geometry. The most pressing of these
              concern  the nonresolvable homology manifolds discovered by the investigator, 
              J. Bryant, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger.  Simply put, the main project is  to
              discover to what extent the classical geometric theory of  topological
              manifolds carries over to these newly discovered spaces.  This study is closely
              related to the well-known Borel and Bing-Borsuk  Conjectures.  Other problems
              on the investigator's list of projects  include the construction of controlled
              Gamma-surgery theory and its  application to the study of topological
              embeddings in codimension two,  the construction of manifold structures on
              acyclic Poincare duality  spaces, the study of ``short'' maps defined on
              ``large'' Riemannian  manifolds, and applications of controlled topology to the
              study of  spaces of Riemannian manifolds.       Much of topology is concerned
              with the study of mathematical objects  called spaces.  The surface of a sphere
              is a space, as is the surface  of a donut.  In the study of mathematical
              systems with many variables,  it is common for spaces of very high or even
              infinite dimension to  play important roles.  A classical problem in topology
              is to find small  checkable sets of axioms which characterize particular
              spaces.  One  popular set of axioms involves the notion of connectivity. 
              Roughly  speaking, a space is connected if it is all in one piece.  It is 
              locally connected if it can be chopped up into arbitrarily small  connected
              pieces.  (Be warned -- these plain English definitions are at  best rough
              approximations to the actual mathematical definitions.)  In 1978, James Cannon
              made an amazingly perceptive conjecture.  He  conjectured that if a space
              satisfied certain generalized connectivity  axioms and had enough room in it to
              push certain sets apart, then it  was a topological manifold -- a space which
              is assembled by gluing  together small pieces of ordi nary Euclidean space. 
              (Both the surface  of a sphere and the surface of a donut are topological
              manifolds of  dimension 2.  The ``curved spaces'' appearing in general
              relativity are  topological manifolds of dimension 4.)  Combining work of F.
              Quinn and  R. D. Edwards shows that Cannon's conjecture is true whenever a 
              connected space contains even the tiniest manifold piece.  This  manifold piece
              acts as a sort of seed which determines the entire local   structure of the
              space.  Working with J. Bryant, W. Mio, and S. Weinberger,   the investigator
              has shown that Cannon's conjecture is not true in complete  generality.  The
              main question the investigator will be studying is whether   the ``seeding''
              phenomenon from the Edwards-Quinn case holds in general --   whether the local
              structure of connected counterexamples is the same at   every point.  If this
              turns out to be true, these new spaces could become  objects of interest
              paralleling manifolds.  Cannon's axioms guarantee  that from a large-scale
              point of view, these spaces look exceedingly  like manifolds.  If the seeding
              phenomenon holds, one imagines that  there could eventually be theories
              speculating that we live in one of  these new mathematical objects rather than
              in ``ordinary'' Euclidean  space.  ***
