Title       : Further Study of Random Sums, Bilinear Forms, Multilinear Forms, Stopping Times,
               Expectations, Tail Probabilities & Limit Theorems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9626236

Award Number: 9626236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klass jane@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626236 Klass  ABSTRACT  The Principal Investigator and his colleagues study the
              behavior of random sums.  Work in three areas is proposed: quadratic (bilinear)
              forms having a fixed number of summands, ones having a random number of
              summands, and improved tail probability approximations for Poissonized sums of
              independent random variables.  In the first such area it is anticipated that
              results will be obtained which identify the order of magnitude of the
              expectation of a function of the absolute value of a bilinear form (and also of
              a generalized U-statistic) of a fixed number of independent real-valued random
              variables, for any non-decreasing function of at most polynomial growth without
              further assumptions on the bilinear form, the generalized U-statistics, the
              distributions, or the number of independent variates.  The second problem area,
              worked on if time permits, will attempt to establish similar results regarding
              the expectation of the maximum absolute value of one specific family of
              bilinear forms of independent and identically distributed mean zero random
              variates, maximized up to a stopping time determined by the variates
              themselves.  Thirdly, the proposer and colleagues will attempt to produce
              improved and best possible tail probability approximations for Poissonized sums
              of independent random variables satisfying certain constraints.  Probabilistic
              issues crop up whenever numbers are important and total knowledge or command of
              the situation is rendered humanly impossible.  For example, the management of a
              chain store (e.g. Sears or Macy's) must continually make decisions concerning
              how much of its capital to allocate to each of a multitude of items.  Yet it
              does not really know the entire sales picture.  Not only does management not
              know future trends, it doesn't know what the current sales results are for
              comparable or competitive items sold by other companies in similar locations --
              and management may not have full comprehension of the contributory factors
              influencing its own sales  pattern.  To make good financial decisions,
              management needs a fairly comprehensive and continually updated mathematical
              model of its fiscal situation.  For instance, it needs to know what is the
              chance that it will have more than d unsold dresses of cost c or more in a
              given store, as well as throughout the company.  To assess the sensitivity of
              its profitability to variations in materials and labor costs as well as
              consumer demand the company may want to compute expectations involving
              quantities which mathematicians recognize as quadratic forms or generalized
              U-statistics.  Thus, if their utility were properly recognized, the results to
              be obtained in this proposal might well be of substantial industrial interest.
