Title       : Computational Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9626231

Award Number: 9626231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert Baumslag gilbert@groups.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9139,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Baumslag  9626231    The investigator and his colleagues develop software to
              study  finitely presented groups.  Many problems that arise in diverse 
              mathematical disciplines can be distilled into related problems  about finitely
              presented groups.  One of the major developments  of the decade beginning in
              the mid 1950s has been the proof that  almost all questions about such finitely
              presented groups are  algorithmically undecidable.  Nevertheless, the very
              importance  of these groups makes it essential to try to obtain at least 
              partial information about them.  In particular, although problems  about
              finitely presented groups are unsolvable in general, it may  be possible in a
              number of specific instances to solve such  problems.  In order to gain some
              insight into these problems, it  is often necessary to try to carry out some
              experiments and  computations with finitely presented groups.  Such experiments
               and computations are very time-consuming and usually  impossible to carry out
              by hand.  This project aims to make such  experiments and computations possible
              by using very fast  computers. enabling one to gather enough information
              together  about many important problems to facilitate their solution.  The 
              project creates and implements a package of group-theoretical  algorithms and
              procedures, which can be run by means of a  graphical user interface and which
              is easily accessible by a  widevariety of users.    Groups are mathematical
              entities that encapsulate, among other  things, the intrinsic meaning of
              symmetry.  This explains,in  part, why they turn out to be a very important
              tool in physics,  chemistry, biology and other mathematical disciplines.  The 
              understanding of these "groups" provide insight into these  disciplines, as
              well as a means for studying them.  For example,  groups play an essential role
              in quantum mechanics and particle  physics and they also provide a means for
              studying the space  people live in.  Many of these groups have seemingly simple
               descriptions, even though t hey themselves can be very  complicated.  This
              complexity helps to explain why, for example,  certain important parts of
              chemistry and biology are so  difficult.  They also give rise to new problems
              and provide for  solutions to problems in theoretical computer science, 
              cryptography and other fields.  Their ubiquitousness and  usefulness make the
              creation of a software package that will lead  to a deeper understanding of
              many of them an extremely important  enterprise.
