Title       : Multivariate Estimation for Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9626189

Award Number: 9626189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gutti J. Babu babu@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric D. Feigelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626189  Babu     Many important problems in astronomical research require
              models that are  often composite and nonlinear, far more complex than the
              models assumed in  standard multivariate analysis.  While these models can
              sometimes be  calculated analytically, they often can only be represented by
              Monte Carlo  simulations, particularly when selection biases are involved in
              the data  collection.  In such cases, the empirical distribution does not
              approach the  underlying population distribution and standard parameter
              estimation is  inapplicable.  The investigators study an estimation procedure,
              based on  projections of multivariate datasets on to 1-dimensional spaces, to
              derive  optimal values and constraints on the hidden parameters  
              Kolmogorov-Smirnov-type statistics based on the projections will be used to 
              compare the data with models.  Asymptotic consistency and the asymptotic 
              distribution of the new statistics will be evaluated using approximation 
              theory of empirical processes.  When applied to astronomical problems, 
              `best-fit' model parameters may be computed even for biased multivariate  data
              and complicated models.  %%%      Many important problems in astronomical
              research involve applying  complicated astrophysical models to datasets with
              many variables:  the  evolution of galaxies since the Big Bang, the
              distribution of matter in our  Galaxy, the age of the oldest stars in globular
              clusters.  The astronomer  seeks insight into the validity of the models and
              the range of model  parameters consistent with the data.  The models are often
              very complex, and  real datasets frequently suffer from known selection biases
              (e.g. only the  brighter galaxies are detected).  We develop and apply the
              mathematical  and statistical tools necessary to treat such problems.  This
              project is part of a   long-term effort to promote intellectual integration of
              two disciplines:  statistics,  which has sophisticated tools for understanding
              data; and astronomy, which  confronts fundamental questions a bout our physical
              Universe.  ***
