Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9626627

Award Number: 9626627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Meyer ken.meyer@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Meyer    Dr. Meyer (with Dr. McCord)  will study the topology of the
              integral manifolds of the regularized spatial three-body problem.  He wishes to
              describe the bifurcations by computing the homology of these manifolds for
              various values of the parameters.  He will try to clarify the existence of
              Arnold diffusion in the three-body problem using reduction, symplectic scaling,
               normalization, and the theory of normally hyperbolic manifolds.  Dr.   Meyer
              (with Dr. Schmidt) will study the existence of KAM tori near elliptic orbits of
              the three-body problem.  He (with Ms Howison, a graduate student) will
              establish the existence of various periodic solutions of the spatial restricted
              three-body problem.  He will also try to establish the existence of elliptical
              comet like orbits in the full three-body problem.    Dr. Meyer studies the
              differential equations the describe the motion of the planets and satellites in
              our solar system, the N-body problem.  He also studies other types of equations
              that describe mechanical systems. Since these equations are not solvable
              exactly, he studies questions about special types of solutions.  For example,
              when does the system of equations have periodic solutions or even
              quasi-periodic solutions?  He will attempt to establish several new families of
              periodic solutions and several new families of quasi-periodic solutions for the
              N-body problem.  He has developed several new methods to attack these problems.
               The existence of these quasi-periodic solutions give some partial
              understanding of the stability of the solar system.  He will also study some
              global questions about these systems.  What global constraints on the possible
              configuration of the bodies come from the conservation of energy and momentum?
