Title       : Multiple Imputation Inferences with Public-Use Data Files and Frequentist
               Properties of Bayesian Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9626691

Award Number: 9626691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Li Meng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626691  Meng  This is a comprehensive research program on multiple
              imputation  methodology.  Multiple imputation methodology is  the most  
              effective inferential method available for handling the common   and complex
              problem of nonresponse in sample surveys, especially  those that produce
              public-use data files shared by many users.    The multiple imputation
              framework was established under the  Bayesian perspective, mainly because the
              Bayesian approach  provides a coherent and flexible general framework for 
              constructing sophisticated imputation models that incorporate all  available
              information.  However, the fact that the public-use  data files are designed to
              be shared by many users requires that  the procedures used for creating
              multiple imputations, and for  analyzing the multiply-imputed data sets, must
              have good  frequentist properties.  Thus, the study and use of multiple 
              imputation highlights and requires the melding of the Bayesian  and frequentist
              perspectives, thus posing many challenging and  intriguing research problems at
              the intersection of these two  perspectives.  To effectively tackle these
              problems, this  research is conducted simultaneously at two levels. At the 
              general level, the research examines new robust frequentist  properties of
              Bayesian procedures.  At the specific level, the  research studies the use of
              these properties in multiple  imputation, with a focus on constructing new
              procedures as well  as justifying existing ones under more general conditions. 
              Specific topics include confidence validity under uncongenial  multiple
              imputation inferences, frequentist properties of   posterior predictive
              p-values, and unbiased imputations with  single observation unbiased priors. 
              This research studies the important and complicated problem of  nonresponse, a
              problem inherent to all  sample surveys. The most  serious problem caused by
              nonresponse is nonresponse bias, that  is, those people who do not respond are
              systematically different  from those who do respond.  Su ch systematic
              differences have been  repeatedly documented in the social, economic, and
              statistical  literature, for example, on self-reporting of income.  If the 
              bias is not corrected and only the answers from respondents are  used, a very
              distorted picture of the characteristics (e.g.,  average annual income of
              households) of the underlying population  is likely to be obtained. Correcting
              for such systematic  distortion, especially for large public-data files, is a 
              very complex and demanding task.  The basic task is to reduce the  nonresponse
              bias by using available information (e.g.,  demographic information) on the
              nonrespondents to predict their  missing values.  Since we have uncertainty in
              our prediction, we  need more than one prediction, i.e. imputation, to honestly
               display the uncertainty. With more than one imputation, it  becomes
              straightforward for an individual user to estimate   the loss of information
              due to nonresponse and thus obtain valid  statistical inference using only
              standard complete-data analysis  procedures.  It is obvious that the quality of
              the imputation  model has direct impact on the quality of the subsequent 
              statistical analyses. A main aim of this research is to provide  better and
              more flexible methodologies for constructing  imputation models; the
              significance of such a research is  highlighted by the fact that the analyses
              of public-use data  files typically have a profound impact on our society
              because the  conclusions from these analyses are typically used to answer 
              questions in economics, education, demographic studies, public  health and
              policy, sociology, political science, among others.   Another aim of this
              research is to explore the possible use of  the methodologies developed for
              multiple imputation to  missing-data problems in other content areas, such as
              the problem  of handling the missing observations in ultraviolet radiation 
              measurements, which are crucial for accessing global atmospheric  changes due
              to ozone depletion.
