Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9626470

Award Number: 9626470
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander R. Muci   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Alexander R. Muci has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Muci received the doctoral degree from   Harvard University
              under the supervision of Professor David A. Evans.    Dr. Muci will continue
              research at the California Institute of Technology   under the sponsorship of
              Professor John E. Bercaw.  The postdoctoral   research will focus on the
              synthesis and study of enantiomerically pure   polymerization catalysts.  In
              particular, work includes the synthesis of   an yttrocene complex where
              chirality installed in the silicon linker   controls the rotational orientation
              of the substituted Cp rings.    Longterm research goals target the development
              of synthetically useful   catalytic carbon-carbon bond activation reactions. 
              Heterogeneous,   metal-catalyzed carbon-carbon bond cleavage is an important
              process for   the cracking of crude petroleum hydrocarbons into more useful,
              lower   molecular weight chemicals and fuels.  The Postdoctoral Research
              Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural
              program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and
              attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and
              teaching.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
