Title       : SBIR Phase II: The Role of Gamma Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) in Plant Growth and
               Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9626947

Award Number: 9626947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397861             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Kinnersley kinnersleya@auxein.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auxein Corporation
	      3125 Sovereign Drive, Suite B
	      Lansing, MI  48911    517/882-7370

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9626947  Kinnersley       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will expand on the Phase I demonstration that formulations containing
              4-aminobutyric acid (GABA) increase plant growth and reduce plants' fertilizer
              requirements.  There are growing concerns with both providing enough food to
              feed the world's growing population and problems of nitrogen pollution caused
              by overuse of nitrogen fertilizers.  This has created opportunities for
              products to increase fertilizer efficiency while either maintaining or
              increasing crop productivity. Auxein Corporation has developed proprietary
              formulations that have significantly increased production in diverse plants
              such as turf grass, bush beans and cherries, and reduced the levels of
              fertilizer needed to give optimal productivity.  Mineral analysis of treated
              plants has shown an increase in the content of the macronutrients needed for
              plant growth with the most consistent increase shown in tissue potassium
              content. In treated rye grass and duckweed, levels of potassium increased more
              than 200 percent.  The correlation between GABA-mediated increases in plant
              growth and increases in tissue potassium content led to a working hypothesis
              that GABA bioactivity in plants is similar to its mechanism of action in
              animals, where it is known to affect transport of calcium and potassium.  The
              research objectives of Phase II are designed to develop a product formulation
              suitable for commercial application and establish the efficacy of the company's
              formulations in field tests, emphasizing targets crops where both increased
              yield and quality through improved potassium nutrition would be of benefit. 
              Another objective is to quantify the savings in fertilizer requirements that
              can be achieved in the field.  The results of Phase II research are expected to
              establish the efficacy of the company's formulations for increasing plant
              growth and productivity and reducing plants fertilizer requirements, and to
              demonstrate their commercial utility.  The co mpany estimates the total U. S.
              market opportunity for such products to be approximately $3.0 billion, and its
              goal is to achieve $200 MM in product sales within five years of product
              introduction.  The product value will be further increased if use results in a
              mitigation of nitrogen pollution and if GABA functions in plants by increasing
              mineral availability, thereby improving crop quality.  ***
