Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9626319

Award Number: 9626319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. De Boor deboor@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amos Ron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9626319  de Boor    The proposed research comprises three topics, all in the
              general area of   representations and approximations of functions of several
              variables.  It is   expected to contribute in the areas of  Multivariate
              Splines, Multivariate   Polynomial Interpolation, Radial Basis Function
              Approximation, Wavelets,   and Gabor Expansions.  The first topic concerns
              polynomial interpolation.    Several years ago, the proposers came up with a
              scheme that assigns, to any   data on any finite discrete pointset in several
              dimensions, a polynomial   interpolant of least possible degree, and with
              various other desirable   properties. It is proposed to develop an error
              formula for  that scheme, in   preparation for its application in cubatures or
              in the construction of   trivariate finite elements. The second topic deals
              with applications of the   theory of approximation from shift-invariant spaces,
              a theory that was   developed by the proposers and others.  One suggested
              application, of a   theoretical  nature, but pertinent to wavelets, explores
              the (surprising)   connection between the smoothness of functions in a
              refinable space and the   approximation orders provided by such a space. 
              Another, very unexpected,   application of shift-invariant space theory is in
              the area of approximation to   scattered data from the span of translates of a
              radial basis function. The   suggested approach is based on a new conversion
              formula that allows the   extension of many approximation schemes on uniform
              grids to general   grids.  The last topic deals with the representation of
              functions in one or   more variables via  decomposition/reconstruction
              techniques.  A thorough   understanding  reached in prior research on general
              shift-invariant systems   is now used in the constructions of new wavelet and
              Gabor systems.    Special attention is given to exploiting the freedom offered
              by the   redundancy inherent in oversampled systems.    Computer solutions of
              physical problems (including the problems to be   att acked by high performance
              computing) require a description of the   various physical aspects of the
              problem in the only language a computer   understands, namely numbers. The
              resulting mathematical description (of a   car door or the human heart, of
              pictures taken from a  satellite,  of the   moisture content of air as a
              function of longitude, latitude and height above   sea level, etc.) is of
              necessity inexact, and this makes it very important to   develop efficient
              methods of representation, i.e., methods of acceptable   accuracy and using not
              too many numbers. The proposal concerns the   development of such methods (for 
              descriptions involving several   parameters) and of means for ascertaining
              their accuracy and efficiency.
