Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Methods in Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9626616

Award Number: 9626616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75600              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Goresky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626616  Goresky       During the last decade, many apparently insurmountable
              difficulties   in the Langlands program have been overcome.  Recently,
              attention has  turned to the so-called "Fundamental lemma," which appears to be
              the  single most difficult unproven conjecture in the field, and which 
              threatens to delay indefinitely the completion of the program.  Nevertheless,
              the lemma is so widely believed to be true that papers  are regularly published
              that depend on its validity.  In the simplest  cases, the fundamental lemma is
              a conjectural equality between an  orbital integral on a p-adic algebraic
              group, and another orbital  integral on an endoscopic group.  It is an amazing
              formula, which has  been verified (with great difficulty) in a number of
              special cases.  Professors Goresky, Kottwitz, and MacPherson have found a new
              approach  to this problem that adds a number of geometric ideas and methods; 
              by a sequence of reductions, applications of the Weil conjectures and  the
              Lefschetz fixed point formula, each case of the fundamental lemma  may be
              restated as an equality between the equivariant cohomology  groups of two
              naturally occurring complex projective algebraic  varieties.  These two
              varieties apparently have little or nothing to  do with each other except that
              they both admit an action by the same  torus.  Using their newly developed
              formula for equivariant  cohomology, Professors Goresky, Kottwitz, and
              MacPherson have found it  possible to compare both sides of the fundamental
              lemma, which in many  cases suffices for a proof.  They are refining this
              technique with the  hopes that it may eventually lead to a complete proof.     
               To put the foregoing in perspective, during the 1970's, R. Langlands  (of the
              Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton) outlined a series  of conjectures
              and ideas of enormous scope and depth that, when fully  explored and verified,
              will result in a "grand unification" of several  branches of mathematics,
              including number theory, representation  theory of  Lie groups, and harmonic
              analysis.  During the last twenty  years enormous progress has been made on
              this program, and very  difficult obstacles have been overcome.  Nevertheless,
              it is commonly  believed that it may take another twenty years (or more) before
               Langlands' ideas are fully explored.  The "fundamental lemma" remains  the
              single most outstanding difficulty in the program.  It has been  proven in many
              special cases, and, as mentioned above, it is so widely  believed to be true
              that papers which depend on it are regularly  published in refereed journals. 
              Professors Goresky, Kottwitz and  MacPherson have discovered new geometric
              techniques in the study of  the fundamental lemma that will lead to its proof
              in many new cases  and may eventually lead to a complete proof.  Although these
              geometric  techniques have been developed primarily to carry out this step in 
              Langlands' program, they have already been applied to problems in  other areas
              of mathematics.  ***
