Title       : Electronic and Vibrational Energy Transfer Dynamics Studied Through van der
               Waals Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9626129

Award Number: 9626129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hai-Lung Dai dai@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hai-Lung Dai of the University of Pennsylvania is supported by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue his studies on van   der
              Waals (vdW) complexes. Intermolecular interactions that induce   electronic and
              vibrational energy transfer will be studied through vdW   complexes formed with
              the two molecules involved in the encounter.  The   vdW forces place the two
              molecules in a unique orientation and at a fixed   distance defined by the
              complex structure.  By monitoring the   fluorescence decay and emission spectra
              following optical excitation of   the complex, energy transfer dynamics can be
              examined with orientation   and energy specification.  Isomeric complex
              structures will be used to   enable the orientation effect to be studied. 
              Specifically, (a)   collision-induced electronic relaxation such as intersystem
              crossing will   be studied through monitoring laser-induced fluorescence (LIF)
              decay in   vdW complexes.  Molecular orbital dependence in electronic
              relaxation of   molecules will be characterized together with the effect of
              different   collision partners.  (b)  Degenerate four wave mixing (DFWM) will
              be   developed to study complexes with rapid nonradiative decay and low  
              fluorescence yield.  (c)  Structures and vdW modes will be determined   from
              LIF, DFWM and stimulated emission spectroscopy.  Models for   calculating
              intermolecular potentials will be tested against these   experimental
              measurements and used for searching isomeric structures of   the complexes.   
              This research deals with the problem of how energy flows within and among  
              vibrationally and electronically excited molecules.  The molecules of   study
              are incorporated in molecular clusters which are held together by   weak
              intermolecular vdW forces.  Vibrational or electronic excitation of   the
              component molecules will generally cause the complex to dissociate.    This
              dissociation process mimics the energy transfer that occurs between   colliding
              molecules.  The experiments with molecules embedded in a vdW   complex provide
              a measure of control over the reaction process that is   not available with
              molecular gases in which the molecules are randomly   oriented.  The experiment
              will provide information useful for the   understanding of the reactivity of
              different molecular orbitals, and for   the determination of the potential
              energy surface which characterizes the   reaction.  With this information it
              will be possible to devise novel   photochemical reaction pathways.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
