Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Development of an Advanced Numerical Method for Modeling
               Thermal Ink Jet Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9626153

Award Number: 9626153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elbridge G. Puckett egpuckett@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1022,1504,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626153  Puckett       This research project undertakes to develop and implement
               effective numerical methods for modeling fluid flows in thermal  inkjets. 
              Such a flow is multidimensional and is characterized by  high thermal
              gradients, multiple phases, and interfaces and free  boundaries.  The project,
              supported under the GOALI initiative, is  a collaboration between investigators
              at the University of  California--Davis and Xerox and features joint mentoring
              of a  postdoctoral researcher.  A goal of the project is to develop  reliable
              and effective software to model the fluid problems and to  validate the
              numerical methods and software against physical  experiments.       This
              project is concerned with developing advanced  computational methods for
              modeling fluid flows in thermal inkjets,  and incorporating the methods in
              software.  These flows arise when  the ink in an inkjet cartridge is heated to
              spray characters onto  paper.  The heated ink (a liquid) forms a vapor bubble
              (a gas)  that shoots the ink onto the paper.  In this process, the formation 
              of the bubble, its growth in the surrounding ink, and the way this  forces ink
              out of the cartridge are genuinely three-dimensional  phenomena.  They involve
              thermal properties (where the ink is  heated to form a bubble), multiphase flow
              (liquid and gas), and  free boundaries (where the bubble grows in the ink, and
              where a  droplet of ink is forced out of the cartridge).  These features are 
              difficult by themselves.  To verify that their combination is  modeled
              accurately, the investigators compare the computational  results against
              experiments.  The project is performed by  researchers E. Gerry Puckett at
              UC--Davis and John Andrews at  Xerox's Wilson Research Center, who jointly
              mentor a postdoctoral  researcher.  This provides a close integration of
              research and  education in a combination of industrial and academic
              environments  that provides a junior mathematical scientist advanced training
              in  the design, development, and application of sop histicated  numerical
              methods to problems that arise in science and industry.  Such integration is a
              key feature of the GOALI initiative, which  supports the project.
