Title       : Adaptive Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9626102

Award Number: 9626102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven K. Thompson skt@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  DMS 9626102  Thompson    Adaptive sampling designs are designs in which the
              procedure for  selecting the units to include in the sample may depend on 
              observations made during the survey.  For some populations,  adaptive
              strategies produce substantial increases in precision of  estimates compared to
              conventional designs with equivalent sample  sizes.  The research investigates
              new classes of adaptive designs  and inference procedures and develops the
              needed basic theory.   The research involves a combination of design-based and 
              model-based approaches, and includes investigations in adaptive  cluster
              sampling, adaptive allocation, adaptive graph sampling,  optimal sampling
              strategies, multivariate methods in adaptive  sampling including
              rapid-assessment strategies, and nonsampling  errors in adaptive sampling.   
              With adaptive sampling designs, the procedure for selecting the  sample can be
              changed during a survey in response to observed  patterns in the population. 
              For example, in a survey of a rare,  endangered animal species, whenever
              members of the species are  detected, additional observations may be made at
              neighboring  sites.  In environmental pollution assessment studies, an 
              adaptive plan allows additional observations to be made in the  vicinity of
              observed "hot spots."  Similarly, in surveys of   hard-to-access human
              populations, social links between  individuals may be adaptively used in
              obtaining the sample.  Such  designs are in marked contrast to conventional
              survey designs, in  which the sites or people to be included in the sample can
              be  determined prior to making any observations or obtaining any  responses. 
              Research in adaptive sampling has many important  applications in environmental
              studies, including surveys of  endangered species, natural resources, and
              environmental  pollutants, as well as for scientific studies of hidden or 
              hard-to-access human populations.  Advantages of adaptive  sampling strategies
              include the potential for obtaining better  estimates of popu lation quantities
              with a given amount of  sampling effort.  Adaptive cluster sampling designs,
              for example,  have been shown to be highly efficient relative to conventional 
              designs for sampling populations that are very unevenly  distributed.  Adaptive
              designs can significantly increase the  "yield" of the sample, so that, for
              example, more animals of the  rare species are observed, while at the same time
              permitting  unbiased estimation of quantities such as the total number of the 
              animals in the population.  Adaptive designs can be used to  increase the
              probability of finding the values of most interest   to investigators, such as
              the highest concentrations of a  pollutant.  In many scientific studies of
              hidden or  hard-to-access human populations, adaptive link-tracing designs 
              provide the only practical means for obtaining a sample large  enough for
              study, so that effective methods for making estimates  from such samples are
              vitally important.  ***  DMS 9626102  Thompson    Adaptive sampling designs are
              designs in which the procedure for   selecting the units to include in the
              sample may depend on  observations   made during the survey.  For some
              populations, adaptive  strategies  produce substantial increases in precision
              of estimates compared  to conventional designs with equivalent sample sizes. 
              The  research  investigates new classes of adaptive designs and inference 
              procedures  and develops the needed basic theory.  The research involves a 
              combination of design-based and model-based approaches, and  includes
              investigations in adaptive cluster sampling, adaptive  allocation, adaptive
              graph sampling, optimal sampling strategies,  multivariate methods in adaptive
              sampling including   rapid-assessment strategies, and nonsampling errors in
              adaptive  sampling.     %%%  With adaptive sampling designs, the procedure for
              selecting the   sample can be changed during a survey in response to observed 
              patterns in the population.  For example, in a survey of a rare,   endangered
              animal species,  whenever members of  the species are detected, additional
              observations may be made  at neighboring sites.  In environmental pollution
              assessment  studies,  an adaptive plan allows additional observations to be
              made in  the vicinity of observed "hot spots."  Similarly, in surveys of  
              hard-to-access human populations, social links between  individuals   may be
              adaptively used in obtaining the sample.  Such designs are  in  marked contrast
              to conventional survey designs, in which the  sites   or people to be included
              in the sample can be determined prior to    making any observations or
              obtaining any responses.    Research in adaptive sampling has many important
              applications in   environmental studies, including surveys of endangered
              species,  natural   resources, and environmental pollutants,  as well as for 
              scientific studies  of hidden or hard-to-access human populations.   
              Advantages of adaptive sampling strategies include the potential  for 
              obtaining better estimates of population quantities with a given  amount   of
              sampling effort. Adaptive cluster sampling designs, for  example, have   been
              shown to be   highly efficient relative to conventional  designs  for sampling
              populations that are very unevenly distributed.    Adaptive designs can
              significantly increase the "yield" of the  sample,   so that, for example, more
              animals of the rare species are  observed, while   at the same time permitting
              unbiased estimation of quantities  such as the   total number of the animals in
              the population.  Adaptive designs  can be   used to increase  the probability
              of finding the values of most  interest   to investigators, such as the highest
               concentrations of a  pollutant.    In many scientific studies of hidden or
              hard-to-access human  populations,   adaptive link-tracing designs provide the
              only practical means  for obtaining   a sample large enough for study, so that
              effective methods for  making estimates  from such samples are vitally
              important.    ***
