Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Leveraged Bootstrap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9626532

Award Number: 9626532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Jian Ren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 96-26532  Ren     The objective of this research is to investigate a new
              resampling   method, called the Leveraged Bootstrap. The Leveraged Bootstrap
              facilitates   research in a broad class of nonparametric and semiparametric   
              statistics using various types of censored data, including right censored  
              data, doubly censored data, interval censored data, etc.. This method does  
              not depend on the extensions of the usual statistics for complete data to  
              incomplete data, and is simple, computationally efficient and easily   
              applicable to a wide of variety of statistical inference problems with   
              different types of censored data. In this research, the following issues   are
              considered: (i) how the leveraged bootstrap should be applied in   practice;
              (ii) the efficiency of the leveraged bootstrap; (iii) comparison   with other
              methods. Specifically, the investigator studies the application   of the
              leveraged bootstrap in some statistical inference problems such as the  
              empirical likelihood methods in constructing confidence bands and tests,    and
              the hypothesis testing problems which are associated with several   statistical
              models.   %%%   Various types of censored data are generally referred to as  
              incomplete data in statistics literature. For instance, a patient who has  
              died from heart disease cannot go on to die from lung cancer. In such a   case,
              the survival time of lung cancer of the patient is incomplete.   Recently,
              doubly censored data and interval censored data have been   encountered in some
              very important clinical trials such as breast cancer   research and AIDS
              research. The statistical research on these types of   censored data still
              generally lags behind that on right censored data.   The principle difficulties
              in statistical analysis using these complicated    types of censored data are
              that the usual methods developed for complete   data often do not have direct
              extensions to incomplete data, and that the   usual nonparametric bootstrap can
              be quite computationally time  consuming   in certain cases. This research is
              to develop some new statistical methods   which are accurate, computationally
              efficient and easily applicable for   different types of censored data.  ***
