Title       : Topics in Neural Networks, Stochastic and Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9626575

Award Number: 9626575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Burton burton@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626575 Burton  ABSTRACT  Original research is pursued by the investigator and
              his colleagues on:  (i) topics of neural networks, such as feed-forward
              networks and unsupervised networks, (ii) algorithms to estimate the expected
              extreme value of a time series given some record of the past, (iii) dynamical
              and metric properties of various continued fraction type expansions, and (iv)
              stationary processes and random fields that arise as limits of random
              substitutions with a view toward random tiling systems.  The methods employed
              are taken from ergodic theory, probability, and statistical physics.   This
              work consists of four topics:  (i) mathematical properties of neural networks,
              (ii) extreme value estimation, (iii) continued fraction algorithms, and (iv)
              random substitution processes.  (i) A neural network is a type of
              self-programming computer that learns by example, essentially adjusting itself
              to adapt to its environment.  Neural networks--though not yet well understood,
              mathematically--are already in commercial use in such areas as handwriting
              readers, DNA classifiers, and financial forecasters. With greater understanding
              will come more enlightened use. (ii) The investigator and his colleagues are
              developing extreme value estimation algorithms to help solve an estimation
              problem needed in the design of structures such as off-shore oil platforms
              which require a high probability of withstanding storms.  Typically, there is
              limited historical data from which to make these estimates.  The algorithms are
              used to estimate the most powerful storm that is likely to occur in the
              vicinity of the structure in the next 20 years. (iii) Continued fractions have
              the property of being the most economical way to approximate a real number by a
              fraction.  They consist of fractions containing fractions containing fractions,
              etc., etc. The investigator and his colleagues look at these as dynamical
              systems to study their properties.  This work ties together ideas from
              probability theory, group theory, and flows on  surfaces.  (iv) The
              investigator is studying random substitution schemes as they are natural ways
              of creating strings of symbols with random properties, using a simple recipe. 
              This idea may also be used to generate tilings of the plane or space that have
              properties of randomness and determinism.  The construction begins with a set
              of tiles (or simple shapes) and decompositions of these tiles so that each
              piece of each decomposition is a scale replica of one of the original tiles. 
              This procedure is continued, decomposing to finer and finer scales, zooming the
              scale.  This may give models of materials in nature, as has been the case for
              non-random versions of this procedure.
