Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9626443

Award Number: 9626443
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Pettus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NY Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, NY  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Thomas R. Pettus has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Pettus received the doctoral degree from   the University of
              Rochester under the supervision of Professor R. H.   Schlessinger.  Dr. Pettus
              will continue research at Columbia University   under the sponsorship of
              Professor S. J. Danishefsky.  The postdoctoral   research will focus on the
              synthesis and biological study of a new class   of microtubule stabilizing
              agents, the epothilones.  The molecular   structure of epothilones, which
              resembles that of the macrolide   antibiotics, is more amenable to chemical
              manipulation than the structure   of taxol, which is known to arrest normal
              microtubule polymerization.    The research contributes to the longterm goal of
              new synthetic methods   that mimic through chemical means the topological
              constraints present in   an enzyme active site.  The Postdoctoral Research
              Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural
              program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and
              attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and
              teaching.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
