Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Lp and Tail Probability Approximations for Sums of
               Dependent Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9626175

Award Number: 9626175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74259              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor H. de la Pena vp@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626175 de la Pena  ABSTRACT  The study of the behavior of sums of dependent
              random variables plays a central role in both the theory and applications of
              probability and statistics. U-statistics are commonly encountered in problems
              concerning estimation, while multilinear forms arise in research pertaining to 
              multiple stochastic integration, regression and covariance analysis, and
              invertibility of matrices. Randomly stopped sums of independent random
              variables and martingales are found at the core of the studies of sequential
              analysis, and such diverse areas as queuing theory, inventory theory and
              reliability theory. The investigator and his colleagues consider fairly general
              problems involving sums of dependent random variables, including extensions of
              Wald's equation in the case of martingales, quadratic forms and  double
              stochastic integrals; approximations of the tail probabilities of multilinear
              forms; generalization of the principle of conditioning to a wider class of
              problems; and determination of speeds of convergence of related limit theorems.
              In tackling the proposed problems, the investigator and his colleagues draw
              from their recent results which include two fundamental contributions to the
              theories of sequential analysis, U-statistics and empirical processes.   The
              investigator and his colleagues deal with several problems whose solution would
              have a beneficial impact on several areas of probability and statistics. The
              broad area consists of the study of the properties of phenomena that exhibit
              high levels of inter-dependence and, hence, are hard to analyze on their own.
              The difficulty stems from the strong links present with other components. The
              approach followed by the investigator and his colleagues when dealing with this
              type of problem consists in introducing a new set of phenomena that closely
              resembles the original one but which in addition has desirable independence
              properties. In probabilistic language, one calls this approach to dealing with
              dependence a de-coupling of t he dependence of a phenomenon. Up to now there
              are several results developed in this area which typically produce optimal
              results. The investigator and his colleagues continue to apply this theory to
              problems in sequential analysis, U-statistics and stochastic integration. The
              statistical theory of sequential analysis was introduced during World War II as
              a means of optimizing resources. In sharp contrast with the typical statistical
              approach of assigning a prefixed sample and analyzing the data only after the
              sample size has been achieved, the sequential approach permits the optimization
              of resources by closely following the development of the process at each stage
              of the experiment. The sequential approach is particularly useful in cases of
              destructive sampling, as in  equipment and supply lifetime studies in military
              equipment and industrial applications. In medical studies, its application
              allows both to optimize resources and to  deal with the ethical issues of
              terminating early a clinical trial when there is strong indication that the
              drug under study is harmful or proven to be beneficial, without having to wait
              until a pre-fixed sample size has been attained in accordance with the
              classical approach.
