Title       : Rigorous and Empirical Analysis of Random Cellular Automata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9626152

Award Number: 9626152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Griffeath griffeat@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9626152 Griffeath  The current and planned research of David Griffeath focuses
              on an interplay between mathematical theory and computer visualization for
              complex, random and deterministic lattice dynamics. Griffeath exploits this
              "symbiosis" in his theoretical and empirical studies of cellular automaton
              dynamics and other nonlinear spatial interactions. On the theoretical side,
              this work is giving rise to an increasingly rich and illuminating rigorous
              theory of Threshold Growth, a new paradigm for discrete-time parallel updating
              of lattice configurations. On the empirical side, Griffeath is developing
              effective, interactive simulation tools for the study of complex spatial
              systems, designing two platforms in parallel: (a) a high-end simulator based on
              the new CAM8 cellular automaton machine from MIT, of which he has one of the
              first few prototypes in the world; and (b) a low-end 32-bit Windows 95
              simulator and graphical front end called WinCA. Over the next three years,
              among the types of dynamical system Griffeath intends to study using this
              hybrid methodology are various cellular automata, interacting particle systems,
              and individual-based models that serve as prototypes for such complex phenomena
              as nucleation, spiral formation in excitable media, the shape theory of crystal
              growth, flocking, host-parasite interactions, dendritic growth, and phase
              separation by surface tension.    Mathematical models for growth and
              competition have played a key role in the development of spatial complex
              systems theory since the mid 1950's. An extensive body of theory and
              applications, for both random and deterministic systems, has been developed,
              especially over the past twenty years. Modeling of such fundamental phenomena
              as aggregation, emergence of shape, interfacial competition, and droplet
              interaction sheds new light on many areas of applied science. Griffeath's work
              during the next funding period will be motivated especially by problems
              elicited from the spatial mathematical ecology community, as identi fied during
              an interdisciplinary conference that he organized at the Santa Fe Institute
              during January, 1996. He expects that the various simulation tools he is
              developing will be able to provide new insights into questions of genuine
              interest to that clientele, and that a substantial body of interesting new pure
              mathematics will result as well.
