Title       : Statistical Quality Control for Multistage Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9626181

Award Number: 9626181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Schervish mark@stat.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej J. Strojwas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  The statistical modeling of multistage sequential manufacturing  processes
              requires models both for processes running as desired  and for processes
              suffering from faults.  In addition, tools are  needed for monitoring and
              controlling the process, for diagnosing  faults, and for predicting future
              data.  This research project is  developing such models and tools.  A starting
              point is a  hierarchical mixture of recursive regression models with Markov 
              transition structure having the faulty processes as absorbing  states.
              Developing the models requires understanding the  sensitivity of predictions to
              the parameters of the models.  For  example, the use of absorbing states for
              faulty processes,  although intuitively appealing and mathematically simple,
              does  lead to some undesirable results that need to be addressed.   Prediction
              requires numerical methods for adequately summarizing  uncertainty from many
              sources.  In particular, it is often  necessary to predict yield several stages
              in the future  for an ongoing process, and the marginal distributions for the 
              output are not available in closed form.  Monitoring ongoing processes requires
              the development of  appropriate summary statistics and displays.  Diagnosis and
               monitoring both require the ability to partition uncertainty  amongst several
              competing possibilities (such as different  possible faults) and make decisions
              based on the relative costs  of the possible errors.    %%%  The research
              develops a general framework for modeling multistage  sequential manufacturing
              processes.  The framework facilitates  monitoring of ongoing processes,
              prediction of future and current  yield, and diagnosis of faults.  In a
              multistage process with  in-line measurements, information becomes available
              sequentially  and one needs to update one's state of knowledge as the 
              information arrives.  This leads naturally to the use of a  Bayesian
              statistical approach to the modeling of uncertainties in  such a process.  The
              process level problems addressed by this   research are those of in-line
              measurement choice, control chart  construction, learning about immature
              processes, and process  control.  The research will lead to more sensitive
              monitoring  tools and more comprehensive prediction and diagnosis tools that 
              should help to improve the competitiveness of American  manufacturers in high
              technology areas such as very large scale  integrated circuit production.   ***
