Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Aspects of Some Problems in Convex Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9626749

Award Number: 9626749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario A. Lopez mlopez@cs.du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shlomo Reisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lopez  9626749       The investigator and his colleague study computational 
              aspects of convex geometry in two directions: (1) Design and  implementation of
              efficient algorithms for the approximation of  convex bodies in
              multidimensional space by convex polytopes with  a priori specified number of
              vertices.  Specific instances that  arise in various application areas, such as
              the approximation of  polytopes by smaller polytopes, are given special
              attention.  Extensions, such as approximation under various metrics, also are 
              considered. (2) Application of high performance computing to  solve or to
              advance toward the solution of a number of  long-standing problems in convex
              geometry.  An important example  is Mahler's conjecture on the volume-product
              of a convex body and  its polar body.  An instance of this problem with
              applications to  the theory of wavelets is tackled by reducing the search space
              to  a finite but large set of cases that can be verified  computationally.     
               The investigator and colleague study efficient computational  solutions for
              the problem of approximating multidimensional  convex bodies by polytopes
              (solids formed by plane faces) of a  prescribed size.  Such approximation is an
              important tool in many  disciplines, including molecular modeling, optimal
              control,  computer-aided design, pattern recognition, and computer 
              visualization.  Furthermore, due to their simplicity, polytopes  are by far the
              most widely used form of model representation.  Thus, the work is also
              important because it facilitates the use  of the large body of methods already
              available for polytopes,  provided that the resulting approximation is good and
              can be  performed efficiently.  Symbolically, long-standing geometric  problems
              are attacked using the tools of high performance  computing.  An approach based
              on verifying computationally a large  but finite number of possible cases
              promises to yield an  important advance in the field.
