Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9626474

Award Number: 9626474
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Griffiths   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, MA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jennifer A. Griffiths has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Griffiths received the doctoral degree from   the
              University of California at Los Angeles under the supervision of   Professor
              Mostafa A. El-Sayed.  Dr. Griffiths will continue research at   the University
              of Massachusetts at Amherst under the sponsorship of   Professor David Tirrell.
               The postdoctoral research will focus on the   immobilization of proteins and
              model protein systems, such as helical   polypeptide polymers, on solid
              surfaces.  The goal is to develop surface   bound monolayers of monodisperse
              helical polymer systems in which there   is 3-dimensional control of the
              protein conformation and assembly at the   interface through selective
              placement of a cysteine residue in the helix.    The helical systems utilized
              are cysteine analogs of polyglutamic acid   polymer generated by biological
              synthesis.  The work leads to new   materials and applications for biopolymeric
              systems in interfacial   chemistry.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in
              Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed
              to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into
              meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
