Title       : The Electrical Evolution of Thunderstorms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9626542

Award Number: 9626542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345604             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Marshall marshall@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626542  Marshall         While much has been learned over the last decade
              concerning the  electrification of thunderstorms, quite a bit is still unknown.
               There are several  competing theories concerning the mechanism by which charge
              centers develop, but  research is still ongoing to determine which of these are
              valid and under what  conditions.        Under this award the Principal
              Investigator will pursue two research  objectives: (1) investigate how electric
              charge inside thunderstorms evolves during  the life of the storm; and (2)
              investigate whether most of this charge is carried on  precipitation-sized
              particles.          To accomplish these objectives, the Principal Investigator
              will participate, in   conjunction with other researchers, in two observational
              efforts   one in New  Mexico and one in Oklahoma.  Beneath thunderstorms, the
              Principal Investigator  will launch balloon-borne instruments that will measure
              the electric field bulk charge  and the charge on individual precipitation
              particles.  To meet objective (1), a series  of balloons will be launched about
              ten minutes apart into each storm to be studied.   The locations of the main
              charges in the storm can be inferred from the electric field  measurements made
              with each balloon launch and with other supporting  instrumentation from
              aircraft.          To meet objective (2), the findings from the precipitation
              particle charge  instrument will be compared to the bulk charge inferred from
              the electric field  measurements.          Both of these experiments will
              provide information on how thunderstorms  acquire large amounts of electric
              charge.  By providing information about the  evolution and distribution of
              charge in thunderstorms, this research will advance the  current understanding
              of how these dangerous and damaging thunderstorms become  electrically charged.
               ***
