Title       : Model Uncertainty and Bayesian Analysis of Multivariate Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9626134

Award Number: 9626134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruey S. Tsay ruey.tsay@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9626134  Tsay    This research involves two main topics in data analysis for
               processing   information and making inference. The first main topic is 
              Bayesian   modeling of multivariate time series. The research seeks to  develop
               a unified modeling approach for a wide variety of vector models.   In  
              particular, the investigator proposes a nice method for  simultaneous  
              dentification of Kronecker indexes and parameters of a vector  process,   and
              considers common features such as common trends,   common business cycles, and
              common nonlinearity in a large  system.   For co-integrated series, the method
              identifies the number   of common trends  at the stage of  model specification
              and,  hence,   differs from the existing methods that  test co-integration rank
               under   a given model. The research employs Gibbs sampler in estimation;  it
              uses   closed-form conditional posterior distributions for linear  parameters,
              but   augments the sampler with other Markov chain methods such as the  
              Hasting-Metropolis algorithm and the griddy Gibbs to handle  nonlinear  
              parameters. The second topic is model uncertainty via data  perturbation   in
              time series analysis. The research relaxes the commonly  imposed   assumption
              of existence of a model and uses data perturbation to  investigate   model
              uncertainty. The investigator uses single and simultaneous   data-perturbation
              to study the impact of model uncertainty on  model selection,   parameter
              inference, and prediction. Based on the  Kullback-Leibler   measure, the
              research  produces a selection criterion that has  three components,   namely
              "goodness of fit," "complexity penalty," and  "uncertainty  measure."    This
              result differs from most of the existing selection criteria  that only contain 
               the first two components. Furthermore, the research shows that  the impact of 
               "uncertainty measure"is most pronounced when the sample size is  small.   %%% 
              This research involves two topics in the analysis of a large  system   for 
              processing information a nd making informed decisions The  results obtained  
              are widely applicable in many scientific fields. For example,  they can be used
              in   stochastic process control in manufacturing, to monitor  simultaneously
              air   pollution indices at several locations in an environmental study,  to
              study common   business cycles in  macro-economics, and to study common 
              seasonality and trends   in ozone concentrations.  The research also seeks
              efficient  computational methods   to perform high dimensional optimization for
              statistical  estimation. The first topic   of the research is analysis of
              multiple processes in which the  investigator develops   a unified modeling
              approach that can identify the complete  dynamic structure   of a large system.
              The structure may contain important common  characteristics   such as common
              trends, common business cycles, and common  nonlinearity.   When common trends
              are present, the method identifies the number   of common trends 
              simultaneously with other relationships between  the processes.     The second
              topic of the research is the role of model uncertainty  in statistical
              inference.    The inference may be prediction, trend estimation, or assessing 
              the effects of a change   in an input variable on the output variables.    ***
