Title       : Stochastics Models in Population Genetics and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9626764

Award Number: 9626764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Krone krone@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Joyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9626764 Krone  ABSTRACT  The projects in this proposal fall into two categories:
              population genetics (especially genealogical processes and sampling theory in
              models with selection) and interacting particle systems (especially multitype
              models motivated by ecology).  Due in large part to the recent explosion of DNA
               sequence data, two significant trends have emerged in population genetics over
              the past 20 years.  Firstly, the theory now focuses on sampling distributions 
              and the inferences that can be drawn from them.  Secondly, the retrospective 
              view (often referred to as coalescent theory) replaced the former prospective
              view.  By studying ancestry, much of the unnecessary structure is stripped away
              and simple flexible models emerge.  Coalescent theory has had much success in
              analyzing neutral models (i.e., models with no selection); however, the
              corresponding selective theory has, for the most part, remained out of reach. 
              Recent progress by one of the PI's has opened up many avenues of research on
              biologically relevant problems.  It is shown that genealogical information is
              embedded in the dual processes of certain interacting particle systems.  The
              investigators propose to extend these techniques to include a variety of
              models, most notably models involving DNA polymorphism and recombination. 
              Sampling theory for models with selection will also be developed.  The sampling
              theory for a large class of models is characterized and is analogous to the
              exponential family.  Thus the theory of inference, including parameter
              estimation, information criteria, hypothesis testing, and model selection will
              be developed rigorously.  Interacting particle systems are ideal for modeling
              biological systems with spatial structure.  In recent years, tools have been
              developed for dealing with multitype particle systems. These multitype systems
              are particularly relevant in ecological models.  A number of multitype models
              of competition and succession are proposed.  Some of the key features in the
              proposed model s are the effects of different dispersal ranges and random
              environments.  The problems in this proposal are motivated by important issues
              in population genetics and ecology.  Mathematical models are useful for several
              reasons.  The time scales of interest in many biological settings are often
              hundreds or thousands of years (e.g., forest succession, evolutionary changes,
              etc.), and hence it is important to be able to predict long-term effects when
              certain characteristics of the population are changed.  Another example of a
              timely issue which precludes a "wait and see" approach is the extinction of
              endangered species.  The models and analysis proposed will allow for
              qualitative and quantitative predictions, as well as efficient simulation
              strategies.  Significant contributions to the mathematical underpinnings of
              these models are also expected.  The proposed work on population genetics will
              address the effects of natural selection on genealogy.  This is crucial for
              developing efficient tests for selection, determining how powerful these tests
              are, deciding which selective models are realistic and what their properties
              are.  Spatial models in ecology will be approached through "interacting
              particle systems."  Issues such as the spread and control of disease in plant
              communities, extinction of populations in subdivided habitats, and the effects
              of inhomogeneous environments will be addressed.  The models proposed are much
              more complicated than most models in the literature because they take into
              account the spatial structure that is inherent (and important) in real
              populations.
