Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9626509

Award Number: 9626509
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Takahara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Patricia M. Takahara has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Takahara received the doctoral degree from   the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the supervision of   Professor
              Stephen J. Lippard.  Dr. Takahara will continue research at the   California
              Institute of Technology under the sponsorship of Professor   Douglas C. Rees. 
              The postdoctoral research will focus on the   determination of the X-ray
              crystal structure of succinate quinone   oxidoreductase (SQR) from Paracoccus
              denitrificans.  SQR is important to   understand because loss of SQR function
              has been implicated in aging and   degenerative diseases, and the 3-dimensional
              crystal structure is   critical for investigating these problems at the
              molecular level.  The   work contributes to techniques and knowledge in
              metalloprotein   crystallography.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in
              Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed
              to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into
              meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
