Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Analysis on Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9626142

Award Number: 9626142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xue-Mei Li xmli@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626142 Li, Xue-Mei  ABSTRACT  The aim of this proposal is to study stochastic
              flows on manifolds, including their existence, geometric properties and
              applications to the study of partial differential  equations, non-linear
              equations, Hamiltonian systems perturbed by white noise and the geometry and
              topology of the underlying space. One of the objects to study, which will be a
              useful tool in many directions, is the affine connection associated to a
              stochastic differential equation. This connection provides the geometrical
              structure to obtain good estimates for the derivative flow of stochastic
              differential equations.  Those structures arising from degenerate systems are
              particularly investigated: there are problems of definition and of the
              existence of singularities. Although the main work is on finite  dimensional
              systems infinite dimensional ones are also considered. Bismut type  formulae
              and integration by  parts formulae on path spaces connected to the above are
              also examined. On a more directly geometrical level the concepts of spectral
              positivity for curvatures are considered together with its consequences for the
              geometry of the manifold.   Stochastic flows are typically solutions of
              stochastic differential equations (equations perturbed by white noise).
              Properties of  stochastic flows including the stability and  invariance are
              particularly interesting when considered together with the geometry of the 
              underlying spaces.  The techniques described in the proposal are used to study
              nonlinear equations including the blow ups and regularities of the solutions.
              The investigator also examines properties of local martingales, which finds its
              applications in mathematical finance.
