Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Construction of Accurate, Robust and Efficient Numerical
               Techniques for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9626567

Award Number: 9626567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Bramble   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raytcho D. Lazarov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9197,9263,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bramble  9626567       The main objectives of this project are the construction
              and  study of finite element approximations to steady-state and  transient
              problems of mechanics and engineering, including  convection-diffusion-reaction
              problems, Stokes and Navier-Stokes  equations, equations of linear elasticity,
              plate bending  problems, and the construction, analysis, and testing of fast 
              methods for solving the resulting algebraic systems.  The emphasis  is on the
              development of new accurate, robust and efficient  computational techniques. 
              Approximation strategies involving  standard Galerkin finite element methods,
              novel least-squares  methods, and mixed finite element methods are studied
              especially  from the standpoint of their accuracy and stability.  The solution 
              techniques that are developed emphasize preconditioning via  domain
              decomposition or multigrid/multilevel methods.       The broad objective of
              this program is to use the full power  of rigorous mathematics both to analyze
              the behavior of numerical  methods currently used in scientific computation and
              to develop  new algorithms exhibiting improved accuracy, stability and 
              performance.  More efficient and scalable algorithms can have a  significant
              impact on the development of effective simulators for  understanding physical
              processes of national importance.  For  example, computer modeling of ground
              water processes involve the  solution of large complex systems of nonlinear
              partial  differential equations.  The results of these simulations provide 
              important predictive information that can influence decisions  with regard to
              ground water remediation strategies and national  conservation programs.  Due
              to the complexity in the geometry and  the physical processes, meaningful
              simulations overwhelm today's  most powerful parallel computers and hence the
              need for more  effective numerical techniques.  The techniques developed are 
              applicable as well to problems such as simulation of smart  materials, heat and
              mass transfer, and high  performance  computing.
