Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Manifolds and Knot Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9626550

Award Number: 9626550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cameron M. Gordon gordon@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9626550  Gordon       Cameron Gordon will continue to investigate Dehn surgery
              on knots.  The  main goal is further to circumscribe the various exceptional
              (non-hyperbolic)  surgeries on hyperbolic knots.  The known bounds on the
              number and nature of  such surgeries are now quite sharp in many cases, and it
              seems that it may  eventually be possible (at least modulo the Geometrization
              Conjecture of  Thurston) to give an essentially complete description of all
              exceptional  surgeries.  The methods used will be based largely on the
              combinatorial-  topological techniques developed by Gordon and John Luecke in
              their previous   work on Dehn surgery, such as the proof of the Knot Complement
              Conjecture.       This project deals with knot theory and 3-dimensional
              topology, the  general goal of the latter being to understand the structure of
              3-dimensional  manifolds.  These are objects that are locally like ordinary
              3-dimensional  Euclidean space but whose global structure may be quite
              complicated.  Since  we live in a 3-manifold, one might say that 3-dimensional
              topology aims to   describe what the mathematical possibilities are for our
              spatial universe.    This aim is still not realized, although there is
              tantalizing evidence that  such a description might ultimately be possible. 
              One important aspect of  3-dimensional topology is the theory of knots---a knot
              being a closed loop  embedded somehow in ordinary 3-dimensional space.  On the
              one hand, results  about 3-manifolds often give information about knots as
              special cases, while  on the other hand, a wide variety of mathematical methods
              can be applied to  the study of knots, leading in turn to new information about
              3-manifolds.    (Recently, deep connections between 3-dimensional topology and
              quantum field  theory were discovered in this way.)  The main vehicle by which
              knot theory  relates to the general theory of 3-manifolds is Dehn surgery, and
              this is the  focus of the current project.  In Dehn surgery, a solid tube
              around a knot is  removed and "s ewn back" differently, giving a new
              3-manifold.  If one allows  links (i.e., several loops linked together) as well
              as knots, then every  3-manifold can be obtained in this way, so a sufficiently
              good understanding   of this construction would have important implications for
              the general theory   of 3-manifolds.  ***
