Title       : The History of Statistics in the 20th Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9626680

Award Number: 9626680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Stigler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will undertake research on the history of statistics during the
              first half of the twentieth century.  The research will examine major lines of
              statistical development through the works of Karl and Egon Pearson, Ronald
              Fisher, William S. Gosset, Jerzy Neyman, Harold Hotelling, Harold Jeffreys,
              Jimmie Savage, and Abraham Wald.  The emphasis will be on the development of
              concept and on the interplay of theoretical development and applications in the
              physical, social, and biological sciences.  Particular lines to be pursued
              include the development of parametric estimation, the emergence of mathematical
              statistics as a specialization, the relationship of Neyman-Pearson theory and
              Fisherian statistics, the relationship of the theory of games and statistical
              decision theory, the development of multivariate analysis, modern Bayesian
              statistics, and categorical data analysis.  The research will be based upon
              detailed study of original sources, both published and unpublished.  It is
              expected that the research will yield a greater knowledge of the historical
              development of modern statistical methods, and thereby a deeper understanding
              of the properties and limitations of these methods.  For example, by studying
              the spread of multivariate analysis from physical science to social science,
              where the same numerical algorithms are employed but with an entirely different
              conceptual framework, some light will be shed on the current debates on the
              appropriateness of such applications, including the use of regression to assess
              evidence of discrimination in hiring, the evaluation of educational programs,
              and the estimation of census undercount.  By understanding the role of
              statistics in past questions of public policy, including temperance,
              immigration, and military affairs, we will be better able to assess the
              statistical component of modern policy questions.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
