Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research on CooperationAmong Animals:
               Mutualism Versus Reciprocity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9626609

Award Number: 9626609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Mesterton-Gibbons mmestert@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1022,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mesterton-Gibbons  9626609       The investigators use evolutionary game theory
              to study  cooperative behavior among animals.  They work toward a general 
              theory that categorizes cooperative behavior in nature as  kin-selected
              behavior, group-selected behavior, byproduct  mutualism, or reciprocal
              altruism.  In pursuit of this goal, their  investigation focuses on cooperative
              behaviors that can be  excluded on a priori grounds from the first two
              categories  mentioned above.  Examples of such behaviors are food sharing in 
              ravens and defensive behavior in lions.  Accordingly, the  investigators focus
              on reciprocity versus mutualism and develop a  mathematical model with the
              power to discriminate between these  two categories of cooperative behavior. 
              The model is important  because many examples of reciprocity in nature have
              been  hypothesized, but hardly any have been proven: without such a  model,
              virtually every example is equally interpretable as a case  of mutualism.      
              The goal of the study is to determine whether animals can  cooperate in nature
              because they keep score of favors done to --  and favors received from --
              specific individuals, or because  acting in their long-term self-interest
              coincides with acting in  the best interest of their community, even though
              they do not  keep score.  From a purely scientific perspective, an answer to 
              this question will advance current knowledge of animal behavior  considerably. 
              From a more utilitarian perspective, even though  the study's primary subjects
              are non-human animals in the wild,  the investigators' findings will be
              relevant to achieving  cooperation among humans as well.  In particular, the
              study's  findings may help to solve the urgent problem of the commons,  i.e.,
              the problem of designing cooperative social structures for  sustainable
              management of the global environment.
