Title       : Behavior of Hatchling Sea Turtles During Their Off-Shore Migration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1990    
File        : a9096227

Award Number: 9096227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Salmon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanette Wyneken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sea turtles are large marine reptiles, which are an important source of        
              protein in many third-world countries.  All species of sea turtles are         
              either threatened or endangered.  This unfortunate situation comes about       
              because of overfishing of adult stocks, nest destruction and poaching of       
              eggs, and because the pristine oceanic beaches chosen as nest sites are        
              now prime areas for human recreation and land development.  A major            
              conservation thrust involves the protection of the most vulnerable sea         
              turtles--the small and virtually defenseless hatchlings--by rearing them       
              for about a year in large tanks before releasing them into the sea.            
                                                                                             
              Under natural conditions, hatchlings emerge from nests at night, crawl         
              down-beach, and migrate out to sea.  Hatchlings released at sea are            
              deprived of this experience.  In many migratory animals, such as birds         
              and salmonid fishes, cues perceived by young as they migrate are used          
              later by individuals as adults to find suitable breeding sites.  If sea        
              turtles behave similarly, hatchlings deprived of their off-beach               
              migration may survive but, as adults, be unable to locate appropriate          
              beaches in which to nest.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The long-term goal of the present research project is also to promote          
              hatchling survival, but Drs. Salmon and Wyneken believe that sound             
              conservation practices must be based upon a thorough understanding of          
              how hatchlings migrate and when, during their journey, they are most           
              vulnerable to predators.  Thus, Drs. Salmon and Wyneken will attempt to        
              determine how loggerhead sea turtles complete their 30-km migration            
              between the East coast of Florida and their goal, the Sargassum matts of       
              the Gulf Stream.  Drs. Salmon and Wyneken will follow hatchlings bearing       
              radio transmitters to determine how long the trip takes, will do               
              experiments to determine what cues guide them, and will determine what         
              predators take hatchlings at various portions of their journey.                
                                                                                             
              Armed with this understanding, Drs. Salmon and Wyneken should be able to       
              specify under what conditions hatchlings might be released into the sea        
              at locations where predators are least likely to capture them, and under       
              conditions that are ideal for the completion of their migration.  The          
              potential benefits are several:  reestablishment of sufficient stocks          
              for intelligent harvesting; insights into the migratory behavior and           
              ecology of a fascinating and magnificent marine animal; and the                
              implementation of sound conservation practices based upon a thorough           
              knowledge of the animal's biology.
