Title       : New Bio-Resource and Cell Culture Facilities at the Whitney Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1990   
File        : a9096186

Award Number: 9096186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Edwards                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : July 31,  1990       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Greenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Florida Fdn
	      2012 W. University Drive
	      Gainesville, FL  326031734    904/392-1336

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Whitney Marine Laboratory is a research institute of the              
              University of Florida, established in 1974, and dedicated to the               
              use of marine organisms for solving basic problems in                          
              experimental biology.  The primary areas of study at the                       
              Laboratory are cell and neurobiology, but within those fields the              
              scope is broad, including a variety of problems and approaches.                
              The Whitney Laboratory has three strengths: it has broad                       
              technical expertise, and is particularly well instrumented for                 
              research in modern biochemistry, cell biology and physiology, an               
              advantage maintained by support from the University and                        
              extramural agencies; a diverse fauna is available locally; and                 
              the rich animal resources of the tropics are easily accessible.                
              Moreover, these organisms, as well as those from cold habitats,                
              can be kept easily by virtue of a seawater supply that is                      
              unlimited, pristine and (in a new experimental aquarium facility)              
              temperature controlled.                                                        
                   This project will provide support for new construction and                
              renovation to maintain and enhance the Laboratory's strengths.  A              
              new marine bio-resource facility, with work space, a collector's               
              office and storage areas, will be built.  A larger and more                    
              efficient tissue culture facility, with an adjoining room for                  
              image analysis, will be constructed.  These activities will also               
              free up space for molecular genetics, a common instrument room,                
              and a laboratory for visiting scientists.  These improvements                  
              will enhance the ability of the Whitney Laboratory to collect,                 
              maintain, and use marine animals, as well as maintaining its                   
              technological advantage in cell biology.
