Title       : Planetary Wave Dynamics: Implications of Bimodality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1990 
File        : a9096318

Award Number: 9096318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. Hansen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augsburg College
	      731 21st Avenue South
	      Minneapolis, MN  554541338    612/330-1000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent studies of intraseasonal, low frequency variability                
              in midlatitudes of the Northern Hemisphere have strongly                       
              suggested that the probability density distributions of the                    
              planetary long waves (k = 2 to 4) are significantly bimodal.  In               
              contrast, the speed, horizontal and vertical shear of the zonal                
              mean flow possess unimodal probability density distributions.                  
              The physical basis for such partitioning has not yet clear.  The               
              possibility that the bimodal structures are an artifact of data                
              stratification method or numerical truncation during assimilation              
              has not yet been discounted either.  The present study addresses               
              these issues through further dignostic analyses of observational               
              data and numerical model simulations.  The Northern Hemisphere                 
              data would be examined to delineate the processes involved in                  
              transitions between the two modes for the planetary long waves                 
              and analysis extended to include the Southern Hemisphere data.                 
              Output from selected long integrations of a general circulation                
              model simulations will be analysed to determine the probability                
              density distribution functions of model planetary long waves.                  
              The possible influence of bimodality on the predictive skill of                
              global numerical forecasts would be evaluated.  This work would                
              contribute to our basic understanding of the dynamical process                 
              important in intraseasonal climate variability.
