Title       : Topics in Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1990  
File        : a9096267

Award Number: 9096267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Fisher fisher@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many random magnetic systems are characterized by freezing and                 
              hysteretic behavior at low temperatures.  The dynamics of spin                 
              glasses, random field systems, random interfaces, and other                    
              glassy systems will be investigated, using scaling and                         
              probabilistic renormalization group arguments, simplified models,              
              and numerical calculations. The emphasis will be on the causes of              
              the freezing and hysteretic phenomena and the interplay between                
              equilibrium and non-equilibrium processes, such as decay of                    
              remanent magnetization and approach to equilibrium.  In some                   
              disordered systems, transport processes are highly collective and              
              non-liniar.  Using sliding charge density waves as a paradigm,                 
              various cellective transport phenomena will be investigated,                   
              including flux flow in disordered superconductors and motion of                
              interfaces between two fluids in a porous media.  These systems                
              do not move until a threshold driving force is reached, and near               
              this threshold they  exhibit novel non-linear dynamic critical                 
              phenomena.  Below threshold, hysteretic behavior occurs which                  
              will also be investigated.  Various quantum statistical phenomena              
              will also be studied:  spin wave dynamics in strongly quantum                  
              magnets, (such as solid 3He): scaling behavior near metal-                     
              insulator transitions; and the effects of dissipation on quantum               
              phase transitions such as destruction of superconductivity in                  
              granular materials.
