Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Metallaradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1991  
File        : a9096251

Award Number: 9096251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John B. Hunt                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus H. Theopold theopold@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                   
              Organometallic Chemistry Program is the preparation of new                     
              organometallic compounds which contain unpaired electrons. The                 
              new compounds are expected to include some which are useful as                 
              catalysts for the oxidation of organic molecules.                              
                                                                                             
              Chromium(III) alkylidenes will be prepared by deprotonation of                 
              cationic alkyl precursors. Full characterization and                           
              elucidation of their reactivity will be pursued in parallel to                 
              their application in ring opening metathesis polymerization of                 
              functionalized olefins. The preparation of alkyls of                           
              chromium(II) and chromium(IV), and of paramagnetic chromium                    
              hydrides, will be attempted also, and the reactivities of these                
              new compounds toward insertion of small unsaturated molecules                  
              into the carbon-chromium bond will be explored. Previous work                  
              in the area of cobalt(IV) and cobalt(V) alkyls will be extended                
              to new alkyl groups and new coordination geometries. For                       
              example, stabilization of these high oxidation states by                       
              coordination to the pentamethylcyclopentadienyl ligand will be                 
              explored. Another extension will aim at the preparation of                     
              tetrahedral cobalt oxo complexes, which would be used in                       
              oxidations of organic substrates. Tris(pyrazolyl)borate ligands                
              will be utilized to stabilize high-valent cobalt in an attempt                 
              to develop oxygenation catalysts which utilize dioxygen.
