Title       : Neuronal Cell Lineages of the Leech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096100

Award Number: 9096100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven C. McLoon                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : September 30,  1990  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48200              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Martin Shankland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary aim of this research is to understand the                          
              developmental mechanisms which account for the intricate cellular              
              composition of the mature nervous system.  In the leech,                       
              individual neurons arise from precise cell lineages and express                
              unique combinations of differentiated characteristics.  These                  
              neuronal cell lineages have only been partially described, and                 
              one of the objectives of the research will be to characterize the              
              complete sequence of cell divisions which lead to the formation                
              of a small number of identified neurons.  The investigators will               
              then perform embryonic cell ablations in order to ascertain                    
              whether the number and identity of the neurons produced by a                   
              given lineage are determined by cell interactions or by factors                
              that are intrinsic to precursor cells.  The cellular basis of                  
              those interactions and/or intrinsic factors will be studied in                 
              further detail.  In addition, the P.I.'s will investigate the way              
              in which different cell lineages communicate in order to bring                 
              about coordinated patterns of neurogenesis.  In particular, they               
              will examine the spatial coordination of homologous cell lineages              
              located in different portions of the nervous system.  Results                  
              obtained from this work will advance our understanding of the way              
              in which cellular diversity and specificity arise during neural                
              development.
