Title       : US-Switzerland Collaborative Research on Cryo-Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9096163

Award Number: 9096163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1989   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Egelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. Edward Egelman of Yale University to                   
              collaborate in research with Dr. Jacques Dubochet of the Center for            
              Electron Microscopy of the University of Lausanne, Switzerland.  They          
              are collaborating in a study of the RecA protein, the most intensively         
              studied enzyme of general genetic recombination; their approach will           
              also contribute substantially to improving techniques for the                  
              structural analysis of macromolecules in general.  Dr. Egelman is a            
              biophysicist who studies disordered and flexible macromolecules,               
              specifically the RecA protein and actin.  Traditional methods of               
              structure determination, such as protein crystallography, have been            
              generally unsuccessful with these molecules.  Dr. Egelman has been             
              examining them using computer-based image analysis of electron                 
              micrographs; he is developing a special facility for this purpose              
              with support from the Instrumentation and Instrument Development               
              Program of NSF.  His particular expertise lies in graphics and                 
              software development; he depends on other laboratories for the                 
              electron micrographs to be studied.  Dr. Dubochet has pioneered                
              methods of cryo-electron microscopy of fully hydrated biological               
              specimens.  Only a handful of laboratories in the world are working            
              in that field, and Dr. Dubochet is considered the leading expert on            
              its use in imaging macromolecules.  He will prepare frozen hydrated            
              electron micrographs of RecA and other dynamical helical systems,              
              which will provide one of the best means for both developing and               
              demonstrating the effectiveness of Dr. Egelman's image processing              
              hardware and software.  Their complementary expertise and facilities           
              will accelerate their mutual research on RecA and other dynamical              
              protein polymers, and both laboratories will benefit from a reciprocal         
              transfer of specialized techniques.                                            
                                                                                             
              The electron microscopy of frozen, fully hydrated biological specimens         
              has emerged as one of the most promising new developments in structural        
              biology in the past several years.  It offers one of the most powerful         
              methods available for visualizing disordered and dynamic helical               
              protein polymers.  It produces images of specimens with little or no           
              damage or distortion from dehydration, heavy metal staining or electron        
              dose.  Dr. Egelman is developing instruments and programs to allow             
              greatly accelerated analysis of electron micrographs, in particular to         
              extract information about polymer dynamics and function from static            
              images.  His techniques for computer-aided enhancement and reconstruc-         
              tion are even more necessary for frozen, hydrated specimens than for           
              conventional electron micrographs, due to the problems of weak contrast        
              and artifacts introduced by the optics of the electron microscope.
