Title       : Identification of the Mouse Sperm Protein Responsible for Sperm-Egg Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9096187

Award Number: 9096187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Bleil jbleil@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary interest of Dr. Bleil's laboratory is analysis of                  
              mammalian fertilization at the molecular level, combining                      
              techniques of biochemistry and molecular genetics. Studies                     
              proposed here are designed to determine which of two identified                
              mouse sperm proteins functions as the ZP3 recognition protein:                 
              i.e., the sperm protein responsible for primary binding of mouse               
              sperm to the zone pellucida. In preliminary studies, a mouse                   
              sperm "56K doublet" protein having properties expected of the ZP3              
              recognition protein has been identified on the basis of affinity               
              chromatography and crosslinking studies. This protein will be                  
              further characterized biochemically. It has been proposed by                   
              others that a sperm galactose-binding protein related to                       
              asialoglycoprotein receptor functions as the mouse sperm protein               
              which recognizes ZP3. Studies described here are designed to                   
              determine whether this rat protein is related to the mouse sperm               
              56kD protein and, independently, whether an asialoglycoprotein                 
              receptor-related protein of mouse sperm has properties expected                
              for the ZP3 recognition protein. The long term objectives of the               
              proposed study are 1) to identify and characterize mammalian                   
              sperm proteins (fertilization proteins") which mediate                         
              interaction between sperm and egg at the level of the zona                     
              pellucida and 2) to determine, at the molecular level, how sperm               
              "fertilization proteins" interact with their counterparts in the               
              zone pellucida.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This work proposes to identify those molecules on sperm that are               
              responsible for recognition of receptors on the egg surface that               
              enable fertilization to take place.                                            
              %%%
