Title       : Subjective Versus Objective Perception in Risk-Sensitive Foraging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1990    
File        : a9096209

Award Number: 9096209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : February 28,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie A. Real   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Decisions often must be made when the outcome of the decision                  
              process is not known but can be specified by some probability of               
              occurring.  The analysis of decision-making under such conditions              
              of uncertainty has become a major focus of research in animal                  
              behavior.  The decision process is influenced by two factors:                  
              the benefit to the organism from a particular outcome (say, a                  
              certain quantity of food) and the probability of that outcome.                 
              Most research to date has examined the manner in which organisms               
              assess and weigh benefits, but little attention has been paid to               
              how organisms assess and construct probabilities.  A considerable              
              amount of empirical evidence suggests that people systematically               
              make biased estimates of probabilities.  We consistently believe               
              that low-probability events are more likely and high-probability               
              events are less likely to occur than they actually are.  People                
              seem to homogenize probabilities, making all events seem more                  
              equally likely than they actually are.                                         
                                                                                             
              Dr. Real's research will determine the degree to which animals                 
              (in this case, white-footed deer mice) show the same kind of bias              
              in their assessment of probabilities.  Such systematic bias would              
              have profound consequences for our ability to interpret                        
              experiments on behavior.  Dr. Real has developed a means of                    
              independently establishing the organism's subjective perception                
              of probabilities.  By allowing mice to choose over different                   
              experimentally derived probabilities, he can construct the                     
              subjective probability that accounts for the pattern of observed               
              choice behavior.  In this way he can partition the dual factors                
              influencing decision-making.  He may also be able to say                       
              something about the common cognitive structures that constrain                 
              behavioral choices in humans and animals.
