Title       : Development of Plant Minisatellite DNA Genetic Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9096317

Award Number: 9096317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Rogstad steven.rogstad@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research will develop probes that detect                     
              moderately-highly variable mini-satellite DNA genetic markers in               
              plants.  Several mini-satellite probes of this type have been                  
              developed for use with tetrapods and they have revealed a wealth               
              of genetic polymorphic markers to the degree that some have been               
              referred to as "DNA fingerprinting" probes.  Such probes have                  
              both proven and potential applications in several fields of                    
              biology including genetic mapping and linkage analysis, pedigree               
              analysis (paternity and maternity analyses) breeding improvement               
              programs, and population and evolutionary genetics.  Recently,                 
              it has been demonstrated that some of these same probes used with              
              tetrapods also reveal alleles at variable loci in algae,                       
              gymnosperms, and angiosperms.  The central goal of the research                
              is to develop DNA probes for such genetic analyses of mini-                    
              satellite variable loci in plants through two experimental                     
              approaches.  First, numerous probes (naturally derived and                     
              synthetic) previously used thus far only in tetrapods await                    
              exploration with plants.  Second, these same probes will be used               
              to develop plant-derived mini-satellite probes.  The ultimate                  
              goal is to provide probes that are rapid, easy, and broad in                   
              application that permit "DNA genetic fingerprinting" for plants.               
              Such probes will be a powerful new tool for the study of the                   
              apportionment and dynamics of genetic variation within and                     
              between a wide variety of plant species.
