Title       : Adaptation and Adjustment in the Antarctic: Long-term Effects on Health and
               Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1990       
File        : a9096178

Award Number: 9096178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1989   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Palinkas lpalinkas@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The record from human exploration and research in Antarctica has               
              established that prolonged exposure to the extreme and isolated                
              environment is a stressful experience, and in certain                          
              circumstances has profound implications for health and                         
              performance of personnel in Antarctica.  There is some evidence which          
              suggests that while winter-over personnel have short-term adjustment           
              problems, they have a long-term decreased risk of diseases and                 
              illnesses triggered by stress.  The objective of this                          
              study is to identify and describe the sources of enduring adaptive             
              response to prolonged social isolation and an extreme physical                 
              environment.  The research team will utilize an interdisciplinary              
              approach, incorporating both anthropological and psychological methods,        
              for qualitative and quantitative assessment of short-term and long-term        
              consequences of the antarctic winter-over experience.  An ethnographic         
              study will examine the microculture of the antarctic research station          
              at McMurdo Sound, the processes of social interaction and extent of            
              social support in coping with stress, and the means of adjustment to           
              the "winter-over syndrome".  Epidemiologic methods will assess                 
              baseline profiles of health, stress, and coping to prospectively               
              examine the effect of prolonged isolation on the effectiveness of              
              these coping strategies and resources in reducing subsequent stress-           
              related illness.  This study will contribute to the understanding of           
              isolated microsocieties and interactions between health, environment and       
              personality.
