Title       : REU: Collaborative Research: Influence of the Riparian Zone on Nitrogen Cycling
               in Streams of Puerto Rico: Role of Nitrification and Denitrification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1989   
File        : a9096177

Award Number: 9096177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 2,  1989   
Expires     : November 30,  1990   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29500              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. McDowell bill.mcdowell@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will investigate fundamental processes that are                   
              likely to influence the behavior of nitrogen in tropical rain                  
              forest streams.  Very little is known about hydrologic                         
              interactions between stream water and soil water or the potential              
              influences such interactions could have on the nitrogen cycle in               
              tropical ecosystems.  Preliminary data collected in montane rain               
              forest watersheds in Puerto Rico indicae that soil water carries               
              large amounts of dissolved nitrogen as ammonium into the riparian              
              zone.  Very little ammonium or nitrate is found in stream water,               
              however, suggesting that nitrogen is removed from solution before              
              it enters bulk stream flow.  It is important to determine whether              
              the nitrogen removed from solution is exported from the ecosystem              
              in a gaseous form by nitrification or denitrification or whether               
              it is recycled internally by plant uptake.                                     
                                                                                             
              It is hypothesized that in these tropical streams: 1) available                
              stream-side inorganic nitrogen supports an active nitrification-               
              denitrification couple and that 2) this couple has a major                     
              influence on in-stream nitrogen chemistry.  Furthermore, it is                 
              hypothesized that flow paths through the stream-side zone will                 
              have a predictable influence on nitrogen dynamics.  To                         
              investigate these hypotheses work will be performed: 1) to                     
              established transect of observation wells on stream reaches with               
              differing stream-side hydraulic characteristics and measure                    
              initial concentrations of inorganic and organic nitrogen at these              
              sites; 2) test the effects of nitrogen enrichments on nitrogen                 
              chemistry at these sites; and 3) estimate the potential for                    
              nitrification and denitrification in laboratory soil and sediment              
              systems, then quantify specific mechanisms of nitrogen loss with               
              nitrogen-15 tracer techniques.  This combination of field                      
              measurements, field manipulations, and laboratory experiments                  
              will enable us to examine the relative importance and spatial                  
              characteristics of nitrification, denitrification, and plant                   
              uptake in typical tropical stream ecosystems.
