Title       : Sequential Models of Regulation with Limited Commitment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1990  
File        : a9096205

Award Number: 9096205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Spulber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project makes important methodological and                       
              substantive contributions to our understanding of business                     
              regulation.  Methodologically, most of the sizable literature on               
              regulatory behavior assumes that the regulator is a "first-mover"              
              in the regulatory setting and is able to commit to incentive                   
              mechanisms which induce the regulated firm to truthfully reveal                
              its private information or undertake costly hidden actions.  This              
              project examines regulatory price and standard setting where                   
              regulators are often unwilling or unable to make credible                      
              commitments to specific regulatory actions or policies.                        
              Substantively, the research provides new insights into                         
              technology-forcing standards.  Technology-forcing regulations are              
              those in which the agency writes a standard that is costly, or                 
              even impossible to meet using current technology.  This is an                  
              important and interesting class of problems because technology-                
              forcing standard setting is used in environmental regulation,                  
              regulation of product and occupational safety, and regulation of               
              product efficacy and durability.                                               
                                                                                             
              The project focuses on the effects of limited regulatory                       
              commitment on sequential equilibrium pricing and investment                    
              strategies by regulated firms.  First technology-forcing                       
              regulation is studied in a standard setting context.  The                      
              incentives for the firm to invest in new compliance technologies               
              and the intertemporal evolution of standards are emphasized.                   
              Second, the project considers a model of price regulation in                   
              which the regulator determines the firm's rate structure after it              
              has made its investment in capital.  Third, the effects of                     
              regulatory commitment on the quality of service are studied.
