Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award (Computer and Information Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1991    
File        : a9096285

Award Number: 9096285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 14,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Forbus forbus@ils.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 6856,9227,
Abstract    :
                      This research develops knowledge based computer systems for            
              "qualitative physics," allowing computers to reason more                       
              effectively about the physical world.  Qualitative physics                     
              complements traditional physics by providing (1) fast answers in               
              simple situations and (2) a framework for more detailed analysis.              
              Specific qualitative models are being developed for fluid                      
              systems, thermal systems, and motion, adequate to describe                     
              complex systems such as as mechanical clocks and boilers.  The                 
              models include methods for prediction, measurement,                            
              interpretation, and for constructing plans and procedures.  The                
              research also includes an investigation of how people learn                    
              physical domains, including cognitive simulations of analogical                
              processing.                                                                    
                      The significance of this research is its potential to                  
              produce "robust" computer reasoning systems, comparable to humans              
              in their ability to reason approximately about how the physical                
              world around them will behave, without the detailed information                
              and mathematical equations required for classical models of                    
              physics.  In addition, studying the range of qualitative physics               
              expertise in humans may provide important insight into the nature              
              of cognition.  Practical and effective qualitative reasoning                   
              systems will also be essential in developing many advanced                     
              technological systems: Examples include intelligent monitors for               
              complex systems such as factories and power plants, and                        
              intelligent computer assistants for mechanical and engineering                 
              design.
