Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On Nonlinear Elliptic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1990       
File        : a9096249

Award Number: 9096249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanyan Li yyli@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project extends earlier contributions to the                 
              theory of semilinear elliptic partial differential equations.                  
              Recent research has established that multiple solutions can exist              
              when the equations are defined on unbounded domains.  One of the               
              issues to be considered in this project is to clarify the                      
              conditions one must impose on the equations to guarantee the                   
              existence  of any solutions.   Simple examples illustrate how an               
              equation may have only trivial solutions.                                      
                   A second line of investigation will focus on second order                 
              fully nonlinear elliptic equations.  This is an area of                        
              considerable activity where existence and uniqueness results have              
              been established for equations on compact Riemannian manifolds                 
              with nonnegative sectional curvature.  It is not clear whether                 
              the nonnegativity is necessary.  Work will be done in an effort                
              to explain the role of the sectional curvature and to consider                 
              the related complex equations as a longer-range goal.
