Title       : Contrasting Differentiation Processes in Oceanic Magma Chambers, Alcedo and
               Sierra Negra Volcanoes, GalapagosIslands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9096293

Award Number: 9096293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Geist dgeist@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1557      VOLCANOLOGY & MANTLE GEOCHEMIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Galapagos volcanoes Sierra Negra and Alcedo represent two                  
              extremes of magmatic diversity.  Sierra Negra is made up of                    
              compositionally similar, evolved tholeiitic basalts, whereas                   
              Alcedo has erupted a remarkable bimodal suite of tholeiitic                    
              basalts and oceanic rhyolites.  It is believed that the                        
              difference in the extents of differentiation of these two                      
              volcanoes is related to fundemental differences in their magma                 
              chambers' histories, yet the two are so close that their flanks                
              overlap.  This project will perform detailed field, petrologic                 
              and geochemical studies of Alcedo volcano, in order to begin to                
              elucidate these differences.  Particular emphasis will be placed               
              on determining the origin of the unique suite of oceanic                       
              rhyolites.  Volumes of the different units, their eruptive order,              
              and the locations of eruptions will be determined.  These in turn              
              will provide constraints on the petrologic processes that govern               
              the evolution of oceanic magmas.  Eventually it is planned to                  
              study Sierra Negra for comparison purposes, but such a study is                
              not part of this project.
