Title       : Calcium-Dependent Proteolysis in Mammalian Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1990  
File        : a9096188

Award Number: 9096188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      DCB  DIVISION OF CELLULAR BIOSCIENCES        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy E. Croall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1117      CELLULAR PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goals of this research are, first to develop a widely                      
              applicable assay for measuring the activation of calcium-                      
              dependent proteases ("calpains", EC 3.4.22.17), and second, to                 
              determine whether alterations in calcium homeostasis, either                   
              influx through the plasma membrane or release of intracellular                 
              calcium stores regulate autoproteolytic activation of these                    
              proteases.  The results of these studies will provide the basis                
              for subsequent investigations to identify physiological                        
              substrates, which may include talin, filamin, fodrin and protein               
              kinase C, and the consequences of proteolytic modification on the              
              functions of these proteins.                                                   
                                                                                             
              An increase in intracellular calcium is one important type of                  
              cellular response to certain external signals.  Mechanisms by                  
              which a generalized increase in intracellular calcium is                       
              translated into specific, local effects on different cellular                  
              functions are currently being sought and studied by many                       
              laboratories.  One such mechanism which has only begun to be                   
              appreciated is the activation by calcium of specific protease                  
              enzymes. This mechanism is potentially of great importance, but                
              the absence of an assay for calcium-dependent proteases in cells               
              has prevented elucidation of the details of their regulation and               
              identification of their physiological substrates.  Thus, the                   
              contributions of these enzymes to localized, calcium-dependent                 
              processes such as secretion, membrane fusion, and other cellular               
              functions have remained obscure.  The results of this research                 
              promise to provide a new dimension of insight into the mechanisms              
              of cellular signalling involving calcium.
