Title       : Research Initiation: Formal Modeling of Parallel Computations for Improvements
               of the Parallel Software Development Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096260

Award Number: 9096260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet L. Gatton                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Casavant tomc@eng.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Large-scale distributed-memory machine designs represent a very                
              attractive possibility for low-cost massively-parallel computation             
              power.  This work provides mathematical foundations of computing and           
              computation theory by developing new models for designing, structuring,        
              and analyzing software for such machines.                                      
                                                                                             
              The main objective of this research is to develop and refine modeling          
              methodologies for parallel/distributed computations.  These techniques         
              will be based on the modeling and analysis capabilities of Extended            
              Petri Nets and Communicating Finite Automata.  In addition to the well-        
              known properties of these modeling mechanisms, new properties of               
              parallel computation behavior will be investigated, primarily                  
              influenced by relevant analytical properties from the field of control         
              theory.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This work forms a basis for new software development methodologies for         
              parallel computers.  Most significant will be its impact on improving          
              the usability of the class of easy-to-build, but difficult-to-use, non-        
              shared memory MIMD systems.
