Title       : Coordination Compounds of Polyoxomolybdate Anions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1991   
File        : a9096289

Award Number: 9096289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John B. Hunt                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon A. Zubieta jazubiet@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic                 
              Chemistry Program will support a project in the general area of                
              inorganic solution chemistry and in the specific area of the                   
              chemistry of polyoxometalate anions. Polyoxometallate anions                   
              are the largest inorganic compounds which can be brought into                  
              solution, and their solution chemistry is in a region                          
              intermediate between that of small molecules and that of solid                 
              metal oxides. This project is expected to help elucidate the                   
              processes which occur at the surfaces of metal oxides during                   
              catalysis, and in particular to elucidate the mechanism by                     
              which acrylonitrile is synthesized using bismuth molybdate as a                
              catalyst, a process responsible for the production of four                     
              million tons of this chemical per year.                                        
                                                                                             
              The overall objective of the project is to exploit the                         
              synthetic methodologies developed recently for organohydrazido                 
              complexes of polyoxomolybdates in the synthesis of                             
              polyoxometalates with organoimido ligands. Emphasis will be                    
              placed on the synthesis of organoimido derivatives which are                   
              soluble in organic solvents, of polyoxomolybdate complexes                     
              stabilized by coligands, and of lacunary polyoxomolybdates. The                
              complexes will be characterized by x-ray crystallography, by                   
              multinuclear NMR, and by electrochemistry. Thermal and                         
              photochemical decomposition of the organoimido derivatives, as                 
              well as their reactions with allylalcohol and alkenes, will be                 
              investigated.
