Title       : RUI: Organization and Expression of Bovine Cytochrome Oxidase Subunit IV Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1990       
File        : a9096234

Award Number: 9096234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS               
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Bachman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed work will result in the characterization of the              
              bovine nuclear gene that specifies subunit IV of the                           
              mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase (COX IV).  Bachman's previous                 
              work led to the isolation of a cDNA corresponding to the COX IV                
              mRNA.  This will be used in a straightforward way to isolate                   
              genomic clones.  She has evidence for at least two genes, one of               
              which appears to be a pseudogene.  Using these clones, it should               
              be possible to develop gene-specific probes which Bachman will                 
              then use to study a variety of aspects of the regulation of the                
              gene(s).                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   The cytochrome oxidase (COX) of the mitochondrion is a large              
              complex of different proteins, three of which are encoded by the               
              mitochondrial DNA while the remainder are specified by the                     
              nuclear genome.  The number of such nuclear subunits varies: in                
              yeast there are 5; in mammals, about 10.  Several interesting                  
              regulatory problems are presented by this enzyme.  These include               
              the mechanism that coordinates expression of the nuclear and                   
              mitochondrial genes, and the mechanism, possibly the same, that                
              regulates expression in different tissues.  As yet, virtually                  
              nothing is known about the structure and regulation of these                   
              nuclear genes in mammals.  The work proposed by Dr. Bachman will               
              lead to the isolation and characterization of gene(s) for the                  
              largest of the mammalian nuclear subunits, COX IV, and should                  
              provide some insight into the mechanisms which regulate its                    
              expression.
