Title       : Molecular Analysis of a "Cadherin Related Molecule"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1991       
File        : a9096144

Award Number: 9096144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Lilien   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              All embryonic cells thus far examined bear both calcium                        
              independent and calcium dependent adhesive systems.  The calcium               
              dependent systems are mediated by a family of molecules referred               
              to generically as calCAMs.  Dr. Lilien has shown that the calCAMs              
              are divisible into at least two structural types on the basis of               
              their two dimensional peptide maps.  One group of calCAMs have                 
              peptide maps with over 60% of the spots being similar to N-                    
              cadherin related molecules.  The second type is represented by L-              
              CAM and shares only 20% of its peptides with the first group.                  
              Embryonic chick liver has both a cadherin related molecule, CRM-               
              L and L-CAM.  Dr. Lilien proposes to further compare the                       
              structure of CRM-L with N-cadherin and L-CAM.  To accomplish this              
              he will use molecular genetic techniques isolating cDNA clones of              
              the cadherin related molecules in liver.  He will screen liver                 
              cDNA libraries with antibodies recognizing all cadherins and                   
              oligonucleotide probes based on the known sequences of L-CAM and               
              N-cadherin. Additionally he will attempt to prepare antibodies                 
              which are specific to CRM-L.  To generate these he will use                    
              synthetic peptides chosen from sequence information for                        
              immunization of rabbits.  These antibodies along with monoclonals              
              will be screened immunohistochemically and ultimately analyzed                 
              for their effect on liver cell adhesion.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The development of the organs in an embryo involves movements of               
              cells and groups of cells relative to each other.  These                       
              movements require that cells make and break adhesions with                     
              neighboring cells.  This proposal is an investigation of a class               
              of molecules potentially important for adhesive interactions                   
              between cells.
