Title       : Topographic Analysis for Distributed Hydrological and Erosional Modelling of
               Landscapes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1990    
File        : a9096150

Award Number: 9096150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41777              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Of central importance to hydrologic and soil erosion modelling is         
              the development of an adequate representation of terrain.  Such a              
              representation must be capable of yielding precise estimates of                
              elevation, slope, and aspect at any point.  Little progress has been           
              made in solving this problem because of its complexity, however.               
              Present models for predicting effects of land use practices and                
              agricultural management practices on nonpoint source pollution, for            
              example, are limited by their inability to adequately consider                 
              three-dimensional effects.  Based on the idea that terrain can be              
              represented in the form of discrete polygons, each bounded by two              
              contour segments and two interpolated streamlines, the investigators           
              will develop a technology to handle spatial variability of the                 
              attributes in large watersheds and river basins.  This project will            
              refine and begin testing of an established hydrological model that             
              integrates algorithms developed for more specific models.                      
                                                                                             
                   This innovative study aims to develop methods that encompass              
              three-dimensional effects and that are more tractable, accurate, and           
              practical for use by engineers, soil scientists, and other                     
              practitioners than are current methods.  Explanation of means of               
              representing terrain, and the central statistical questions that must          
              be dealt with in working out this representation, will contribute to           
              the development of geographic information systems.  These methods have         
              the potential to facilitate progress toward modelling the effects of           
              management and land use practices on nonpoint source water quality and         
              quantity.  The techniques developed may also be applicable to                  
              subsurface water movement and to related groundwater applications,             
              which in turn are likely to be essential considerations in the                 
              development of reliable remedial measures.
