Title       : Dynamics and Maintenance of the Intertropical Convergence Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9096288

Award Number: 9096288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97200              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Battisti david@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   The Intertropical Convergence Zones (ITCZs) are                           
              climatological features in the earth's atmosphere that are                     
              intimately tied to both the tropical large-scale meridional                    
              (Hadley) circulation and the low-latitude surface circulation.                 
              The ITCZs drive the meridional circulation cells which transport               
              momentum and excess heat from the tropics to midlatitudes,                     
              thereby affecting the baroclinity of the midlatitudes and hence                
              climate.  In addition, the eastern Pacific ITCZ appears to play a              
              role in the large El Nino/Southern Oscillation climate                         
              fluctuations.  Yet the dynamics and energetics of the processes                
              maintaining the Intertropical Convergence Zones are poorly                     
              understood.  This study examines the maintenance of the ITCZ                   
              phenomenon and the associated large-scale circulation, using a                 
              General Circulation Model and a simplified 3-layer model of the                
              tropical atmosphere.  The PI will explore how the surface                      
              boundary heating (sea surface temperature) and orography effect                
              the location, strength, energetics and dynamics of the ITCZ                    
              through a carefully designed set of GCM experiments with                       
              increasingly complicated forcing.  A 3-layer model of the                      
              tropical atmosphere will be constructed and employed to                        
              facilitate in the interpretation of the GCM experiments (this                  
              model will explicitly resolve the boundary layer and the free                  
              baroclinic tropical tropospheric circulations).                                
                                                                                             
                   The results will help to better define the relationship                   
              between the ITCZ and large-scale meridional and surface                        
              circulations, and hence contribute to our knowledge of the                     
              global climate.
