Title       : Chemical Synthesis and Reactions of Mono- and Di-functional Heteronuclear
               Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1991      
File        : a9096105

Award Number: 9096105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 8,  1989     
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Hersh william_hersh@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry                       
              Program supports research in the area of organometallic                        
              catalysis. In this project William H. Hersh of the University                  
              of California at Los Angeles will investigate the chemical                     
              synthesis and reactivity of mono- and di-functional metal                      
              clusters. These cluster molecules are potential catalysts for                  
              carbon-carbon bond formation which is an important process in                  
              organic synthesis and especially in the production of                          
              petrochemicals from non-petroleum feedstocks. In addition the                  
              clusters may serve as model compounds for understanding the                    
              mechanisms of reactions at the surface of metals.                              
                                                                                             
              Heteronuclear bi- and tri-metallic cluster molecules containing                
              either molybdenum and iron or manganese and iron will be                       
              synthesized, using bridging carbyne or acyl groups and                         
              ancillary ligands such as cyclopentadienide and carbon                         
              monoxide. The reactions of these clusters will be studied,                     
              including the isomerization of a bridging methoxycarbyne to a                  
              bridging acyl via methyl migration to one of the metal atoms of                
              the cluster. Difunctional clusters will also be synthesized,                   
              and reactions in which two organic substituents on different                   
              metals of the cluster join via carbon-carbon bond formation                    
              will be investigated. Special emphasis will be placed on the                   
              kinetics and mechanisms of these reactions.                                    
              studied.
