Title       : Engineering Creativity Award: Optoelectronic Multilayer Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9096283

Award Number: 9096283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 28,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna C. Saraswat saraswat@glacier.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project is concerned with the innovative growth of               
              new combinations of materials and creative methods for                         
              characterization and quality assessment of these new materials                 
              systems for use in ultra fast optoelectronic communication and                 
              switching systems.  Cadmium telluride (CaTe) layers will be grown              
              on gallium arsenide/silicon (GaAs/Si) substrates.  The use of                  
              GaAs/Si substrates offers the possibility of exploiting the fast               
              optoelectronic circuitry of BaAs and established silicon VLSI                  
              technology.  Combinations of GaAs and mercury CaTe will be                     
              investigated in the creation of a monolithic infrared detector                 
              system.  Photoluminescence (PL) which is a well known                          
              characterization technique will be combined with new ideas to                  
              characterize the film quality and to correlate defects with the                
              film growth conditions.  The approach centers around spatially                 
              controlling the area where the luminescence emanates from the                  
              sample.  Photoluminescence is to be combined with                              
              electroluminescence and geometrical arrangements of pn                         
              junctions in order to confine and control carriers in areas of                 
              importance.  The combination of luminescene techniques provides                
              the injection of excess  carrier from different parts of the                   
              sample and the pn junctions confine the carriers with built-in                 
              electric fields.  Some new approaches to the characterization of               
              thin layers from the combined used of photo and                                
              electroluminescence in unique ways can be anticipated.
