Title       : Isomerism in Organocobalt Derivatives of Vitamin B12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1992      
File        : a9096104

Award Number: 9096104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John B. Hunt                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic                 
              Chemistry Program is in the area of bioinorganic chemistry. The                
              project deals with the synthesis and reaction chemistry of                     
              derivatives of vitamin B-12. Various derivatives of this                       
              vitamin serve as coenzymes in the catalysis of about 15 enzymic                
              reactions in organisms ranging from bacteria to human beings.                  
                                                                                             
              Details of two kinds of recently discovered isomerism in                       
              organocobalt derivatives of vitamin B-12 will be studied. The                  
              first involves formation of upper (beta) and lower (alpha)                     
              alkylcobalt derivatives when cobinamides (vitamin B-12                         
              derivatives lacking the pendant axial ligand) are reductively                  
              alkylated with some, but not other alkylating agents. The                      
              reason for the different outcomes with different alkylating                    
              agents will be studied as well as the mechanism of formation of                
              two isomers and the conditions under which the isomers can be                  
              interconverted. Preliminary results indicate that                              
              interconversion of such isomers may involve novel                              
              dialkylcobinamide species. The second type of isomerism                        
              involves formation of pairs of apparently isomeric alkylcobalt                 
              derivatives when aquocobalamin is reductively alkylated with                   
              alkoxyethyl bromides. These cannot be alpha and beta isomers,                  
              but are believed to be 2-alkoxyethyl and 1-alkoxyethyl                         
              cobalamins. The structures will be determined by NMR                           
              spectroscopy of products synthesized with isotopically enriched                
              alkoxyethyl bromides, and the mechanism of formation of such                   
              pairs of isomers will be studied. The conditions under which                   
              the isomers are interconverted will be determined also.
