Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Random Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1990  
File        : a9096256

Award Number: 9096256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Shih Yang yang@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Yang will work on a number of problems in random                
              fields and Markov processes with local interactions. In both                   
              cases, a question of primary interest is the investigation and                 
              description of critical phenomena. Professor Yang will study the               
              critical dimensions of the scaling limits of self-avoiding random              
              walks and the structure of infinite volume limits of Markov                    
              processes with local interactions. He will also investigate the                
              structure of the Gibbs state of lattice gas models with hard-                  
              core conditions and the differentiability of pressures of the                  
              system, and will give a description of how a non-equilibrium                   
              distribution approaches equilibrium in such models.                            
                   This project is research in a part of probability theory                  
              that is closely related to mathematical physics. The motivating                
              physical problem is to predict the long-run behavior of systems                
              of large numbers of interacting particles, based on information                
              of a local nature about the interactions. Some of the techniques               
              of quantum field theory for investigating such systems turn out                
              to be applicable to the study of certain kinds of random                       
              processes that arise in probability theory, for instance random                
              motion constrained by the condition that the path of the randomly              
              moving point not cross itself.
