Title       : Electromagnetic Wave Laboratory for Undergraduate Students at a Community
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1990   
File        : a9096174

Award Number: 9096174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fielding   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Angeles Harbor College
	      1111 Figueroa Place
	      Wilmington, CA  907442311    213/518-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project links properties of transversely vibrating                   
              mechanical systems with electromagnetic waves at radio                         
              frequencies.  Currently, there are few attempts in lower division              
              physics laboratories to demonstrate any of the properties of                   
              electromagnetic waves at radio frequencies.  In lower division                 
              laboratories, electromagnetic waves are presented in terms of                  
              oscillations of current and voltage in wires at audio frequencies              
              which leaves the student with the impression that electromagnetic              
              waves in space are a topic entirely separate from transverse                   
              mechanical waves, hidden from comprehension by a formidable                    
              mathematical formalism.  Understanding the similarities of                     
              electromagnetic waves to transverse mechanical waves gives the                 
              students an appreciation of the physical basis of electrical                   
              phenomena.  Concepts like impedance, reflection coefficient, and               
              matching are seen as general properties of all transverse waves                
              and are not unique to electromagnetic waves.  Understanding the                
              differences between electromagnetic waves and transverse                       
              mechanical waves leads the student naturally into the modern                   
              theories of electrons and relativity.  The major instruments to                
              be purchases are Wiltron Model 6409 RF Analyzer.  The Wiltron                  
              Analyzer will be used to investigate.  A.  Electromagnetic                     
              standing waves in conductors', B.  Attenuation of electromagnetic              
              waves in systems driven beyond cut-off, C.  Electromagnetic modes              
              of vibration in cavity resonators', electromagnetic waves in                   
              space near conductors.
