Title       : Mating-type Control of Chlamydomonas Sexual Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1989      
File        : a9096165

Award Number: 9096165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS               
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 31,  1989      
Expires     : December 31,  1989   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen P. VanWinkle-Swift swift@nauvax.ucc.nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Cell-cell interactions and later developmental events during the               
              Chlamydomonas sexual cycle are known (or presumed) to be controlled by         
              alleles at the mt, or "mating-type" locus.  mt exemplifies a master            
              regulatory gene orchestrating the expression of groups of unlinked cell-       
              type-specific genes.  This proposal describes work designed to determine       
              which aspects of sexual development are under direct mt regulation, and        
              to define the circuitry of genetic pathways that underlies progression         
              of the sexual cycle.  Intensive searches for mutant phenotypes showing         
              mating-type-limited expression will be conducted.  Altered chloroplast         
              gene transmission (under mt control) will be used to identify mating-          
              type-limited (mtl) mutants.  Through the characterization of sexual            
              development in mutant strains (microscopy), analysis of chloroplast            
              inheritance (marker transmission genetics and DNA-specific flourescence        
              microscopy), measurement of linkage between mt1 gene loci, and                 
              definition of epistatic interactions between these genes in constructed        
              double mutant strains, the mt locus will be identified and distinguished       
              from the genes it regulates. Induction of second-site suppressor               
              mutations and characterization of the suppressed strains will be used to       
              further clarify the primary functions of the mtl loci.  Genetic analysis       
              of mating mutants will also be used to evaluate alternative models for         
              the mating-type "switching" typical of homothallic species.                    
              The proposed experiments will lay a genetic foundation for the eventual        
              understanding of the molecular basis of differentiation of the sexual          
              stage of the organism.  Chlamydmonas is a simple one-celled plant and an       
              understanding of the mechanisms involved in the simple differentiation         
              of mating types may give insight into the more complex mechanisms used         
              in differentiation in higher plants.
