Title       : Gene Expression During Meristem Initiation and Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9096321

Award Number: 9096321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian M. Sussex   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                 This proposal seeks to analyze the initiation and organization of          
              lateral root meristems in radish (Raphanus sativus) where large numbers        
              of meristems can be induced to develop synchronously and rapidly.  By          
              analysing patterns of protein profiles generated by in vitro translation       
              we will determine times at which to produce cDNA libraries from which to       
              isolate probes for genes that are expressed uniquely or preferentially         
              in a staqe-specific manner in the organizing meristems.  These probes          
              will then be used to examine the tissue and cellular location of gene          
              products, and to examine whether homologous genes are expressed in other       
              types of meristems, such as the shoot apical meristem, or in meristems         
              of other species.  Our experiments will be aided by the use of                 
              primordiomorphs formed in gamma plantlets or by colchicine treatment.          
              Primordiomorphs are meristems formed in the absence of cell division,          
              and in them we will be able to examine the relationship between                
              molecular genetic events and a requirement for cell divisions at               
              specific stages of meristem initiation and organization.                       
                  Apical meristems are initiated in the embryo of vascular plants and        
              function directly, or indirectly through the formation of other                
              meristems, to produce the entire post-embryonic organism.  The                 
              initiation and organization of meristem function in localized groups of        
              cells at specific sties is a major event in establishing the patterns of       
              plant development. Little is known of the molecular genetic events that        
              control the developmental pathway of meristem formation, or how these          
              events are related to observable chanages in cellular and tissue               
              structure.
