Title       : Collaborative Research on the Influence of Pretrial Publicity on Jury
               Decisionmaking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1990   
File        : a9096102

Award Number: 9096102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1989     
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Despite considerable academic and public policy interest in               
              the issue of pretrial publicity, currently there is only limited               
              knowledge of its nature and effects on jury decisionmaking.  Over              
              recent years a variety of methods have been used to examine media              
              effects, but, while producing some knowledge, these efforts have               
              had their weaknesses.  Studies of real jurors and real cases have              
              typically used post hoc survey methods which cannot fully unravel              
              the linkages between pretrial publicity and jury decisionmaking.               
              Simulated jury studies have shown that people can and will form                
              impressions of defendants based on pretrial publicity, but these               
              studies do not demonstrate the impact of any particular sets of                
              biases on jury decisionmaking, and, by and large, these efforts                
              suffer from problems of external validity.                                     
                   Drs. Penrod and Linz seek to expand our knowledge of the                  
              influence of pretrial publicity while transcending some of the                 
              common pitfalls.  Three experiments are planned.  The first                    
              experiment assesses the impact of pre-trial publicity in four                  
              actual trials involving varying degrees of publicity.  Using a                 
              new jury simulation procedure called the "facsimile method,"                   
              videotapes of these ongoing trials will be presented to "shadow"               
              juries selected from community and student populations.  The                   
              second experiment is a laboratory study that makes use of the                  
              real trial videotapes but systematically manipulates the pretrial              
              publicity material that is shown to subjects.  The third study                 
              also uses the actual trial material but in this instance does so               
              in order to examine experimentally professional (judge, lawyer)                
              and lay evaluations of pretrial publicity.                                     
                   The three experiments combined constitute a most imaginative              
              package.  By integrating laboratory and field approaches in data               
              collection and design, the research maximizes both experimental                
              control and experimental realism.  From that vantage alone, it                 
              constitutes an important advance.  In addition, and equally as                 
              important, the facsimile strategy has the potential of being used              
              in other domains relating to legal decisionmaking. Therefore,                  
              this research promises a methodological contribution to the field              
              above and beyond what it should contribute to our understanding                
              of pretrial publicity.
