Title       : Heat and Momentum Transfer in Finite Rod Arrays, Award in U.S. and indian
               Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9096298

Award Number: 9096298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Subrata Sengupta razal@engin.umd.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5919      INDIA (COOPERATIVE SCIENCE)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Description:  This project supports cooperative research by                    
              Dr. S. Sengupta of the University of Miami and Dr. A.K.                        
              Mohanty of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur,                      
              India.  These scientists plan to investigate, experimentally                   
              and numerically, the heat transfer in the entrance region of                   
              shells containing finite number of rods.  The study will                       
              include the effects of the type of array, the relative                         
              distances (distance divided by diameter) between rods and the                  
              channel walls, the Reynolds number and the Grashoff number.                    
              Included will be laminar and turbulent regimes in finite rods                  
              bundles bound by square as well as circular shells.                            
              Comparison of experimental and numerical results will be made                  
              to evaluate the adequacy of existing one-equation and                          
              two-equation closures in predicting the developing flow.                       
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The experimental work on the geometrical types will be                 
              carried out at Kharagpur.  The analytical work on the square                   
              bundle will also be carried at Kharagpur, while the analytical                 
              work on the circular geometry will be carried at Miami.  Thus                  
              both scientists will contribute to the study and their efforts                 
              will complement each other.  Both institutes have the                          
              facilities to do the required work and will be building on                     
              existing experience.
