Title       : Studies in Thought Suppression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9096263

Award Number: 9096263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Wegner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The conscious suppression of a thought is a difficult thing to                 
              do.  Just trying for a few minutes not to think of white bear,                 
              for example, can be perplexing.  But people seem intent on                     
              trying to suppress unwanted thoughts nonetheless.  Thoughts of                 
              frightening events or depressing losses are targets of                         
              suppression, and people also may suppress thoughts of food,                    
              alcohol, or other temptations they hope to avoid.  This                        
              research explores thought suppression by asking people to                      
              suppress thoughts under various laboratory conditions.  Prior                  
              studies have shown that when people try to do this, they                       
              usually are capable of avoiding the target thought after a                     
              while by distracting themselves with other things.  The studies                
              in the project address two fundamental questions about this                    
              process.  How does self.distraction operate, and what                          
              consequences can thought suppression be expected to have?  The                 
              studies of how self.distraction operates examine how people                    
              suppress thoughts most effectively, and thus these studies have                
              implications for the treatment of alcohol and substance                        
              addiction.  The studies of the consequences of thought                         
              suppression focus on the possibility that suppressed thoughts                  
              may influence a person's thinking, emotions, and social                        
              interactions..even though the thoughts are seemingly absent.                   
              Thought suppression may make an unwanted thought more easily                   
              brought to mind, may make exciting thoughts unusually likely to                
              produce physiological agitation and anxiousness, and may                       
              promote such preoccupation with the unwanted thought that                      
              people find they cannot steer their social interactions in the                 
              directions they wish them to go.  Taken together, these studies                
              will introduce new knowledge on whether and when people should                 
              use thought suppression, and the consequences..both agreeable                  
              and harmful.that can be expected as a result.
