Title       : Synthesis, Assembly and Function of the E. Coli H+-ATPase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9096159

Award Number: 9096159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 31,  1990   
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157640             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Brusilow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research will investigate 3 aspects of the synthesis and                   
              assembly of the E.coli enzyme.  1) It has been shown that                      
              certain F1 subunits actually open the Fo proton channel.  By                   
              cloning ATPase genes in various combinations, and by                           
              constructing various truncated and mutant subunits, it will                    
              demonstrate exactly which subunits, and which regions of                       
              those subunits, are responsible for enhancing proton                           
              conduction through the Fo 2) It has been shown that a change                   
              in gene expression can produce an ATPase with altered                          
              energy-coupling characteristics.  The different ATPases will                   
              be purified and reconstituted to demonstrate what those                        
              structural changes are and what effects they have on the                       
              enzyme's activity.  3) ATPase subunits are differentially                      
              synthesized and then assembled.  It will then be determined                    
              to what extent newly synthesized subunits are degraded by                      
              proteases in vivo and how they might be protected from such                    
              proteases during assembly by binding to other subunits.                        
                                                                                             
              Proton translocating ATPase are large multimeric, membrane-                    
              bound enzymes which, acting as ATP in biological systems.                      
              They are therefore at the heart of energy metabolism and are                   
              central to any discussion or study of biological energy                        
              coupling.  These enzymes catalyze a reaction whose mechanism                   
              is unknown - they couple the movement of protons across a                      
              membrane to the synthesis or hydrolysis of ATP.  In bacteria,                  
              plants and animals they use the proton motive generated by                     
              oxidative electron transport or photosynthetic oxygenic                        
              electron transport to synthesize ATP from ADP and Pi.  The                     
              ATP synthase in E. coli can synthesize ATP, and also can act                   
              as an ATPase.  It is freely reversible in vivo in contrast to                  
              the eukaryotic enzyme.  It is hoped to answer an as yet,                       
              unanswered question, how does energy coupling occur.  Dr.                      
              Busilow has a very unique approach to explore this problem                     
              and is well prepared to carry out this study.
