Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1990        
File        : a9096222

Award Number: 9096222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : July 31,  1990       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fang-Hua Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9227,
Abstract    :
                   Work sponsored by this Presidential Young Investigator Award              
              will focus primarily on questions arising in the applications of               
              mathematics to problems of elsticity and liquid crystals, to                   
              geometric problems related to the study of curvature on manifolds              
              with boundary.                                                                 
                   The problems to be addressed are presented in terms of                    
              various partial differential equations arising either from                     
              physical considerations - minimization of functionals or                       
              variational inequalities, or are motivated by geometrical                      
              concepts.  The latter include the problem of finding a metric on               
              a manifold with prescribed Ricci tensor.  This problem is studied              
              locally or globally through the analysis of systems of elliptic                
              equations.  In the Hodge theory, the problem reduces to that of                
              solving the boundary regularity of solutions of degenerate                     
              elliptic systems.  For a single equation, the problem has                      
              recently been settled.                                                         
                   Focus of the elsticity (plasticity) studies will be on the                
              Singonolli problem, seeking the best possible regularity of                    
              vector valued functions which solve obstacle problems.  In                     
              liquid crystals many physical properties such as line                          
              singularities, phase transition, and moving defects, may be                    
              explained within a comprehensible theory.  Related work will be                
              done on studies of the corresponding dynamical equations.  In an               
              isotropic case, these problems reduce to the analysis of heat                  
              flow of harmonic maps and to harmonic maps from Minkowski space                
              to singular target manifolds.
