Title       : Regulatory Role of Plant Protein Kinases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1990    
File        : a9096264

Award Number: 9096264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Lawton lawton@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              By probing plant cDNA libraries sequentially with two partially                
              degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to highly conserved                  
              domains of mammalian serine protein kinases, a clone (PVPK-1)                  
              that encodes a putative plant protein kinase has recently been                 
              identifed.  This clone has striking homology to mammalian cAMP-                
              dependent protein kinases.  This development now provides the                  
              basis for examination of the structure, organization and                       
              regulation of plant protein kinase gene families and dissection                
              of the function of individual protein kinases in specific signal               
              transduction pathways that regulate development, mediate                       
              environmental responses and integrate metabolism.                              
                                                                                             
              Specific objectives are: (a) use of these and existing cloned                  
              sequences to determine the organization of families and sub-                   
              families of protein kinase genes; (b) isolation, characterization              
              and nucleotide sequence analysis of genomic sequences                          
              corresponding to cloned PVPK-1 cDNA; (c) generation of specific                
              antibodies against PVPK-1 protein kinase; (d) immunoaffinity                   
              purification of the biochemical properties of PVPK-1 protein                   
              kinase; and (e) analysis of function by expression of wild-type                
              and mutant PVPK-1 genes in protoplasts and in stable transgenic                
              plants.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Relatively little is known at the molecular level about signal                 
              transduction and response-coupling mechanisms that control plant               
              growth and development.  Protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation               
              of specific proteins is a major strategy for regulation of                     
              protein and enzyme activity in the transduction of environmental,              
              developmental and metabolic signals in animals and simple                      
              eukaryotes.  In higher plants, while protein phosphorylation has               
              been observed in vivo and protein kinase activity in vitro,                    
              little information is available on the molecular properties of                 
              plant protein kinases, their number and diversity with respect to              
              regulatory inputs and protein substrate outputs, or the function               
              of protein kinases in specific signal transduction pathways.                   
              This research begins to fill this information gap.
