Title       : Computational Analysis of Fluid Flows: External Boundaries Interior Layers and
               Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1990 
File        : a9096276

Award Number: 9096276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Izenman                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hagstrom hagstrom@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is concerned with the computational analysis of              
              time dependent fluid flows and it involves both the design of                  
              reliable and efficient numerical methods for problems on                       
              unbounded domains and the simulation of wave propagation in                    
              reactive media.                                                                
                  One aspect of this work is the development and testing of                  
              asymptotic boundary conditions for the Euler and Navier-Stokes                 
              equations in exterior and cylindrical domains.  The main tool is               
              the asymptotic analysis of the long range propagation of waves.                
              An advantage of this approach is enhanced accuracy, which may be               
              controlled by varying the domain size or improving the asymptotic              
              approximations.                                                                
                   A second area of concentration is the computational study of              
              existence, stability and dynamics of multidimensional diffusive                
              waves.  One application is to a model of flame propagation in a                
              channel, including the effects of heat loss at the walls.  The                 
              numerical analysis of singular perturbation problems will also be              
              studied.  The emphasis is on hyperbolic problems with stiff                    
              source terms and on the long time simulation of complex systems.               
                   The unifying theme throughout is the interplay between                    
              computational and asymptotic analysis.
