Title       : Dissertation Research: A Pollinator Mediated Plant- Pathogen Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1990    
File        : a9096170

Award Number: 9096170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tarri M. Joyner                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1990    
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie A. Real   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Silene alba, a flowering plant found along roadsides, can                 
              become infected with a parasitic disease, caused by a fungus.                  
              In addition to rendering the plants sterile, this disease causes               
              both male and female plants  to produce flowers with anther sacs               
              filled with spores of the fungus.  The insects which pollinate                 
              healthy Silene alba also visit diseased flowers, thus acting as                
              vectors of this disease.  This study attempts to show how the                  
              behavior of the insect pollinator/vector influences the                        
              plant-pathogen interaction between Silene alba and the fungus by               
              using an approach which combines field observations,                           
              experimentation, and mathematical modeling.                                    
                   No studies of plant-vector-pathogen interactions have                     
              included the behavioral component of the vector in modeling the                
              dynamics of the system.  This study in which the disease vector                
              is also the pollinator of the plant is an ideal place to begin an              
              investigation of how vector behavior affects a plant-pathogen                  
              interaction.  The voluminous literature on the effect of                       
              pollinator behavior on plant population dynamics can be drawn                  
              upon to develop models in this plant-pollinator/vector-pathogen                
              interaction.  The results of this study will be of interest to                 
              epidemioligists working in plant-vector-pathogen systems as well               
              as to evolutionary ecologists working on the effects of                        
              individual behavior on population and community dynamics.
