Title       : Gap Junctional Communication in Vertebrate Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1991      
File        : a9096202

Award Number: 9096202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keia' L. Thompson                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Gimlich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Intercellular gap junctional channels facilitate the transfer of               
              ions and small molecules, and this form of cell-cell                           
              communication is crucial to normal development of the vertebrate               
              embryo. The aim of this proposal is to study gap junction                      
              biosynthesis and the developmental role of gap junctional                      
              communication in vertebrate embryogenesis, using as a model                    
              system the frog Xenopus laevis. Messenger RNAs that may encode a               
              small family of distinct gap junctional subunits are present                   
              during oogenesis and early development in this organism. The                   
              channel forming properties of these gene products will be                      
              investigated. The spatial and temporal patterns of abundance of                
              the gap junction mRNAs and their protein products will be                      
              determined. Tests of the developmental functions of gap                        
              junctional communication will involve specific destruction of                  
              mRNAs in vivo, direct interruption of communication among cells                
              in defined embryonic lineages, and attempts to perturb                         
              biosynthesis of new embryonic gap junction proteins with                       
              "antisense" RNA. Developmental abnormalities resulting from such               
              treatments will be interpreted in the light of clonal analysis of              
              cell fate changes in treated embryos.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The results of this study will shed light on basic modes of cell-              
              cell signalling during embryonic pattern formation and may                     
              suggest explanation of common defects in the early development of              
              vertebrates.
