Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry for PDE, Quantitative Properties of Solutions of
               PDE, and Unique Continuation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1989  
File        : a9096158

Award Number: 9096158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1989  
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Three projects will be the focus of mathematical work done                
              on problems arising in the theory of nonlinear partial                         
              differential equations.  The first is concerned with questions                 
              related to symmetry in overdetermined boundary value problems.                 
              The symmetry occurs in solutions of certain equations in which                 
              the existence of positive solutions implies that the domain is a               
              ball and the solution is radially symmetric.  Work will be done                
              examining the degree to which the positivity assumption may be                 
              dropped while one can still infer symmetry of the domain.                      
              Related to this investigation are questions concerning averages                
              of functions over a fixed set as the set is subject to rigid                   
              motions through space. If, on assuming that the averages are                   
              zero, the function must be zero, one says that the Pompeiu                     
              property holds.  The problem of deciding the validity of the                   
              property is equivalent to showing the existence of solutions of                
              the eigenvalue problem for the Laplacian.  Work will be done in                
              looking for geometric properties of sets which complement this                 
              analytic result.                                                               
                   The second project concerns questions from potential theory               
              in which knowledge of quantitative properties of solutions of the              
              relevant operator are sought.  One particular issue is the                     
              problem of giving geometric conditions on the boundary of a                    
              domain which characterize the regular points for the heat                      
              operator.  Related work will consider conditions on the boundary               
              from which one may measure the extent of nontangential limits of               
              solutions.                                                                     
                   In the third project, work will concentrate on a new                      
              approach to uniqueness properties of elliptic and non-elliptic                 
              operators that is not based on the classical Carleman method.                  
              Recent studies have concentrated on operators containing                       
              unbounded lower order terms.  The object is to determine when                  
              solutions of the homogeneous equation which equal zero on an open              
              set must equal zero everywhere.  A 1939 result of Carleman has                 
              influenced all subsequent results in this area.  New discoveries               
              using a blend of geometric and variational ideas will be employed              
              to extend the present theory to cover larger classes of                        
              operators.
