Title       : Industrial/Environmental Analysis; Analytical Chemistry Across the Curriculum: A
               Case Study Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650804

Award Number: 9650804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Schaber schaber@ccvmsa  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Dinan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Bieron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Canisius College
	      2001 Main Street
	      Buffalo, NY  142081035    716/883-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Experience with the structural determination abilities of infrared (IR) and the
              trace elemental analysis capabilities of atomic spectroscopy (AS) are essential
              parts of any chemist's training. Unfortunately, the obsolete condition and
              unreliability of the college's instrumentation has made instruction difficult
              in these areas. This project involves purchase of a modern Fourier-transform
              infrared (FTIR) and an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) source. These
              instruments are being integrated into the laboratory components of several
              analytical chemistry courses using modem teaching methodologies. The focus of
              the project is to develop an industrial/environmental cluster of experiments
              that run through the current freshman-, sophomore-, and junior-level chemistry
              courses. Experiments within this cluster are based upon the case study method,
              involve the use of one or both of the new instruments, and focus on issues
              involving environmental quality. This approach better prepares chemistry,
              biochemistry, and biology students by involving them in real-world problems and
              by providing hands-on experience using modern analytical instrumentation. Case
              studies can be written in a manner that allows other colleges and universities
              to adapt these methods readily. The project's educational impact can be
              evaluated by measuring students' attitudes. These measurements can be made
              using psychological survey instruments that allow detailed statistical analysis
              to be performed.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
