Title       : Innovations for Enhanced Instruction of Animal Nutrition and Reproductive
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650641

Award Number: 9650641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The problem addressed by this project is the lack of student access to modern,
              dependable equipment that is primarily dedicated to undergraduate teaching of
              laboratory courses in Animal Nutrition and Animal Reproduction and Development.
              Objectives are to develop laboratory curricula that give students training in
              the application of biological principles to solve problems in animal
              agriculture through an understanding of the scientific method and to provide
              significant individual access to items of equipment that enable students to
              test hypotheses and gain technical experience with modern experimental
              procedures.   The plan includes the expansion of the laboratory classes in the
              two disciplines to include a substantial class experiment on the nutritional
              physiology of growing lambs (Animal Nutrition) and an array of individual or
              small-group projects on gamete and embryo physiology (Animal Reproduction and
              Development). Both experiences include significant student participation in
              developing hypotheses and setting specific objectives; reports are written in
              scientific format. The target audience is predominantly sophomore and junior
              undergraduates majoring in Animal Science.   The significance and impact of
              this project for undergraduate education are related to the number of students
              whose exposure to experimental animal science may be substantially increased.
              All of the 470 students, plus a moderate number of nonmajors, take at least one
              of the courses described. Evaluation of the success of these innovations is
              conducted by student and faculty peer review, and results may be communicated
              to scientific peers at annual meetings of the American Society of Animal
              Science and the Society for the Study of Reproduction, each of which has
              sessions devoted to undergraduate instruction.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
