Title       : Modern Steady-State and Time-Resolved Flourescence in the Undergraduate
               Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650619

Award Number: 9650619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Gravelle sgravelle@stvincent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew A. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Vincent College
	      
	      Latrobe, PA  15650    412/539-9761

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Through acquisition of a fluorimeter and a pulsed laser fluorescence system,
              this project incorporates fluorescence and time-resolved pulsed laser
              spectroscopy experiments into six laboratory courses in the Chemistry
              Department. Until now, the department has lacked equipment for introducing
              students to laser-based or fluorescence spectroscopy techniques that have
              become increasingly important in the undergraduate curriculum. The objectives
              of the sequence of experiments in this project are to introduce students to
              important concepts in steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy
              and to provide students with firsthand experience with corresponding
              applications in diverse areas of chemistry. To achieve these objectives, the
              project incorporates fluorescence and time-resolved laser spectroscopy into
              courses spanning the curriculum in quantitative analysis, in biochemistry, and
              in the advanced integrated chemistry laboratory. The topics of new or modified
              experiments to be introduced through the project are Ca2+ ion determination,
              chymotrypsin denaturation, introduction to ELISA, ethidium bromide binding,
              static versus dynamic quenching, time-resolved fluorescence of aromatic
              compounds in water, fluorescence control in zeolites, and luminescence decay
              rates of Eu3+. Because each of the chemistry degree programs (chemistry,
              biochemistry, and environmental science) requires students to take several of
              the courses involving these experiments, all majors are able to develop a solid
              understanding of fluorescence spectroscopy. Information and laboratory
              materials generated by the proposed experiments can be presented at
              professional meetings. Precollege teachers have access to the planned
              experiments through workshops and curriculum projects of the Saint Vincent
              College Teacher Enhancement Institute and the BRIDGES Project.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
