Title       : Instrumentation to Provide Detailed Nutrient Analyses in Aquatic and Terrestrial
               Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9650844

Award Number: 9650844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Fuller rfuller@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is designed to enhance students' understanding of nutrient
              dynamics in both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems by providing a more
              comprehensive analysis of different ions using a Dionex ion chromatograph (IC).
               Previously, many environmentally oriented courses have lacked detailed water
              chemistry information because of the time-consuming nature of wet chemistry
              techniques (e.g., titration and spectrophotometric methods).  Therefore,
              students have not always witnessed first-hand all of the more interesting
              nutrient pathways present in a particular ecosystem.  With the IC, students are
              able to quantify many different anions and cations.  This enables them to track
              more ions as they enter ecosystems in precipitation and then observe how
              concentrations change as water moves through a forest canopy (with comparisons
              between pine, spruce, tamarack, and deciduous forests).  Furthermore, through
              groundwater and surface water sampling, students are gaining a better
              understanding of how geology and abiotic processes affect nutrient cycles. 
              They are also able to make comparisons of vertical profiles of nutrients
              between productive and unproductive lakes, as well as lakes in limestone versus
              granite regions.  This instrument is assisting in the formation of
              collaborative laboratories between courses in biology, geology, and
              environmental studies, some of which involve gathering data on environmental
              problems suggested by the Madison County Planning Office.  These collaborations
              demonstrate to students the relatedness of science in different disciplines and
              the importance of an interdisciplinary understanding and approach when studying
              the environment.
