Title       : Electronic Measurement Network for the Freshman Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9650017

Award Number: 9650017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95618              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estel D. Sprague estel.sprague@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project introduces electronic measurement and manipulation of data through
              the construction and implementation of a measurement network in freshman
              chemistry laboratory programs for science and engineering majors. The result is
              a major revision of the laboratory curriculum that takes advantage of the
              capabilities of the network. The connectivity it provides facilitates
              cooperative learning activities. Learning groups of students function in a true
              team mode, sharing their efforts in experimental measurement and, most
              significantly, in the preliminary interpretation of data while still in the
              laboratory. Occasional multi-session projects can be undertaken, in which the
              members of learning groups study related aspects of a problem and combine their
              efforts to produce more meaningful results and conclusions. The students learn,
              through concrete examples, that today's chemists carry out measurements and
              data manipulation electronically, work cooperatively on extended projects as
              members of a team, and spend a great deal of time interpreting data.   A small
              prototype network system has been constructed and tested with students. This
              project will finalize the design of this prototype and construct and install it
              in the laboratories, concurrent with revision of the laboratory curriculum.
              Installation and implementation of the system in stages over a 1-year period
              allows direct comparison of student learning with and without the network. This
              can be assessed through common laboratory examinations. The clientele in the
              laboratory program are being carefully monitored and their attitudes and
              perceptions assessed through regular surveys.
