Title       : An Integrated Computer System Across the Health Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9650793

Award Number: 9650793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vythilingam Wijekumar vjwije@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Browe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele A. Gerwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Hershman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The present basic-science education of nursing students lacks sufficient course
              and content integration and is deficient in analytical and interpretation
              skills. This department is addressing this deficiency by improving the
              undergraduate science curriculum for nursing students in medical physics, human
              physiology, and nursing laboratories by the introduction of an Integrated
              Computer System in all three courses. The primary components of an Integrated
              Computer System include a computer with CD-ROM and software and hardware
              interface for experiments.   This system enhances discipline integration by
              three activities. First, the Integrated Computer System introduces nursing
              students to a system of data acquisition, analysis, and extrapolation in the
              laboratory that is identical for all three disciplines. Each course builds upon
              the analytical skills developed in the previous course. Second, the Integrated
              System is utilized to link learning modules between each discipline. Each
              course develops a series of learning modules based upon the same concepts. Each
              module includes the basic principles of the concept, laboratory or clinical
              procedures, data acquisition and analysis, and conclusion and applications.
              Each module is carried with the student to the next course, thus linking all
              three disciplines. Third, the Integrated System introduces simulations that can
              be used in all three disciplines and greatly extends the traditional laboratory
              or clinical conditions. The primary goal of these three methods is to enhance
              the nursing student's appreciation and knowledge of concepts that can be
              applied across disciplines and thus enhance their motivation and ability to
              master these concepts.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
