Title       : Acquisition of Updated Equipment for an Integrated Cell and Molecular Biology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9650222

Award Number: 9650222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33627              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Melan melan@duq3.cc.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Garey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Maurer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Doctor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Until recently, the upper-level Biology core curriculum consisted of four
              separate lecture courses in Cell Chemistry, Cell Biology, Genetics, and
              Developmental Biology, along with their associated laboratories. This strategy
              for laboratory experience was expensive in terms of faculty time, was redundant
              in terms of course content, and did not provide students with an adequate view
              of the integrated nature of cellular, molecular, and developmental biology.  
              The department has since replaced the four separate (1-credit) laboratories
              with an integrated 2-semester (4-credit) laboratory sequence. All Biology
              majors enroll in Lab I:  Experimental Biology, where they learn basic
              biotechnological methods. They then have the choice of enrolling in one of
              three second-level labs where they use the techniques learned in Lab I to carry
              out investigations in an area of their interest.   The Department of Biological
              Sciences has purchased equipment and supplies to establish and upgrade the
              microscopy, computing, and spectrophotometry resources available. As a result,
              students are able to get hands-on laboratory experience with equipment that
              accurately reflects present-day scientific investigation. All of the protocols
              and reagents developed in these labs are being made available for distribution
              to colleagues at other institutions. In addition, the students, as part of
              their second semester projects, post summaries of their project results on the
              World Wide Web page established for this course. Students are encouraged to
              further their research experiences, as they have in the past, through summer
              projects in individual investigator's laboratories.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
