Title       : Nanometer Scale Characterizaton in Undergraduate Labs Using a Lateral Force
               Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650897

Award Number: 9650897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwo-Ching Wang wangg@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toh-Ming Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PIs request fund to purchase a lateral force microscope (LFM) and a control
              station to create an upper level undergraduate lab course. This lab course is
              entitled "Quantitative Nanometer Scale Characterization Using a Lateral Force
              Microscope" and is aimed to significantly improve the present program of
              undergraduate instruction in the area of modern nanometer scale
              characterization of materials. The microscope will be housed in the existing
              junior Experimental Physics Lab and maintained by a department technical staff.
              We estimate that about 20 undergraduate students from both the School of
              Science and School of Engineering will take the course each semester (total ~0
              per year, including a summer session). This lab course offers several
              experiments: scaling in rough surfaces, electron mean free path in thin films,
              particle-surface interaction in surface polishing, and structures of integrated
              circuit (IC) chips. The materials and experimental projects developed in the
              lab course will also be partially used by other lab courses on campus such as
              Experimental Physics Lab (Physics Department), Structures and Properties Lab
              (Materials Science Engineering Department), and IC Fabrication Lab (Electrical,
              Computer, and Systems Engineering Department). The interdisciplinary lab course
              will broaden the applications of a nanometer scale characterization tool
              invented by physicists and be used by a wider range of undergraduate students.
              The knowledge and skill that interested undergraduates learn in this new lab
              course will better prepare them for entering a work place with modern
              technology. The lab course will be offered spring and fall semesters annually.
              In the summer where most other lab courses will not be offered, the LFM lab
              course will be offered to interested URP (Undergraduate Research Participation)
              students and NSF sponsored REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) program
              participants (one of the PIs GCW is the Program Director) who come from other
              colleges.
