Title       : A Quantitative Analysis Laboratory Curriculum Utilizing an Analyzed Complex
               Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9650845

Award Number: 9650845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228531             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Cameron Dorey camerond@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Draves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Conrad L. Stanitski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9255,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The proposed project will provide a prototype for the modernization of the
              sophomore/junior level quantitative analysis laboratory course. The goals of
              the laboratory course are first, to demonstrate principles taught in lecture,
              and second, to teach laboratory technique emphasizing precision and accuracy.
              The traditional laboratory course either emphasizes precision and accuracy by
              using single-component samples or demonstrates modern techniques by using
              naturalistic (non-analyzed) samples. This project will integrate the two goals
              by utilizing an analyzed complex matrix for student samples, lypholized
              clinical control serum, as a multicomponent sample to simulate situations
              likely to be found by graduates in analytical laboratories.  Significant
              features of the chosen sample matrix include (1) a large variety of substances
              which have been analyzed by the manufacturer, including ions, neutral
              molecules, proteins, and enzymes; (2) the need for preanalytical separation
              and/or masking of interferents in some analytical schemes; (3) the opportunity
              for kinetic analyses; and (4) a wide range of concentrations of different
              analytes in a single sample. Other features of the experiments to be developed
              include computer-aided data acquisition and reduction.   The project will be
              carried out in three phases: (1) the laboratory exercises will be developed and
              tested using students at UCA; (2) chemistry faculty from other universities
              will attend a workshop to learn the specific laboratory exercises and test some
              of the exercises the next year in their quantitative analysis courses; (3) the
              investigators will write a laboratory guide for the experiments, using the
              accumulated knowledge of the classroom experiences.   Anticipated student
              outcomes of the project include improvement of comprehension in the classroom
              of problems involving complex analyses, an increased enthusiasm for analytical
              lab-work, and a greater familiarity with the principles behind simple automated
              instrumentation.
