Title       : A Web-Based Introduction to Computer Networks for Non-Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650458

Award Number: 9650458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Holliday holliday@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bharat S. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eleanor S. Prochaska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Insight into the functioning of computer networks is of increasing importance
              for many students. As an illustration of computer science, a relatively
              in-depth treatment of the topic of computer networks is also an excellent
              alternative to the more traditional, breadth-first approach. In this project,
              the department is developing courseware that provides an introduction to
              computer networks, to be used in an introductory computer science course for
              students who are not planning on majoring in computer science. The courseware
              uses the World Wide Web and consists of Hypertext mark-up language documents
              and a set of `executable content` applications using the Java programming
              language. The Java applications use interactive algorithm animation to
              illustrate key concepts. Highlighted areas include CSMA/CD, Internet protocol
              routing, TCP error and flow control, cryptography and secure sockets, domain
              name resolution, and Hypertext telecommunications protocol. The role of each
              concept in the design of the Web can serve as an organizing theme. With a focus
              on the key concepts and animated applications, a significant understanding of
              this material is possible in a course for nonmajors.   The courseware is a
              major component of the primary course for nonmajors. The audience of the course
              includes a broad range of students, primarily undergraduates, but with some
              in-service teachers. Preservice teachers and technology majors form a large
              fraction of the students. The importance of understanding computer networks for
              our preservice and in-service teachers and technology majors is a primary
              factor in the project design.   The courseware can be used in a computer
              classroom of networked PCs. One situation in which Java applications may be
              used is in closed student laboratories.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
