Title       : A Reconfigurable LAN-Based Laboratory for Real-World Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9650763

Award Number: 9650763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74423              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Bun Yue yue@cl.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Morris M. Liaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George C. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Perkins-Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Clear Lake
	      2700 Bay Area Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  770581098    281/283-3015

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Most academic computer laboratories are tightly controlled, homogeneous, and
              difficult to reconfigure. Laboratory assignments using these labs are limited
              to traditional application programming and simulation, with little genuine
              exposure to other tasks related to a computer information system. This project
              involves initiating the first phase of a reconfigurable, heterogeneous,
              local-area-networks (LAN)-based lab that reflects real-world environments in
              order to provide students with practical, hands-on experience on realistic
              assignments.   The lab consists of a multiprotocol router hub serving 10 small
              LANs:  7 Pentium LANs, and 3 Macintosh LANs. Each LAN has three computers, just
              sufficient for many useful assignments. Additional computers can be added in
              the future to make the lab truly heterogeneous. The smart router hub makes the
              lab easily reconfigurable and allows the LANs to be isolated for various
              experiments. Students may thus be able to have sole control of a LAN to work on
              assignments that cannot be supported otherwise. Examples are database
              installation, database administration, security control, turn-key client and
              server system development, network installation, management and performance
              analysis, internetworking and interoperability, groupware installation and
              management, etc.   This lab may serve as a reconfigurable LAN-based lab model
              for other universities interested in providing real-world experiences and
              several technical papers can be written. The lab can ultimately be used to
              provide practical experience to all computer science courses. In particular,
              the courses Network Protocol and Design of Database Systems are being
              immediately improved. The lab is also critical to other courses, such as
              Applications Software and Computer Science Project.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
