Title       : Field Instrumentation for Environmental Remote Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9650878

Award Number: 9650878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott M. Robeson srobeson@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Much of remote sensing is based on the principle that important information can
              be derived by examining the radiative characteristics of matter at a variety of
              electromagnetic wavelengths. It is rare, however, for students to have the
              opportunity to measure these radiative characteristics directly. This proposal
              would give students hands-on experience with state-of-the art remote sensing
              and mapping instrumentation (e.g., radiometers, digital cameras, and GPS
              receivers). Giving students experience and skills with instrumentation should
              become a more fundamental part of the undergraduate geography curriculum. Field
              experiences, in particular, allow both geography major and non-majors to apply
              classroom theory to real-world phenomena. In addition, these experiences and
              skills allow students to obtain jobs outside academia and to enhance their
              records for entry into graduate school.      The National Center for Geographic
              Information and Analysis (NCGIA) has begun to establish guidelines for an ideal
              remote sensing curriculum at the undergraduate level. One recommendation has
              been to teach a Remote Sensing Field Techniques course. In particular, the
              NCGIA recommendation is to allow students to collect field data, calibrate
              radiometers, and to assess errors in remote sensing observations. Without
              appropriate instrumentation, these tasks are impossible. This ILI-IP project
              would allow remote sensing field techniques to be taught to a variety of
              students in several courses and contexts at Indiana University. The results
              from this project will be submitted to professional journals and NCGIA as a
              model for undergraduate field experience in remote sensing.
