Title       : The Center for Aquatic Environmental Studies - A Miniature Controllable Aquatic
               Ecosystem for the Study of Biogeochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9650522

Award Number: 9650522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26517              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Ort michael.ort@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colleen Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project has developed a conceptual framework for a Center for Aquatic
              Environmental Studies (CAES) in which students can investigate biogeochemical
              processes in a miniaturized aquatic ecosystem. The project supports two
              laboratories of the CAES:  four miniature aquatic ecosystems in which plants
              and invertebrates live and grow in several large tanks and an isotopic
              laboratory where processes of heavy metal sequestration can be measured.   The
              new equipment includes the basic materials for the aquatic ecosystems (e.g.,
              tanks and filters) and for isotopic sample preparation (e.g., fume and laminar
              flow hoods, balance, oven, and hotplates). The CAES is being used to develop
              lab experiments that can be used throughout the curricula in Environmental
              Sciences, Chemistry, Geology, and Biology. These experiments include studies of
              the ecology of the system (e.g., population dynamics), nutrient cycling, acid
              mine drainage, and sequestration of heavy metals in aquatic plants, such as
              duckweed and water hyacinth.   Students can use the lab in introductory-level
              courses and can return to the CAES frequently throughout their course of study,
              eventually doing senior projects under faculty supervision as part of a
              'capstone' course. Throughout their study, students work in cooperation with
              others with diverse expertise, learning from other students as well as from
              professors and the mini-ecosystem itself. Students develop greater
              sophistication in their understanding and abilities as time goes by, much as
              one does in projects associated with a job. The CAES is a permanent entity, so
              students can benefit from long-term data sets. Research at the senior level can
              be original, and students are being encouraged to write publishable articles in
              conjunction with their advisors.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
