Title       : Rotations in Contemporary Biology Laboratory Techniques for Undergraduates: A
               Team Approach to Problem Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9650712

Award Number: 9650712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilze Skare skarei@woods.uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas B. Shea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Braunhut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Collaborative research is central to solving real problems in contemporary
              biology. Such experiences, however, are typically not part of undergraduate
              curricula. Accordingly, this project is centered around the purchase of
              state-of-the-art instrumentation to be used in a comprehensive 2-semester
              undergraduate laboratory course for upper-level biology majors.   The course is
              designed to illustrate the collaborative, interdisciplinary nature of modern
              day research by having 6 teams of 8 to 10 students investigate a problem of
              biomedical significance using contemporary techniques from various
              subspecialties of biology. The student teams rotate through different
              laboratory settings as they follow the steps necessary to isolate, purify,
              characterize, clone, and mass produce a product of therapeutic value. Each team
              of students is mentored by a faculty Team Leader who is an expert in each
              particular methodology.    The goals of this course are to instill critical
              thinking skills by expecting the students to apply to a real-world problem the
              concepts and lab techniques they have so far encountered only in isolated,
              unrelated laboratory exercises, i.e., to learn to think like scientists; to
              familiarize students with state-of-the-art instrumentation that they are likely
              to encounter in a graduate research lab or an industrial setting; to emphasize
              the importance of teamwork and the fostering of strong collaborative
              relationships; and to encourage students to pursue graduate studies.   
              Students are being evaluated throughout the course by the Team Leaders.
              Critical thinking skills are tested with practical problem-solving exercises.
              The success of the course can be evaluated by feedback from student
              participants and a panel of academic and industrial scientists. The resulting
              course workbook can be published and posted on-line for world-wide access.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
