Title       : An Integrated and Networked Microscopy Center for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650654

Award Number: 9650654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Koke jk09@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana M. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project concentrates on the formation of an integrated microscopy facility
              (IMF) in the Biology Department. The IMF supports laboratory exercises at all
              levels in the curriculum (freshman to graduate). The exercises are experimental
              in nature and can foster analytical thinking skills through students'
              collaborative analysis of data. Some of these students will graduate to become
              teachers.  Southwest Texas State University produces more than 2,000 elementary
              and secondary school teachers each year, including 30-35 certified to teach
              biology.  In addition, an outreach program with area high schools is being
              established. Therefore, project plans have emphasized adding a laser scanning
              confocal microscope (LSCM) to the existing transmission electron and light
              microscopes to form a state-of-the-art microscopy facility.    An LSCM is
              essential to this plan because of the nature of the images that it can provide
              and because of its networking capability. Imaging is computer controlled and
              displayed. Digitization of images permits each student to collect images from
              their specimens and later retrieve the images using a computer at a site remote
              from the IMF. Widespread use of the proposed IMF is possible because the LSCM
              includes a UNIX-based computer that can be fully networked. Networking with
              hardware already in place permits images from the IMF to be accessed from all
              over campus and from all over the world. Thus any teaching lab with a
              workstation (consisting of any modern PC or Mac) can access the IMF. Accessible
              images include those from all the microscopes in the IMF, as the LSCM computer
              can also be used to acquire and store images from these sources.    The IMF
              allows students access to high technology in a familiar, computer environment.
              The LSCM provides technology that makes remote access to image files by
              students possible. Implementation of the objectives of this project can
              markedly increase the level of science education in biology and provide a model
              program for other universities  to emulate.
