Title       : Augmenting Student Research in Developmental Biology at Earlham College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9650237

Award Number: 9650237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy B. Mulnix amymul@earlham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Harvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earlham College
	      National Road West
	      Richmond, IN  47374    317/962-6561

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Biology Department is committed to incorporating scientific inquiry
              throughout the curriculum. This project targets the Developmental Biology
              course and makes possible a set of inquiry-based projects that use various
              light and scanning electron microscopic techniques to investigate Drosophila
              embryogenesis. These projects parallel and extend examples of cleavage and
              gastrulation presented in lecture. They also solidify understanding of
              subsequent axis and pattern formation.   Specifically, students observe
              cleavage and gastrulation events using bright field,
              differential-interference-contrast (DIC) and phase contrast techniques. Early
              developmental events are also documented using videomicroscopy. In the
              inquiry-based component of the lab, students work in groups to either
              investigate changes in nuclear and cytoskeletal organization using fluorescent
              markers or changes in surface morphology using the scanning electron microscope
              (SEM). The projects emphasize embryogenesis as a set of questions to be
              explored. These inquiry-based projects also build virtues associated with
              research: technical skill, enthusiasm, confidence, perseverance, attention to
              detail, and creative problem solving. Pilot studies using the SEM and
              fluorescent markers for nuclei and actin filaments were successful in the
              previous offerings of Developmental Biology.   The new equipment used in this
              project may expand the current microscopic capabilities to include DIC and
              video documentation and enhance significantly students' capabilities in
              phase-contrast, fluorescence, and SEM studies. This equipment is necessary for
              solidifying and expanding the investigative projects described. Since few
              inquiry-based exercises are described in contemporary laboratory manuals for
              use in Developmental Biology, this set of projects makes a significant
              contribution to undergraduate Developmental Biology laboratories. The equipment
              is also being incorporated into the existing secondary school outreach
              programs.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
