Title       : Instrumentation for an Integrated Laboratory Course on PhaseAnalysis in
               Materials Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9650509

Award Number: 9650509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay K. Vasudevan vasudevk@email.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Beaucage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Materials Science and Engineering is introducing a new
              integrated laboratory course sequence on Phase Analysis in Materials. To
              implement this course, project leaders are obtaining an energy dispersive x-ray
              spectroscopy system, with the associated NIST desktop spectrum analyzer
              software for an existing desktop student scanning electron microscope, and an
              automation and analysis package for the undergraduate Philips x-ray powder
              diffractometer.   These instruments can be used in conjunction with automated
              mechanical testing (Instron) and thermal analysis (DTA/DSC/TGA) systems in a
              number of experiments to provide an integrated program that applies equally to
              metals, ceramics, polymers, and composites. The instrumentation enables the
              department to make innovative and cost-effective use of existing resources to
              perform newer and more extensive experiments, conduct more refined analysis of
              experimental data, enhance the department's capacity to provide students
              hands-on phase analysis experience using state-of-the-art methods, and better
              prepare those students for the modern industrial environment. It can also
              augment the ongoing outreach program with area high school teachers, students,
              and underrepresented minorities.   The integrated approach to materials problem
              solving is both novel and crucial to materials engineering education. With this
              approach, students can readily understand the trade-offs between ease of
              processing and performance in terms of materials phenomena and differences in
              microstructure, which contributes substantially to the design component of a
              materials program. The proposed laboratory sequence on phase analysis adds a
              significant new dimension to the curriculum and substantially affects
              student/graduate engineer performance in the co-op/work environment, which
              should lead to overall enhancement in industrial output. The course may serve
              as a model for other materials engineering programs in the Nation.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
