Title       : A Laboratory Course to Teach Chemical Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9650327

Award Number: 9650327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Matthews matthews@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Ritter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Gadala-Maria  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Two critical issues that dominate planning, growth, and success of the chemical
              manufacturing industry are product quality and the environment. Traditional
              undergraduate chemical engineering education emphasizes fundamentals, but
              consideration of the over-reaching manufacturing issues of product quality and
              environmentally conscious chemical manufacturing has not been integrated into
              the curriculum.   This project provides an interrelated series of experiments
              centered upon manufacturing and evaluating the quality of a familiar chemical
              product, namely poly(methyl methacrylate). These experiments can be
              incorporated into a 2-semester unit operations laboratory sequence. This
              project continues to employ the existing, highly successful paradigm of
              teaching science and engineering fundamentals. At the same time, it allows for
              the integration of the principles of product quality and environmental
              accountability into the laboratory. Furthermore, this project improves several
              other required and elective lecture courses, as short teaching modules based on
              the experiments can be disseminated into those courses, providing continual
              reinforcement of the fundamentals of chemical manufacturing throughout several
              semesters of undergraduate education. This project is located in the Department
              of Chemical Engineering but can affect other disciplines, most notably
              Mechanical Engineering, by offering elements of these experiments and the
              teaching modules through interdisciplinary electives and the South Carolina
              Honors College.
