Title       : A Microcomputer Laboratory for Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9650032

Award Number: 9650032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah E. Ransdell ransdell@acc.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To capitalize on the recent allocation of space for the proposed laboratory,
              funds were requested for research template and statistical analysis software, a
              local area network of microcomputers, and a classroom data projection system. 
              A dedicated microcomputer laboratory in Experimental Psychology 1) supports the
              continued development of a new Laboratory in Cognition course, 2) allows the
              department to maximize the impact of the administration's recent space
              allocation for this laboratory, and 3) centralizes  and expands laboratory
              resources in order to increase hands-on exposure to the scientific method in
              psychology in the three targeted courses, Experimental Design and Statistical
              Inference, Laboratory in Cognition, and Research Issues in Psychology.
              Establishing a dedicated microcomputer laboratory for students in these courses
              better prepares them for psychology careers because the current situation, a
              College-wide, open-use lab, is an inadequate environment for actively exploring
              the research design and analysis activities. Furthermore,   this project
              expands the research activities possible and facilitates student-directed data
              collection and analysis. Women, who comprise the majority of the students in
              these targeted courses, and minorities, who make up 30% of majors, are
              especially empowered by their successes in these courses. Evaluation includes
              both self-report and behavioral data comparing the current situation with the
              proposed changes. The basic premise of the proposal is that students gain a
              solid background in research design and statistics because they are asked to
              make use of such information rather than just read about it. Students become
              more competitive and savvy about science-oriented laboratory tools after having
              participated in the three courses to be offered in this dedicated laboratory.
