Title       : Enhancing Physics Laboratories with Microcomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9650539

Award Number: 9650539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6789               (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Lynch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Waynesburg College
	      51 West College Street
	      Waynesburg, PA  153701258    412/627-8191

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               After several years of planning, the Mathematics, Computer Science, and Physics
              Department is conducting a project for enhancing physics laboratories with
              microcomputers. The project can dramatically change the way physics
              laboratories are taught at the college. Currently, the students work through a
              series of lab assignments by carefully following detailed sets of procedures.
              The students find the assignments to be tedious at times and, as a result, they
              often lose track of the objective by focusing on the procedure. The collection
              of data is slow, and the results are often inaccurate.   With the acquisition
              of microcomputer stations for data collection and data analysis, students can
              work on lab assignments in ways that are more similar to how scientists work in
              their laboratories. Each assignment has an explicit written objective without
              an explicit procedure. Students are shown how the new equipment works and how
              to navigate through the software, but it is incumbent on them to find ways to
              attain the written objective. The collection of data is fast, and measurements
              are accurate. Many trials can be performed in one lab period. Once the basic
              equipment and software are understood and mastered, students are adequately
              prepared to begin a slew of lab assignments without the need for continual
              guidance from an instructor.   The change is intended for the biology,
              chemistry, and engineering majors in Introductory General Physics I and II; the
              sports medicine majors in Basic Physics; and the engineering and computer
              science majors in Computers in the Laboratory.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
