Title       : Geophysical Field Instrumentation for Undergraduate Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9650583

Award Number: 9650583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harve S. Waff waff@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will utilize field geophysical instruments whose purpose will be to
              provide students experience with state-of-the-art field data collection,
              modeling and interpretation in undergraduate courses in geophysics, geology,
              hydrology, environmental science, and geography. Geophysical instrumentation
              has undergone a series of revolutionary improvements during the last decade.
              This technological advance has been paralleled by similar advances in
              computer-based data processing and modeling programs, and together they provide
              an unprecedented opportunity to address a wide spectrum of scientific problems
              of public and private concern with a sophistication not previously accessible.
              We are designing a new, expanded course program around the requested equipment.
              It includes modification of existing undergraduate exploration geophysics,
              seismology and summer field camp courses, and introduction of three new courses
              in geophysical instruments and digital signal processing, field geophysics, and
              a geophysics project design course. The planned, extended course offerings, in
              which these instruments will be essential, will fill the expanding needs of the
              Geological Sciences Department and the Environmental Studies program The goal
              of these improvements to our program is to provide undergraduate students in
              the above disciplines with opportunity to become skilled in application of
              noninvasive methods of subsurface investigation which pertain to their areas of
              study. The field instruments will include:  a multichannel seismograph plus a
              small elastic wave generator, a total field magnetometer, a portable
              frequency-domain electromagnetic depth sounding system, and a ground
              penetrating radar system. When the instruments are not being used by the
              University of Oregon, we plan to make them available for undergraduate
              instruction at other schools within the state.
