Title       : Moveable Computer Workstations Designed to Facilitate the Use of STELLA II in
               the Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9650838

Award Number: 9650838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22454              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Henson-Apollonio   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shihong Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Science literacy in the United States has been reported to be declining to a
              pre-World-War II level. Both in and out of the classroom, a lack of critical
              thinking skills contributes to a growing sense of frustration regarding the
              public's ability to understand scientific research, among nonscientists and
              scientists alike. To counter this trend, the department is offering an
              undergraduate biology laboratory experience that helps prepare students,
              especially those in Elementary Education, for a lifelong commitment to
              self-education in biology.   Unfortunately, students often lack a sense of
              self-confidence, inhibiting their ability to utilize their real-world
              experiences as a basis for analyzing and interpreting experimental results. The
              project aims to build on students' life skills to develop computerized models
              of familiar cause-and-effect situations and then to have these students apply
              their skills to build simulation models of biological systems using results
              obtained in the undergraduate laboratory. However, a shortage of computer
              equipment, accessory equipment, and software in our biology laboratories has
              resulted in inadequate student access and limited computer use. To solve the
              problem, the department is obtaining the necessary equipment to implement a
              semester-long, hands-on laboratory unit to study a freshwater aquatic
              ecosystem. Observations are recorded by traditional methods and by newer ones,
              such as digitization of video recordings. Students build simple STELLA II
              models based on their observations. The results of field studies and laboratory
              exercises are then used to run simulations of their models. In this way,
              Elementary Education students develop a variety of computer skills that
              stimulate the use of the computer as an active learning tool, while conveying
              the dynamic nature of biosystems.   The STELLA II models can be evaluated by
              education and science faculty on-campus and at Purdue University/West
              Lafayette. The laboratory exercises and models may be disseminated to various
              STELLA-based organizations over the World Wide Web, by Internet e-mail, and in
              related conference reports such as AACE and EDUCOM.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
