Title       : Implementing a "Development of Environmental Resource Information" Minor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9650755

Award Number: 9650755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rollin D. Strohman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Dietterick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A new minor in Development of Environmental Resource Information is being
              established at this institution. This minor enables those persons involved in
              resource management to place resource information in the correct geographic
              location. It also provides an introduction to the legal aspects of boundaries
              and resource utilization. The minor combines surveying with software
              instruction in AutoCAD, Arc/Info, and land design software. This is balanced
              with boundary law, resource ecology, and environmental impact analysis. The
              last course in the minor is a project course in which all the material in the
              minor is integrated.    Geographic Information Systems (GIS) databases are
              becoming the standard planning tool. But when these databases are created, more
              than 50 percent of the effort and 90 percent of the cost is related to
              obtaining data in digital form. This minor helps students create the data in a
              cost-effective manner. Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers are a key
              technology in obtaining position information to correctly place and check the
              accuracy of GIS data. The project involves purchase of GPS receivers that will
              provide ground control for production of orthophotos (uniform scale aerial
              photographs), digital elevation model (DEM) data, and the requested
              cartographic data acquisition software. The DEM data can be used with requested
              land design software for earthwork, hydraulics, and hydrology calculations. A
              color printer and data collectors are also used in the minor.    Information on
              the minor can be publicized on a department web page, and links to the page can
              be requested from other web pages. Evaluations of the project can also be
              distributed there. Laboratory exercises developed for the minor will be offered
              to the NASA project to develop a National Remote Sensing Core Curriculum.
