Title       : Computer Applications in Introductory Physics & Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9650377

Award Number: 9650377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Cheyne stanc@tiger.hsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Kniffen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampden-Sydney College
	      
	      Hampden Sydney, VA  23943    804/223-4381

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               It is the objective of this project to equip two laboratory courses in the
              Department of Physics with new computers. The Department of Physics and
              Astronomy has a policy that requires a separate co-requisite laboratory with
              each Physics or Astronomy course. Most students who enroll in these courses are
              significantly deficient in scientific, technological, and computer skills. In
              addition, most nonscience students find the laboratory a burden. Therefore, one
              must be creative in acquiring the student's interest and maintaining a
              meaningful educational experience in the lab.   With the development of the
              Internet, it is possible to access scientific and technological databases
              worldwide, for example, meteorological and astronomical images. With the
              incorporation of computers and Internet applications into the introductory
              Physics and Astronomy laboratory, this project can accomplish several
              objectives. Firstly, students gain valuable exposure to computers. Secondly,
              students are exposed to the latest science and technology. Thirdly, computer
              projects properly integrated into a laboratory are a good mechanism to increase
              the interest of nonscience students. Fourthly, the use of the Internet helps
              the student realize that meteorology and astronomy are very active and dynamic
              fields, even at the introductory level. Finally, the current approach to
              computer simulations in the astronomy laboratory, in which the student is sent
              to the computer center, can be replaced by in-class instruction where the
              frustration of dealing with unfamiliar software and hardware can be mitigated. 
               Current estimates are that 225 students (23 percent of the total college
              enrollment) would use these computers per academic year. The college is
              expanding the summer session, increasing the usage by an additional 30 to 50
              students. The department is also planning to generate a laboratory manual
              entitled, `Incorporating the Internet in the Introductory Laboratory.` This
              contains information concerning all aspects of using the Internet in a
              classroom. It features information on the possible problems one might face,
              solutions to those problems, and methods of locating remote databases. In
              addition, the lab manual can include exercises designed to give the student a
              better understanding of the images of interest (i.e., meteorological,
              astronomical, etc.).                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
