Title       : Laboratory Modernization: Stage 2, Electricity and Magnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9650961

Award Number: 9650961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6486               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Gruebel f gruebelrw@titan.sfasu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali A. Piran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter L. Trikosko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman L. Markworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stephen F Austin St Univ
	      Box 6078
	      Nacogdoches, TX  759626078    936/468-2201

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports a major reorganization of the laboratories for the second
              half of the introductory physics sequence for all science majors and
              pre-engineers (approximately 80 students each year). This continues the
              restructuring, begun in 1990, of the introductory laboratory sequence for these
              majors. The department is organizing four laboratory modules, Wave Motion,
              Electricity and Magnetism, Optics, and Modern Physics, each requiring 3 to 4
              weeks to complete. Each module contains several innovative experiments that are
              run weekly until the module is completed by all of the students. This
              arrangement reduces the number of setups for an individual experiment,
              resulting in significant cost reductions to the university and its sponsors.  
              This project specifically addresses Module 2, Electricity and Magnetism.
              Classic experiments have been merged with new approaches to introduce the
              student to the concepts of exponential decay in physical situations, behavior
              of pulses in transmission lines, and experimental determination of fundamental
              constants. The exercises encourage creative curiosity and rely heavily on the
              use of analytical techniques made possible by computers. The module represents
              a more loosely structured laboratory than the conventional approach in which
              everyone does the same experiment at the same time. The involvement of the
              students in discussions with one another and the enhancement of creative
              curiosity should occur more readily in a less structured environment.   The
              project uses student focus groups, survey instruments, and observations in
              formative and summative evaluation. Dissemination products include course
              materials, software, a laboratory manual, and final evaluation reports.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
