Title       : Hardware Prototyping Capability for a Community Service Projects Course in
               Electrical and Computer Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9650771

Award Number: 9650771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Coyle coyle@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry G. Dietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery L. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leah H. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin T. Kornegay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               In the Engineering Projects in Community Service (EPICS) program, Electrical
              and Computer Engineering students earn academic credit for long-term team
              projects that solve technology-based problems for local community service
              agencies. Each project team is a mix of sophomores, juniors, and seniors, and
              each student may participate in an EPICS project for up to 3 years. This
              structure provides the continuity required to carry out long-term engineering
              design projects that can have a significant impact on the community.   The
              program is establishing a hardware prototyping facility. Its goal is to enable
              the student teams to fully implement and test their designs. The students thus
              experience all phases of an engineering project, from project-definition
              meetings with their community service agency partner, through system design, to
              construction and evaluation of a system prototype. After a prototype has proven
              its value to the community, funds raised from private sources are used to
              produce the systems deployed on a permanent basis.   The five current EPICS
              projects and those to be added involve many technologies: computer networks,
              digital electronics, distributed databases, electromechanical systems, energy
              management systems, human-computer interfaces, power electronics, solar power,
              speech processing, and wireless communications. The equipment supports hardware
              prototyping efforts involving any combination of these technologies.   The
              addition of this full-scale hardware prototyping capability is crucial to the
              continued development of the EPICS program. It enables the EPICS program to
              become an outstanding model of how community awareness, communication skills,
              teamwork, system design skills, and project management skills can be taught to
              undergraduates in engineering.
