Title       : Seeding the Laboratory Curriculum In Physical and AnalyticalChemistry with
               Interdisciplinary Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9650638

Award Number: 9650638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice E. Reutt-Robey rrobey@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cary J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil V. Blough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Rebbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Through this project, the university is seeding its upper-division
              undergraduate laboratory courses in physical and analytical chemistry with
              selected interdisciplinary applications. Faculty expertise is being used to
              develop new applications that demonstrate the role of chemical measurements in
              addressing topical problems in biological chemistry, materials chemistry, and
              environmental chemistry. Students enrolled in Instrumental Methods of Analysis
              are using fluorescent probes of species in biological and environmental
              matrices. In Physical Chemistry Laboratory I students are performing
              calorimetric measurements on liquid crystalline materials of interest in
              biological chemistry (synthetic biomembranes) and in materials chemistry
              (liquid crystal display materials). In Physical Chemistry Laboratory II
              students are using fluorescence methods to explore complex formation on
              chemical models of active enzyme sites.   By offering students the opportunity
              to perform measurements on chemical systems that are in the broad public view
              and of direct relevance to society, the university is motivating its diverse
              student population. These experiments are providing opportunities for
              investigations on more complex chemical systems than those typically studied in
              undergraduate laboratory curricula.   The department is purchasing two
              fluorescence spectrophotometers, one fluorescence detector for the HPLC, and
              two differential scanning calorimeters. This instrumentation is essential for
              developing and implementing these new applications. The impact that these new
              applications have on student motivation and chemical reasoning provides a
              rational guide to furthering curricular development at colleges and
              universities.
