Title       : Enhancing Instructional Opportunities of Modern Molecular Genetic Techniques in
               Biology at an Undergraduate Liberal Arts University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9650355

Award Number: 9650355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54765              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Wimmers lwimmers@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian S. Masters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Molecular genetic tools are employed in an ever-increasing variety of fields in
              both academia and industry. This department, like many others, has offered a
              very good program in traditional cellular biology, but has been unable to offer
              courses addressing the theory or application of molecular techniques. Thus,
              many biology majors proceed to graduate academic programs and industrial
              workplaces without the background necessary to take advantage of these
              important tools. The Department of Biological Sciences is working to correct
              this deficiency by offering two new courses in molecular biology with strong
              laboratory components concentrating on modern molecular genetic approaches to
              basic biological questions.   Both courses emphasize a hands-on approach and
              accommodate students from a wide range of biology education backgrounds. The
              first course deals with traditional molecular subjects in the lecture and makes
              use of a project-oriented approach in the laboratory. Students work in small
              groups using a variety of modern molecular techniques to duplicate a published
              research program. This approach enhances instruction by placing techniques
              within their appropriate context, increases student interest, and encourages
              team working skills. The second course exposes students to the theory and
              practice of the different DNA fingerprinting techniques being used in many
              areas of biology. These exercises provide students with a practical working
              knowledge of a wide range of molecular techniques and a particular familiarity
              with DNA fingerprinting.   Students completing this course will be prepared to
              pursue this highly practical technology in areas of biological science ranging
              from ecology to forensics. Both courses are intended to enhance current
              upper-level biology courses, prepare students for independent research
              projects, serve as models for similar efforts at other undergraduate
              institutions, and provide the basis for outreach programs to K-12 instructors. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
