Title       : The Generation and Analysis of Genetic DNA Sequence Information in the
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9650105

Award Number: 9650105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25750              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Pierce j.pierce@usip.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ara H. DerMarderosian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the Scs in Philade
	      43rd St Kingsessing Mall
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/596-8800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project concerns the acquisition of a safe, reliable, and cost-effective
              DNA sequencing instrument that can be used in undergraduate education and
              research. The evolving biotechnology curriculum in the Department of Biological
              Sciences has three components: recombinant DNA techniques, the generation of
              genetic sequence information, and the analysis and manipulation of genetic
              information.   The project focuses on meeting the instrumentation needs of the
              second component by obtaining a fluorescent-based DNA sequencer that uses a new
              capillary matrix electrophoresis technology. This instrument meets all of the
              project's requirements in being safe (no radioactive nucleotides and no
              acrylamide gels), reliable (fluorescent nucleotide chemistry is a standard
              technology in the genome projects), and cost-effective (DNA sequencing
              reactions are performed using a polymerase chain reaction sequencing kit at a
              cost of about $5 per reaction).   All biology undergraduate students can learn
              how biotechnology is performed by gaining hands-on experience in structured
              required laboratory class exercises and in doing independent, faculty-sponsored
              research projects. For students to prepare for the careers of the future and
              for their taking on leadership roles after graduation, it is imperative that
              undergraduate students majoring in biology have a firm understanding of what
              biotechnology is and how this discipline is affecting science and society.
