Title       : Social and Behavioral Sciences Laboratory for Undergraduate Small Group and
               Focus Group Instruction, Training and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9650514

Award Number: 9650514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Bennett stephen.benett@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Gallo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula J. Dubeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail Fairhurst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred J. Tuchfarber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Rapid advances in social and behavioral science theories and methodologies pose
              substantial challenges to undergraduate students, particularly those interested
              in multidisciplinary fields combining elements from communication, economics,
              political science, and sociology. One major area of growth in these social
              sciences is in the use of small group and focus group studies and methodologies
              to increase understanding of complex and subtle decision-making and group
              interaction processes.   This project provides students with a state-of-the-art
              laboratory in which they can learn and develop research skills in small group
              and focus group behavioral observations and instruction. The project makes
              sophisticated video and audiographic recording and data processing equipment
              available to assist students in their hands-on experiences in conducting small
              group and focus group studies.   In addition, in combination with the targeted
              curriculum offered within each department, this cross-discipline Social and
              Behavioral Sciences Laboratory provides students with the flexibility to take
              more diverse opportunities for undergraduate research projects. This new
              equipment makes possible substantial cross-departmental teaching collaborations
              in the areas of communication, social interaction studies, and social and
              behavioral methodology and is ideal for a variety of honors and directed study
              programs to train undergraduates in modern and emerging research methods and
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
