Title       : Advanced Equipment for Both Introductory and Upperclass Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1998    
File        : a9650912

Award Number: 9650912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23409              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Dooley jwdooley@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Cooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Conrad R. Miziumski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics majors need to know that they will be prepared to perform near the
              frontiers of physics after graduations. Chemistry and biology majors need to
              know about the physics techniques that will diffuse into their working lives in
              the form of new measurement appliances. Non-science majors need to decide
              whether they want their taxes (and the price of their telephone service) to pay
              for continued exploration of the frontiers. Physics majors will benefit most
              obviously from the new equipment: They will probe lower temperatures, shorter
              times, and weaker signals than ever before at Millersville. They will measure
              the lifetime of the muon, the critical current and critical field of
              superconductors, and determine the structure and orientation of crystals. We
              plan to set much of our equipment up in mobile stations, for use by advanced
              laboratory students, and (in a new step for us) for demonstration in lecture to
              introductory students. Introductory students will see the superconducting
              transition; see superconductivity destroyed by a magnetic field. They will see
              Bragg x-ray diffraction peaks generated in the lecture hall and compare them to
              the optical diffraction that they observed in laboratory (and through a slit
              formed by their first and second fingers). They will see metal evaporate,
              travel through a vacuum, and form a film. They will estimate that thickness
              using the same idea (conservation of mass) that connects the slow water inside
              a hose to the fast water squirting from its pinched end. We mean to lead
              introductory students to believe that they can use the physics they know to
              understand reports from the frontiers of physics. If they believe they can
              understand, then science has a chance to convince them of the beauty and value
              of work at the frontier. We will extend our reach with summer workshops so that
              teachers can take the story back to their high school students.
