Title       : Incorporating FT-IR into the Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9650826

Award Number: 9650826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Pelter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria O. Longas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Kriley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project provides funds for the purchase of a Fourier-transform-infrared
              (FTIR) spectrophotometer to be used for undergraduate teaching and research.  
              This project is the initial phase of a multiphase plan for improving the
              instrumentation available at the university. The ultimate goals are to provide
              an improved laboratory experience for the students, to increase their skill
              level, and to attract more students to major in chemistry. The target audience
              is students enrolled in the organic, inorganic, and biochemistry laboratory
              courses, which, in addition to chemistry majors, include students in the
              biological sciences and prenursing curricula. At present, only chemistry majors
              get actual hands-on experience with the major instrumentation. This project
              also increases the training available to the chemistry majors and gives all the
              students better exposure to state-of-the-art chemical instrumentation.   The
              plan is to give as many students as possible (approximately 400 per year)
              experience with FTIR. Advanced sampling techniques, such as horizontal
              attenuated total reflectance and diffuse reflectance, are fully utilized.
              Experiments are designed to allow the atmosphere in the teaching laboratory to
              mimic an actual research setting. While IR spectroscopy typically has been
              associated with the assignment and identification of organic functional groups,
              this project shows it can be equally effective as a pedagogic tool in the
              undergraduate inorganic and biochemistry curricula.   Experiments developed in
              this project can be published in an appropriate journal such as the Journal of
              Chemical Education. This can be complemented with student presentations at
              regional and national meetings. Thus, the use of FTIR is beneficial not only to
              these students but to the entire undergraduate community nationwide.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
