Title       : High-Field Multinuclear NMR In Undergraduate Education at Washington and Lee
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9650033

Award Number: 9650033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich S. Uffelman uffelman.e@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa T. Alty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia B. France  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Desjardins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    703/463-8400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports development of a series of undergraduate experiments
              involving high-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). These new experiments
              are being employed throughout the curriculum, ranging from general chemistry to
              undergraduate research. Many of the experiments are designed to make links
              between courses. For example, in collaboration with the Waymouth group at
              Stanford, a suite of experiments for undergraduates involving new oscillating
              Ziegler-Natta polymerization catalysts is being implemented. This experiment
              begins in organic chemistry with the synthesis of ligands and concludes in
              inorganic chemistry with the synthesis of the catalyst and the study of the
              polymerization process.   Similarly, cross-disciplinary experiments are being
              developed involving porphyrin synthesis, spectroscopic characterization, and
              metallation. Routine use of 1H NMR becomes possible in the large organic class,
              and regular use of 13C NMR and two-dimensional NMR techniques is possible in
              the spectroscopy class. Pre-existing undergraduate research programs in
              synthesis, catalysis, and protein structure can flourish with the acquisition
              of the new high-field NMR, and new research initiatives in polymer chemistry
              are being made possible.   The new experiments currently under development, as
              well as those being planned, can be disseminated in the educational literature
              as laboratory manuals and journal articles, as well as presented at
              conferences. Research results may generate both student and faculty
              presentations at conferences and scholarly papers in the chemical literature.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
