Title       : Introduction of Spectroradiometry into the Undergraduate Marine Science
               Curriculum and Special Programs at the Shannon Point Marine Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9650124

Award Number: 9650124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Bingham bingham@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Sulkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Through the Shannon Point Marine Center and its marine science curriculum,
              science majors who may pursue graduate education, community college students
              who are assessing their interest in pursuing marine science as a major, and
              advanced undergraduates participating in Shannon Point Marine Center National
              Undergraduate Marine Education Center (NUMEC) programs are served.  NUMEC
              provides students from around the United States access to marine science
              studies at a marine center within the context of their ongoing undergraduate
              programs at their home institutions.  Three programs operate within NUMEC:  the
              Minorities in Marine Science Undergraduate Program, the Research Experience for
              Undergraduates Site program, and the Fall Quarter-in-Residence.   All of the
              programs provide undergraduates with unique opportunities to become educated in
              the most recent concepts in marine science, to be trained in state-of-the art
              techniques used in marine research, and to engage in supervised, independent
              research.  With the spectroradiometer, students can use advanced technology to
              quantitatively address ecologically relevant questions ranging from UV-B
              effects on invertebrate larvae to influences of light quality on microbial
              community structure.  The instrument has enormous value in teaching basic
              oceanographic principles previously discussed only in lectures.  It is being
              applied in the curricula of Oceanography, Algae, Marine Ecology, Marine
              Invertebrate Biology, and Current Trends in Marine Science courses.   The
              benefits of this tool, however, extend far beyond formal coursework.  Given the
              current concern for global issues, students are increasingly interested in
              problems such as ozone depletion and global warming.  This equipment places an
              exciting, computer-based research tool in the hands of undergraduates who are
              using it to do meaningful, imaginative research.
