Title       : Project Oriented Biochemistry Laboratory Course in a New B.S. Biochemistry
               Degree Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9650559

Award Number: 9650559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Craig pacsch@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Gennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence C. Morrill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A project-oriented laboratory has been designed to introduce students to the
              study of biochemistry as it is practiced. This course can be a capstone
              experience for students from a variety of majors, including those who enter the
              new Biochemistry program. In keeping with the department's focus on career
              education, this course is also preparing the students for future employment or
              graduate education.   The specific goals of this proposal are to enable
              students to study the protein chemistry, enzymology, and molecular biology of a
              single enzyme in a series of integrated experiments using modern laboratory
              methods, including chromatography and capillary electrophoresis, and to
              supplement the learning experience of students enrolled in the biochemistry
              laboratory and lecture courses with effective molecular visualization and
              modeling tools.   The students use a small computer network to prepare for
              experiments, using simulation software to access sequence homology databases
              over the Internet, to visualize proteins and nucleic acids, and to model small
              organic and biomolecules. The equipment is also being used by students and
              faculty in organic and analytical chemistry courses.   The change in the
              biochemistry teaching lab from a disjointed collection of experiments using
              unrelated systems to a series of experiments focused around a single project is
              a model that can be readily adapted by other educators who can design their
              courses to focus on a single enzyme or protein with which they are most
              familiar.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
