Title       : Photo-Optical, Lighting, and Electrical Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650457

Award Number: 9650457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hofu Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ram S. Ronen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin C. Abrams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project represents an effort to integrate basic technical equipment to
              furbish a photo-optical lighting and electrical systems laboratory. This
              laboratory is the physical resource needed to provide the experiential aspect
              of a recently established Illumination Engineering minor which is open to all
              majors in the College of Engineering.   The new laboratory enables more than
              700 students, over the next 5 years, to become proficient with the latest
              technology in lighting systems measurement, control techniques, and design
              modeling. It also serves as a resource for a network of participating community
              colleges.   Recent Federal and state studies indicate that lighting accounts
              for 30 percent of all energy consumed annually in the United States. About 50
              percent of this energy is wasted as a result of a work force that is improperly
              educated with respect to the recent dynamic advances in light sources, control
              systems, luminaires, and corresponding computer-assisted design technologies.
              The National Energy Policy Act, as well as State Acts, has mandated that
              energy-saving equipment and energy management systems be implemented in the
              near future. However, lighting education availability is extremely limited.  
              The department has enlisted the cooperation of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
              Lighting System Research Division to design a unique modular workstation
              laboratory, recommend equipment, and design experiments and projects.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
