Title       : Automated Particle-Size Instrumentation For the Undergraduate Geology Curriculum
               at Colorado College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9650049

Award Number: 9650049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Leonard eleonard@cc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Myrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado College
	      
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80903    303/473-2233

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Colorado College Geology Department will develop an instructional program
              using automated equipment for particle-size analysis: a sedigraph for analyzing
              silt and clay, a settling tube for analysis of sands, and a DOS-based
              control/data management module. Particle-size analysis is a critical to the
              interpretation of modern sediments, as particle-size characteristics reflect
              conditions of transport and deposition. Evaluation of particle-size
              distributions is also fundamental in studies of soil genesis and of soil
              development as an indicator of landscape instability, and in many studies of
              the effect of human activity on geomorphic processes. Throughout our soft-rock
              curriculum, students are introduced to concepts related to particle-size
              characteristics, and  this equipment will provide students  with the
              opportunity to make rapid and precise particle-size determinations,  introduce
              students to modern quantitative techniques, and link classroom, field, and lab
              aspects of sedimentary geology, geomorphology, and soils.  The instruments will
              strengthen curriculum and student research opportunities in soft-rock and
              environmental geology, and will allow the development of field and laboratory
              exercises in Introductory Geology, Geomorphology, Soils, and Sedimentary
              Petrology courses. Individual students will utilize the equipment for projects
              in these courses as well as  Glacial Geology, Archeological Geology,
              Sedimentation and Stratigraphy, and Environmental Sciences. Geology and
              Environmental Sciences majors will also use the instruments to obtain
              high-quality data on sediment and soil characteristics in their thesis work.
              The instrumentation will also be available to students from the other Keck
              Consortium colleges for Keck project-related research.
