Title       : Instrumentation for Plant Biology: Integration of Cellular and Organismal Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9650984

Award Number: 9650984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. Harris gharris@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Kaye Peterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Until recently, the presentation of an integrated view of plant function in the
              laboratory has been hindered by a lack of instrumentation. Students learn about
              cellular and molecular aspects of plant physiological processes in the course
              of discovery-based laboratory experiences, but they have had limited
              opportunities to extend these experimental studies to the organismal level.
              This project is now revising the plant biology laboratory experiences so that
              students will come to understand the importance of making connections between
              the levels of organization inherent in living organisms. They will also gain an
              appreciation of the influence of specific environmental conditions at all
              levels of plant function, from both laboratory and field studies. The
              implementation of this new laboratory curriculum will require portable
              instrumentation to measure chlorophyll fluorescence, gas exchange,
              transpiration, and plant water potential. The addition of this equipment will
              enable students to measure various aspects of photosynthesis and plant water
              relations in the laboratory, greenhouse, and field. In addition to these
              scientific goals, this new curriculum will provide new opportunities for
              discovery-based learning and promote the formation of communities of learners
              and teachers.
