Title       : Equipment for Research-Oriented First-Year Seminar and UpperLevel Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9650859

Award Number: 9650859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Nelson dnelson@vax.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale F. Mierke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Thurlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses the problem of how best to stimulate and then sustain
              undergraduate interest in science. The underlying assumption is that early
              exposure (i.e., first semester or first-year) to the excitement and rigor of
              scientific research is a spark that will ignite students' latent scientific
              interests. Two pilot research-oriented first-year seminars, Preserving Genomes
              and Protein Structure, have proven to be valuable in identifying promising
              scientists and in motivating students to engage in research.   The project
              objective is two-fold:  to upgrade the research-oriented first-year seminar
              courses by incorporating technologies utilizing the polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR) and computer simulations of biomolecular structure, and to apply what has
              been learned in the two pilot studies to a select group of upper-level courses,
              Recombinant DNA, Bioanalytical Chemistry, and Biophysical Chemistry, an
              extension the department believes is required to sustain the students'
              enthusiasm for original research beyond the introductory level. The proposal is
              thus targeted at first-year students and upper-level students who enroll in
              affected courses.    PCR-based experiments, using DNA templates that have never
              been amplified before, are being introduced in the first-year seminar
              Preserving Genomes and offered at a more advanced level in Recombinant DNA.
              Computer simulations of protein and nucleic acid structure are being carried
              out on graphics workstations in the first-year seminar Protein Structure.
              Modular experiments in which novel structures are simulated are being developed
              for incorporation into the advanced courses Bioanalytical Chemistry and
              Biophysical Chemistry, in which aspects of original research involving
              isolation and characterization of novel proteins already exist.   The success
              of the pilot research-oriented first-year seminars has been described in an
              undergraduate presentation at a national conference and in an article in the
              Journal of Chemical Education. Similar means can be used to evaluate and
              disseminate descriptions of incorporating PCR and computer simulations of
              biomolecular structure into these courses. Results can be shared at a national
              meeting, in written articles, and on the World Wide Web.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
