Title       : Digital Video Capture Technology in Introductory Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650887

Award Number: 9650887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10647              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Kaske akaske@piper.hamline.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore W. Hodapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamline University
	      Snelling & Hewitt Avenues
	      Saint Paul, MN  55104    612/641-2800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Advances in high-quality video frame-grabber technology, charge-coupled-device
              (CCD) video cameras, and desktop computing have made image processing available
              in fields as diverse as medical research and video entertainment. Many
              experiments in introductory physics for both the science major and nonmajor use
              older equipment and methods and suffer from a `cookbook` approach. Experiments
              such as these fail to involve students in a meaningful way. They are boring and
              do not teach students the important skill of experimental design.   This
              project applies digital video capture technology using Macintosh computers to
              kinematic experiments in introductory physics. The video technology and image
              processing software used in this project enables students in introductory
              physics laboratories to easily visualize and quickly measure an object's
              displacement and to calculate its velocity, acceleration, and the force acting
              on it. Students use this equipment to explore free-fall, friction, conservation
              of momentum, and other phenomena. Portable CCD cameras enable students to carry
              out experiments outside the laboratory environment. Since experiments and data
              analysis can be carried out rapidly, students can exercise their creativity by
              trying their own variations on an experiment rather than just following the
              `cookbook` approach often found in the introductory laboratory. Students need
              to have laboratory experiences that encourage their creativity, help them
              explore open-ended problems, and teach them to design experiments. Laboratory
              experiments that students can perform with this equipment can help them develop
              their physical understanding of and maintain enthusiasm for the discipline.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
