Title       : Improvement of the Earth Science Curriculum and Undergraduate Research with
               X-Ray Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9650919

Award Number: 9650919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25818              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Bartels k-bartels@neiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Parvinder S. Sethi  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Illinois Univ
	      5500 N Saint Louis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606254625    312/583-4050

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The primary objectives of this project are to provide a hands-on research
              experience to undergraduates in the high-enrollment Introduction to Earth
              Science course and to foster more undergraduate research by engaging students
              in thought-provoking, modern, laboratory experiences in the sophomore, junior,
              and senior years. The department is doing this by introducing quantitative
              mineral identification into the undergraduate curriculum in a sequential
              manner, beginning with the high-enrollment Introduction to Earth Science
              course, progressing with increasing sophistication into the intermediate level,
              and culminating in the upper-level courses and independent research projects.  
              The Introduction to Earth Science students are spending 3 weeks working on a
              project concerning swelling clays in the area soils and are generating data
              that can be forwarded to the regional agricultural affairs office. Students in
              the intermediate level course, Rocks and Minerals, are being provided with the
              theoretical background and lab experience pertaining to instrumental analysis
              and sample preparation. Students in this class apply their knowledge in a group
              project, working on a different set of materials each year, eventually writing
              a report for presentation. Lastly, students in the more advanced courses,
              including Mineralogy, Petrology, Petrography of Fine-Grained Sediments,
              Advanced Mineralogy and Crystallography, and Igneous Petrology, are able to
              engage in a variety of independent research projects.   This department is
              adapting its programs by upgrading an old x-ray diffraction system, which is
              the most suitable and versatile instrument for conducting mineral
              identification analysis. The new laboratory experiences provide for both an
              overall improved undergraduate curriculum and a more intimate science
              experience for the introduction-level nonmajors, a need recently identified by
              the AAAS project on Liberal Education and the Sciences.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
