Title       : High-Performance Liquid Chromatography in the Analytical andOrganic Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650191

Award Number: 9650191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84459              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Grossman weghc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Chromatographic separation methods are of enormous importance in analytical and
              synthetic chemistry. Students who will be employed as chemists or biochemists
              often find that knowledge of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a
              condition for employment. Science students have not previously had the
              opportunity to use HPLC equipment in their undergraduate chemistry labs. The
              objective of this project is to give students that opportunity. The plan is to
              introduce experiments that permit students extended use of state-of-the-art
              liquid chromatographs. Preprofessional students, as well as Chemistry and
              Biology majors, have access to these instruments. The availability of powerful
              separation techniques makes it possible to analyze more fully the results of
              syntheses in Organic Chemistry courses. This improves their pedagogical value
              and broadens the range of systems that can be studied. Students in Analytical
              Chemistry courses learn the capabilities and limitations of HPLC-based analyses
              and are able to compare HPLC methods with others. Their experience of
              analytical methodologies and modern equipment is being substantially extended. 
               Separations are a major area of chemistry, and separations data are important
              components of regulatory and public health decisions. Adoption of the materials
              developed in the project may result in students who have a more realistic idea
              of modern chemistry and who are better prepared for graduate training or
              available jobs in chemistry. Those who go on to teach could be better able to
              convey to their students the impact of chemistry on their lives.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
