Title       : Creation of the Next Generation Introductory Circuits Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9650764

Award Number: 9650764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27289              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Ybarra gary@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rhett T. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project details a new generation of laboratory for the introductory
              circuits course including laboratory test instruments and personal computers.
              The goal of this project is to provide our students with a rich experience in
              creative design by unifying theoretical calculations, computer simulations
              using PSpice, and physical verification in the laboratory using modern test
              equipment and instrumentation techniques.   Each laboratory exercise in the new
              laboratory consists of designing, simulating, and building the subcircuits of a
              wireless control system. As the semester progresses, the students interconnect
              these subcircuits, leading to a complete wireless system at the end of the
              semester.   The physical laboratory consists of 14 stations, 8 of which contain
              state-of-the-art digital measurement instruments. The remaining six stations
              contain measurement instruments that are more than 25 years old. The objective
              is to replace all of the remaining archaic instruments with equipment similar
              to the new equipment. The department is in the process of creating a sequence
              of laboratory experiments in which each step is an integral part of a whole,
              with a pervasive unifying theme rather than a sequence of disjointed exercises.
              The laboratory experience for the students is becoming much more interesting,
              even exciting. With meaningful design problems centered around a
              state-of-the-art, real-world application, the classroom principles are
              immediately relevant, enhancing student retention. As the sequence of
              subcircuit design problems is being formulated, each subcircuit simulated and
              tested in the laboratory, a new laboratory manual is being developed
              concurrently. This manual will be made available for use in other universities
              as a national model through the World-Wide Web.
