Title       : Molecular Analysis by Liquid Chromatography for Mycobacterium Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9650680

Award Number: 9650680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Perez-Arnau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlyn Perez Samot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaston Jauregui-Morales  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project improves the curriculum of biology courses by establishing an
              innovative system of Mycobacterium classification that uses a modern method of
              statistical analysis based on the fatty acid content.  This system, which uses
              the liquid chromatograph, is being linked to the local network in order to
              service a greater number of students.  The project introduces a new
              Mycobacterium characterization method, updates the chromatographic techniques
              in the Microbiology Laboratory, and increases the knowledge and skills of the
              biology students through the practical operation of high-technology
              instruments.  The teaching-learning process can be improved because the results
              can be more precise and the student can be more involved in the analysis,
              evaluation, and application of the results.  These objectives can be achieved
              through the design and development of new experiments that improve the biology
              courses affected by the project.   The utilization of the liquid chromatograph
              system and the related software for the biochemical analysis of micro-organisms
              can be duplicated in other undergraduate settings.  The new experiments can
              help the students acquire and/or improve the following skills:  (1) relating
              structures and chromatographs, (2) analyzing statistical data and using the
              system, (3) managing and operating the chromatograph, (4) comprehending the
              complex nature of the components of micro-organisms, and (5) learning new
              taxonomic criteria based on molecular composition.  The courses that the new
              technology benefits, in terms of their curricular content, are General
              Microbiology, Cellular and Molecular Biology, Medical Biology, and Research
              Methods.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
