Title       : Implementation of a Biology Teaching Laboratory Computer Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9650207

Award Number: 9650207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58029              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Porter porter@usip.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lois H. Peck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison M. Mostrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the Scs in Philade
	      43rd St Kingsessing Mall
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/596-8800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the implementation of a biology teaching laboratory
              computer network that places 32 computers among four teaching laboratories, all
              connected to an existing departmental local area network for common access to
              data and programs. A graphic Internet browser is also being provided. A biology
              teaching laboratories network provides opportunities for students to acquire
              and analyze data as they perform experiments, to gain experience with
              instrument interfacing and statistical analysis using computers, and to learn
              how to present data and multimedia presentations for use in science and
              teaching careers.   Internet connection of the network also gives students
              access to the wealth of programs and teaching resources available on the World
              Wide Web, interaction with graphics and informational databases, and access to
              model data that can be manipulated in the context of laboratory experiments.  
              The network system is being used in the laboratories for two, full-year
              freshman biology sequences that are taken by all of the majors at the college.
              Several upper-class courses, including Basics of Microbiology I and II, Applied
              Microbiology, Virology, Plant Tissue Culture, Hematology, Ecology, Genetics,
              Cell Biology, and Directed Research can also use the networked computers. These
              courses are taken by biology, microbiology, and medical technology majors and
              elected by students in other majors. In addition, the network system can be
              used in courses that serve the biology science teacher certification program.
              This system positively influences the learning environment of approximately 515
              students each year in laboratory courses and another 5 to 10 engaged in
              undergraduate research.   The system greatly enhances the teaching environment
              offered at the college by providing opportunities to meet the individual
              student needs in each of the curricula served. The network system also serves
              to prepare biologists and science teachers to use computers in learning,
              teaching, and research.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
