Title       : Facilitating Scientific Thinking in Undergraduate Biology Students with the Use
               of Computerized Data Acquistion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650846

Award Number: 9650846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jenine L. Tanabe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Bliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yuba College
	      2088 North Beale Road
	      Marysville, CA  959017605    916/742-7351

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computerized data acquisition can be used in undergraduate Biology classes to
              facilitate scientific thinking in beginning as well as advanced students. The
              Biopac system consists of a data converter and software which can be used to
              expand experimental opportunities, increase the accuracy of physiologic data,
              and make possible the application of the experimental method in one laboratory
              session. Undergraduate students, having limited laboratory time, can use the
              Biopac system to deftly generate and manipulate a broad array of physiologic
              data (e.g. spirometry, bioelectric patterns, muscle contraction, heart and
              korotkoff sounds). Even introductory Biology students can successfully use the
              Biopac system to form and test an original hypothesis, generate and compile
              data, and make conclusions within the laboratory time allotted. Advanced
              students in Physiology can use the Biopac system to generate physiologic data
              not possible with existing equipment. The Macintosh computer interface allows
              literature search, networking of students, sophisticated manipulation of the
              data, and reporting of results. The ease of data acquisition, facility of
              manipulation, and expanded data forms provided will increase opportunities for
              original discovery in Physiology. Through the use of independent
              experimentation, students will develop increased scientific proficiency and
              interest. Through the hands-on, computer-based interactive approach, students
              will share in an increased scientific self-confidence and appreciation that
              will benefit them and society at large.
