Title       : Computer Laboratories in Calculus and Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9650871

Award Number: 9650871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Torrence btorrenc@rmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve Torrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Randolph-Macon College
	      
	      Ashland, VA  23005    804/798-8372

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               It has become obvious, in recent years, that a successful undergraduate
              mathematics curriculum cannot ignore the relationship between mathematics and
              real-world technology and that a successful curriculum demands the active
              participation of students in the discovery of ideas. This project provides for
              the creation of a mathematics laboratory classroom where students can utilize
              Macintosh computers as tools for active investigation in the calculus sequence
              and in introductory statistics.    The new mathematics laboratory promotes
              active learning through classroom interaction with software tools, provides the
              opportunity to explore real-world examples previously inaccessible without
              technology, shifts the pedagogical emphasis from computational methods to
              deeper conceptual understanding, emphasizes the links between these subjects
              and others in the natural and social sciences, and addresses national concerns
              about the cogency of traditional mathematics instruction.    The department is
              currently employing, testing, and developing supplemental materials for the
              Project CALC Mathematica laboratories developed at Duke University and Bowdoin
              College. They are developing and implementing statistics laboratories using
              Data Desk and the materials developed for the NSF Activities-Based Statistics
              project. These materials can be evaluated relative to the current materials
              using student and faculty surveys. Through this project, the department can
              strengthen relationships with high schools in the surrounding rural counties
              and provide AP teachers with much needed computer training through summer
              workshops. Other dissemination plans include presentations and publications and
              the use of R-MC listserver CRACAS.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
