Title       : A Comprehensive Suite of Laboratory Projects for an Object- Oriented Computer
               Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9650552

Award Number: 9650552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Rasala rasala@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet J. Fell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Viera K. Proulx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
                        This project focuses on the development of  approximately 50 freshman
              laboratory projects that provide significant experiences with software design
              issues as well as with traditional topics in algorithms and data structures.
              Also, approximately 15 large scale software design projects will be developed
              that will permit students to explore object-oriented design methodologies using
              state-of-the-art development tools.  The over-arching goal is to make the
              software design process an important focus in the computer science curriculum
              and to promote a hands-on approach to learning about design.  The outcome of
              this project will be directed to computer science majors and other majors
              interested in learning about the software design process in depth.             
                               The methodology to be used is to create interesting laboratory
              projects which examine design themes that occur in standard applications, to
              explore problem solving and visualization in mathematics and science, to
              illustrate processes using algorithm animation and simulation, and to
              investigate the design of software using object-oriented models.   To assist
              this methodology the project team will develop a robust collection of toolkits
              to support the freshman experience and to integrate industrial strength C++
              development tools and libraries to support the upper level student projects.   
                       This project has significance and will have national impact. The
              proposed laboratory projects are more substantial and interesting than any
              currently available. They provide practical design experience by making
              connections to typical applications and related disciplines. The projects will
              work on multiple computer platforms and so will be useful at many institutions.
              The dissemination will be via the World-Wide-Web, journals, and textbooks.
