Title       : A Mobile Multimedia Computer Laboratory Mentorship Approach to Improving
               Undergraduate Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9650656

Award Number: 9650656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. St. John dennis.st_john.@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Mathews  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carl M. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan S. Lenker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is assembling a completely mobile, state-of-the-art multimedia
              laptop computer laboratory, networked through wireless infrared technology.
              This laboratory is being used for undergraduate mathematics courses for majors,
              client disciplines, and preservice teachers. This portable laboratory
              represents an extremely versatile configuration that enables any classroom to
              be used as a normal classroom, as a technology demonstration room, and as a
              computer laboratory.    The ACE Teaching Cycle forms the unifying theme for the
              different content areas using the mobile computer laboratory. This pedagogical
              approach implements the findings of current constructivist learning theory
              research by providing students with an experiential base with mathematical
              ideas through carefully constructed computer activities in cooperative learning
              groups before formal discussion of the material. During the first phase, each
              of the co-PI's fully implements activity-first mathematics courses using the
              mobile computer laboratory. Two of the five courses targeted during this phase
              are directed at elementary and secondary school pre-service teachers. Other
              courses include Calculus II, Introduction to Statistics, and Business Calculus.
              The second phase involves doctoral candidates teaching undergraduate courses
              using the mobile computer laboratory under the supervision of the co-PI's.
              (These interns in the mathematics doctoral program with concentration in the
              teaching of college mathematics can concurrently be involved in their second
              research-based course in the teaching of college mathematics.) The final phase
              involves an increased number of undergraduate courses throughout the
              undergraduate mathematics curriculum using the laboratory with additional
              graduate faculty members mentoring interns in teaching college mathematics.   
              As more of our students, graduate interns, and faculty gain experience with
              hands-on computer activities before formal discussion of material, interns are
              expected to view "reform" in term s of learning theory and pedagogy rather than
              in terms of "calculus" or "differential equations," etc. Both the wireless
              portable lab and the mentor/internship program serve as national models for
              improving undergraduate mathematics instruction through research-based use of
              technology.
