Title       : Microcomputer-Based Curricular Enhancements for Elementary Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9650754

Award Number: 9650754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10396              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Meltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kandiah Manivannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeastern Louisiana U
	      100 West Dakota
	      Hammond, LA  704012512    504/549-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project involves adding microcomputer-based enhancements to the curriculum
              of a new elementary physics course. This inquiry-based undergraduate physics
              course is targeted at preservice teachers, as well as others who are getting
              their first exposure to college-level physical science. The theme "energy
              transformation and conservation" is used to tie together the various topics.   
              Students' preconceptions regarding physical phenomena - as determined by
              pretesting - will guide the presentation, activities, and discussion. The
              pretests form the basis for a thorough class discussion of the predictions made
              by students regarding the outcome of various experiments. Investigations to
              test their predictions will be carried out by the students, working in small
              groups, through guided "mini-research projects." Class discussions will be
              centered around the results of the student investigations, and comparison with
              the predictions.      The equipment acquired via this grant will allow
              automated means for data acquisition, analysis, and graphing which are intended
              primarily to supplement, and not to replace, traditional techniques.   The
              product output of this project will be a novel combination of class-tested
              activities that make use of data analysis in the context of an inquiry-based
              elementary physics course with an energy theme.  We expect that the project
              will significantly improve the knowledge of and attitude towards physics of
              students who arrive predisposed to think of science as distasteful. 
              Dissemination will be through journal articles, presentations at meetings and
              on-request release of exams, syllabi, etc..
