Title       : Enhancing Dynamic Learning in the Biological Structure and Function (BSCI 20020)
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9650741

Award Number: 9650741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24893              (Estimated)
Investigator: P Bagavandoss pbagavan@kentvm.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The goal of the project is to significantly enhance student performance in
              Structure and Function laboratory. The major objectives are to introduce the
              nonmajor students to the relevance of modern research techniques to the society
              at large and to transform the static observation-based laboratories into
              dynamic participation-oriented sessions. It is critical that students
              understand the principles of cell function before they can learn about the
              general physiology and pathophysiology of the human body. Therefore, it is
              essential that students understand the nature of DNA and proteins. To gain this
              understanding, students are being introduced to SDS-PAGE, zymography, and
              agarose gel electrophoresis of DNA. Through these hands-on techniques, students
              can understand the nature of proteins and develop an insight into and
              appreciation for recombinant DNA technology. A laboratory on morphogenesis is
              included and forces the students to synthesize physiological concepts from
              isolated facts.   To enhance student appreciation of form and function, the
              project is replacing/supplementing memorization-based models with actively
              learning models such as Maniken and functioning eye and ear models. These
              models promote cooperative learning and stimulate critical thinking through
              active experimentation. For efficient use of the limited laboratory time,
              instructions and demonstrations are given to the entire class with the aid of a
              visual presenter. For example, the visual presenter enables the instructor to
              demonstrate the methods of dissection, details of a skull structure,
              radiographs, angiograms, etc., to every single student in the class at a given
              time. Of equal importance, the visual presenter enables the students to
              demonstrate to the entire class what they have learned in a given laboratory.
              The project enhances student creativity and promotes active student
              participation. Above all, the students can understand human anatomy and
              physiology through the eyes of modern science.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
