Title       : Human Factors Psychology: Scientific Reasoning in an Interdisciplinary Field
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9650833

Award Number: 9650833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29795              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Moutsiakis moutsiak@seattleu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet Shaklee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle University
	      900 Broadway
	      Seattle, WA  98122    206/626-6200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Human Factors is a rapidly growing application of psychology in industry. As
              products are developed, human factors psychologists assist in planning product
              design to maximize the fit of product to user. Integrating human factors
              considerations into design can yield such advantages as shortening the learning
              period, enhancing reliability of performance, or minimizing accidents
              associated with product use. The productivity of such interdisciplinary
              collaborations between psychology and engineering has led to increased demand
              for people trained in this field.   Up to this point, human factors programs in
              psychology have been concentrated at the graduate level. Undergraduate course
              offerings in human factors are rare, and appropriate laboratory training in the
              field is even less likely. However, laboratory-based training in human factors
              at the undergraduate level offers a unique opportunity to develop skills in
              scientific reasoning in an interdisciplinary field with clear application to
              everyday life.   This project focuses on building a human factors laboratory
              for training undergraduate students. The lab consists of computer workstations,
              including equipment and software specialized for human factors investigations.
              The human factors course introduces students to issues and concepts in the
              field and emphasizes lab work as a context in which students learn the
              hypothesis-testing process relevant to human factors questions. Students who
              complete the course are eligible to work with interdisciplinary design teams
              completing projects under contract from local industries in the Science and
              Engineering Project Center at Seattle University. The lab is an ideal location
              to test hypotheses about designs generated in these team projects. Students
              trained in this program will be especially strong candidates for either
              employment or graduate study in this field.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
