Title       : Extension of an Investigational Learning Undergraduate Program to Upper-Division
               Physiology Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9650360

Award Number: 9650360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. O'Connor oconnor@coasmail.physics.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. McEachron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project details a method for transporting the student-team research
              approach to biology education that has been implemented in the Enhanced
              Bioscience Education (EBE) program to content-sensitive upper-division courses
              in animal physiology. This approach is designed to maintain content breadth in
              the lecture component of the course and emphasize in-depth, student-initiated
              and -conducted research in the laboratory component of the course. In this way,
              the project maintains and extends the research skills and enthusiasm engendered
              by investigational programs such as EBE while protecting the breadth of
              coverage required in certain upper-division courses (particularly those with a
              preclinical audience).   The department is remodeling the current laboratories
              in physiology by purchasing equipment to allow research by students in one of
              five concentration areas (modules). These modules allow the department to focus
              the research, obtain sufficient equipment for those modules, and facilitate
              research with pretested and approved protocols.   By using computers for
              background research, data acquisition, data analysis, and modeling
              physiological systems, participants build on the strengths of EBE. Furthermore,
              the project is extending the research skills of the students both by providing
              equipment capable of research activities as close as possible to current
              professional levels, and by creating a Physiology DataBank for research
              results, allowing replication and extension of prior work in the courses.
              Finally, the project involves a presentation of results that is integral to the
              student's research.
