Title       : Development of an Undergraduate VLSI Test Laboratory for Digital, Analog and
               Mixed-Signal Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9650672

Award Number: 9650672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramalingam Sridhar rsidhar@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shambhu J. Upadhyaya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The purpose of this project is the development of an undergraduate VLSI
              laboratory for testing digital, analog, and mixed-signal circuits. The lab
              includes an integrated test platform based on a CMT Mixed-Signal Test Station
              and a high-speed oscilloscope. The laboratory is intended to supplement two
              existing undergraduate courses, Introduction to VLSI Electronics and VLSI
              Testing, and to provide much needed hands-on experience for the undergraduate
              students. This process will enable the undergraduate students to take a
              mixed-signal VLSI circuit design from initial specifications to a working
              implementation.   The skyrocketing demands for mixed-signal technology in
              telecommunication, high-performance computing, and automotive electronics have
              necessitated the introduction of this technology at the undergraduate level.
              Rapid prototyping with the help of automated design and test tools is perceived
              as the most appropriate method of providing the students with a clear concept
              of the various steps in the design, debugging, and evaluation of a typical VLSI
              system.   A new course focusing on the advanced design issues of analog and
              mixed-signal circuits in VLSI is to be offered, fully utilizing the new
              laboratory. The upgrading of the existing courses provides the ABET-recommended
              major meaningful design experience (MMDE) in the VLSI track of the
              undergraduate curriculum. This new laboratory is expected to have a direct
              impact on about two-thirds of the undergraduate ECE students. The project's
              practical experiences can enhance the job opportunities for the students in
              leading industries, where such skills are of great value.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
