Title       : Development of a Fluid Power Laboratory for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650461

Award Number: 9650461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Alleyne alleyne@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsu-Chin Tsao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The problem being addressed by this project is the perception by industry that
              graduating engineering students are missing a vital link between theory
              presented in the classroom and actual industrial problems. Many industrial
              employers acknowledge that most students obtain a high degree of analytical
              expertise, but still maintain that they are not as advanced in applying these
              analytical techniques to `real-world problems.`   The objective of this effort
              is to develop a unique Fluid Power Systems Laboratory aimed at giving
              engineering students a unique laboratory experience with classes of
              `off-the-shelf` industrial devices. This facility enables students to directly
              tie analytical classroom theories with truly practical experiments. The methods
              being used to accomplish this development include the integration of
              industrial, academic, and governmental resources to provide support in their
              respective areas of expertise.   The laboratory is part of a unified approach
              to the Dynamic Systems and Control laboratory environment in the College of
              Engineering. As a result, the lab seeks to integrate Fluid Power Systems into
              all levels of the college-wide engineering curriculum that deal with the
              modeling, analysis, and control of dynamic systems.   The scope of the lab
              audience includes demonstrations of the technology to freshmen through
              senior-level design projects and undergraduate independent research. The
              project stresses collaboration among departments within the college by
              incorporating the lab into several existing courses. The impact of this project
              is the development of engineers trained on industrially relevant devices. These
              engineers have a solid grounding in both theory and some of the relevant
              applications. Since many engineering systems contain some aspect of Fluid
              Power, this project directly affects the nation's technological workforce and
              increases its competitiveness.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
