Title       : Classroom Microcomputer Laboratories for Calculus, Differential Equations and
               Linear Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9650873

Award Number: 9650873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48010              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Campbell jcampbll@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fernanda Botelho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Memphis is
              utilizing this new instructional computer laboratory for instruction in the
              core sequence of courses Calculus I, II, and III, Differential Equations, and
              Linear Algebra. This sequence has a broad student clientele. Mathematics and
              Applied Mathematics majors, including all pre-service secondary Mathematics
              teachers, and all Mechanical, Civil, and Electrical Engineering, and
              Engineering Technology students take the entire sequence. Other majors which
              take at least two of the courses within the sequence include Computer Science,
              Statistics, Physics, Chemistry, and Biology. The average combined enrollment is
              approximately 500 students per semester. Approximately half of our students are
              women, 20% are African - American.    The purpose of this project is to enable
              the department to integrate technology with instruction throughout the
              sequence, by adding a PC lab component to each of the courses. The creation of
              two computer laboratory rooms is allowing each section within the sequence to
              use the laboratory weekly (or bi-weekly, as appropriate), and ensure that at
              most two students share any one machine. Adding a lab component to the entire
              sequence of courses is allowing the Department to (i) more fully incorporate
              the Rule of Three in the calculus courses, (ii) modernize the linear algebra
              course along the guidelines of the Linear Algebra Curriculum Study Group, (iii)
              modernize the differential equations course through adoption of a modeling
              approach and (iv) provide a solid base of technological literacy early in their
              academic careers for this broad group of science students.
