Title       : Using Computers and the Internet in a Project-Based Undergraduate Laboratory
               Course in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650900

Award Number: 9650900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Hershberger hersh@telerama.lm.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carlow College
	      3333 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133165    412/578-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Tomorrow's biologists need a firm foundation in the concepts, techniques, and
              applications of molecular and cell biology, experience in the use of computers
              and the Internet as research tools, and the problem-solving and communication
              skills to function within research teams. For these skills to be developed,
              labs require adequate equipment and computers to fully support investigations
              that reflect real-world molecular biology studies. This project is designed to
              use a project-based approach to teach applied molecular biology, build computer
              literacy in DNA research, and develop students' problem-solving, teamwork, and
              communications skills. Computing, cell culture, and molecular biology equipment
              are being obtained for a capstone Molecular Biology and Biotechnology course
              and its prerequisite courses in Cell Biology and Genetics. The Molecular
              Biology and Biotechnology course challenges student teams to plan and conduct
              an integrated project of molecular cloning, expression of recombinant proteins
              in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, and purification of engineered proteins.
              Baculovirus-infected insect cells provide experience in eukaryotic cell culture
              and protein expression. Computers promote learning of molecular genetics in
              several courses through virtual cloning and DNA sequence analysis software and
              provide on-line access to World Wide Web biocomputing resources, e-mail, and
              newsgroups. The funded equipment supports the creation of model
              baculovirus-based molecular cloning, protein expression and purification
              investigations for undergraduates, and DNA science teaching materials using
              computers and Internet resources. Course materials and protocols can be
              published and described on-line in a set of course Web pages.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
