Title       : Teaching of Multimedia Information Processing & Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9650586

Award Number: 9650586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61186              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yao Wang yao@vision.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Chao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Multimedia communications refers to integrated processing and communications of
              voice, image, audio, video, and computer generated graphics and data. In order
              to prepare the students for this fast evolving technology, the Department of
              Electrical Engineering is setting up a new Multimedia Laboratory, equipped with
              a number of multimedia personal computers, audiovisual equipment, and necessary
              networking and peripheral devices. This laboratory is used for a new laboratory
              course titled Multimedia Information Processing and Communications, which
              provides students with hands-on experience to the acquisition, processing, and
              communications of voice, image, and video, as well as multimedia document
              creation. Being interdisciplinary by nature, this course is offered as an
              elective course for senior students majoring in electrical engineering,
              computer engineering, and computer science. The facilities in the laboratory
              can also be used for senior projects and other undergraduate/graduate research
              projects in the area of multimedia communications. Planned senior/master's
              joint projects include building prototype video conferencing and
              video-on-demand systems over the Internet.   Currently, the department has very
              strong and active educational and research programs in Telecommunications and
              Image Processing. The addition of the Multimedia Laboratory strengthens these
              programs and provides a synergy among these disciplines. The success of this
              development can be evaluated by feedback from students and employers. To enable
              fast and broad dissemination of the experience, the project is establishing an
              Internet homepage that contains all the developed courseware and related
              publications.
