Title       : Integrated Engineering Systems and Controls Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650187

Award Number: 9650187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Young pmy@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project initiates an undergraduate systems and controls laboratory, which
              will be utilized by the Electrical, Mechanical, Chemical and Bioresource, and
              Civil Engineering Departments. It is well recognized that classroom exercises
              or computer simulations alone are not sufficient to develop the
              critical-thinking and problem-solving skills students need. The intent of this
              project is to address these issues with the use of a multidisciplinary
              laboratory, built around a central systems and controls theme and running in
              conjunction with the appropriate courses in each department. The students learn
              how to combine knowledge from various parts of the curriculum and apply that
              knowledge to achieve a desired engineering goal.   The laboratory is equipped
              with experiments in the following areas:  core controls experiments,
              illustrating fundamentals of systems and control theory on typically
              encountered problems such as mass/spring/damper systems and servomechanisms;
              electrical emphasis, facilitating more detailed study of electromechanical
              control problems, including DC and AC machines controlled by thyristors, pulse
              width modulation, and variable frequency drives; chemical and bioresource
              emphasis, allowing study of fluid flow and heat transfer, together with
              autotuning, and adaptive control on a model chemical process rig; and
              mechanical emphasis, involving the study of hybrid/supervisory control, and how
              to integrate machines (with appropriate cross-communication) to perform
              high-level tasks, using a robotics and automated manufacturing workstation.  
              The experiments use control problems commonly encountered in industry and
              modern real-time control and instrumentation strategies, with each experiment
              driven from a PC with data acquisition capabilities and virtual instrumentation
              software. This setup enables students to gain experience on realistic projects
              and develop practical design skills that are up to date.
