Title       : Implementation of a Computer Networking Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1996   
File        : a9650210

Award Number: 9650210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan H. Perry dhperry@nstcc.cc.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew D. Mills  (Principal Investigator former)
              Thomas B. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Fredericks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley W. Schofer, III  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : NE St Tech CC
	      P O Box 246
	      Blountville, TN  376170246    615/323-3191

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Industry in the Appalachia Region of Northeast Tennessee has nowhere to turn to
              hire  qualified college graduates with networking experience and cannot locally
              find unbiased assistance in planning and implementing local area networks
              (LANs). While the Computer Engineering Technology department should be a
              natural focus for this type of training, it has not been able to provide these
              skills because it has been severely lacking in the requisite equipment.
              Students have been exposed to LANs in a single limited-availability course that
              deals with a single network operating system (NOS). However, efforts are being
              made to correct this deficiency in order to increase the region's industrial
              success.   The Computer Networking Laboratory seeks to eliminate these problems
              by providing students with a variety of network architectures and a large
              capacity network (up to 50 simultaneous users). At the same time, data gathered
              from laboratory experiences can be compiled into a document that makes
              available to companies and educational institutions the information necessary
              to emulate or adapt the exercises or put the results to work in a business
              environment.   Several NOSs are being implemented in a hands-on laboratory
              environment, and the students are being given the opportunity to experiment
              with the LANs. A communications server is being included to enable users to
              call from remote sites and log on to use the facilities, which provides a new
              dimension in distance education.   The new laboratory also allows industry
              workshops to be conducted to educate persons requiring specialized training.
              The program has the potential to reach at least four academic program areas in
              the current catalog (over 100 students per year) and potentially that many from
              industry. The impact on local institutions can be amplified by the production
              of the self-help documentation.
