Title       : Acquisition of a Ground Penetrating Radar System for Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9650258

Award Number: 9650258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin A. Speece   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MT Col Mineral Sci & Tech
	      
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/496-4101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Imaging of the shallow subsurface has been an area of intense research activity
              in recent years, fueled, in part, by the need for detailed knowledge of the
              near surface. This information is required not only for the environmental
              assessment of the contaminated subsurface in the remediation of buried waste
              sites, but also for shallow resource exploration and geotechnical engineering.
              Under favorable conditions, Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), an electromagnetic
              sounding technique, provides detailed subsurface information to depths of 30
              meters or more beneath the ground surface.   This project details the
              acquisition of a state-of-the-art GPR system to enhance the field laboratory
              capabilities of the Geophysical Engineering Department. The acquisition of a
              GPR system provides the following:  a method for site investigation that
              provides high-resolution images of the subsurface, a unique educational tool
              that enhances the teaching of fundamental concepts of electromagnetic wave
              propagation and digital signal processing, opportunities to apply basic field
              skills using the system in a full-scale field project, and a facility to
              promote undergraduate research.   Students in the Geophysical Engineering and
              Geological Engineering Programs take 6 weeks of a combined geology/geophysics
              field course. Three weeks of this course are devoted to geophysics. This course
              provides an opportunity for students to gain field expertise using equipment
              commonly employed to make geophysical measurements. As a result, this course
              represents a chance for students to gain field experience using GPR. Moreover,
              GPR is a topic already included in several other courses. The acquisition of a
              GPR system allows the information discussed in these courses to become more
              relevant by providing hands-on use of this instrumentation by the students.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
