Title       : The Connected Curriculum Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9650467

Award Number: 9650467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin Wattenberg fwattenberg@cc.weber.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl G. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weber State Univ
	      3750 Harrison Boulevard
	      Ogden, UT  844080001    801/626-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 7348,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Connected Curriculum Project (CCP) is developing materials that emphasize
              the unity of mathematics and the sciences. It combines hands-on experimentation
              with computer-based exploration using Netscape and the World Wide Web.   The
              hypertext architecture of the Web is built on links and connections and, thus,
              matches curricular goals. In addition, it allows students to customize their
              learning, choosing examples and applications of particular interest and using
              `just-in-time` help that is available at the click of a button.   Using
              Netscape to coordinate helper applications, the project creates a very
              interactive environment with students moving among a browser window, a CAS
              window, and hands-on laboratory work using the TI-CBL.   The structure of CCP
              is open, taking advantage of the adaptability of Web-based material to create a
              curriculum featuring the very best material from the very best teachers. This
              multiple, distributed authorship creates a widespread sense of ownership, the
              key to wide and lasting dissemination.   This project will transform
              workstations at four sites to provide students at any of these sites with the
              same functionality. Students working at one of these sites will be able to work
              on any CCP course and to use CCP material in other courses as well.   This is a
              cooperative effort with the faculty of Bonneville High School in the
              development, implementation, and assessment of materials for courses that are
              often taught at both the high school and college levels. The Bonneville High
              School site can also be an integral part of the preservice secondary education
              programs in mathematics and science and a demonstration site for CCP materials
              for Utah high schools.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
