Title       : Air Process Control Trainer for Engineering Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9650223

Award Number: 9650223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice Bluestein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine M. Cooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin A. Needler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to add capability to an existing undergraduate
              laboratory course in Instrumentation in the form of an Air Process Control
              Trainer. The present laboratory, partially funded through a previous ILI grant,
              includes equipment that demonstrates some of the fundamentals of
              Proportional-Integral-Derivative control, the basis for modern feedback control
              theory, programmable logic controllers, and computer control. Using a water
              tank as a test bed, the student can become familiar with the concepts involved
              in controlling water level, and flow. Student learning is limited, however, by
              the low inertia of a water level detection system which limits the degree to
              which Derivative control can be understood. Working with a local engineering
              firm, a prototype device has been built and tested that uses air temperature as
              the control parameter, thus overcoming the limitations of the water tank unit.
              This Air Process Control Trainer permits control of air temperature and air
              flow, permits demonstration of Derivative control, and adds the capability of
              experiments in heat transfer and fluid mechanics.     This proposal requests
              support for the purchase of eight devices from the manufacturer for our
              existing Instrumentation lab stations. This will give our students a stronger
              background in process control equipment; many of our graduates are employed in
              industries such as chemical plants, refineries, power plants, HVAC, food
              technology and pharmaceuticals that utilize this equipment. The course is
              currently offered as an elective to both mechanical engineering technology and
              electrical engineering technology students; it will become a requirement for
              the B.S. degree in MET in 1996. The project is thus interdisciplinary, affects
              many students including women and minorities, and can benefit other
              institutions through dissemination of experiments and availability of a new
              product.
