Title       : AI Technologies Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9650799

Award Number: 9650799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse Schmeller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thore Omholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Mathieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Maritime College
	      Fort Schuyler
	      Bronx, NY  10458    212/409-7200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Marine Engineering Department has initiated a project to study the
              application of developing artificial intelligence (AI) technologies for
              monitoring the performance of systems and equipment typically found in power
              plants. To facilitate the study, the department is purchasing apparatus that
              may become part of an AI laboratory and expand on current AI capabilities.  
              The AI laboratory has a number of devices, such as heat exchangers, that can be
              interconnected to simulate a fluid system. A data acquisition system is used to
              gather information about the operation of the system or one of its components.
              AI technologies are then trained to use that information to recognize different
              operating conditions. The problem was that the existing laboratory equipment
              was not capable of simulating a typical system and was limiting the ability to
              make the study realistic. The purpose of this project is the development of
              sets of devices that can simulate typical systems in power plants.   Work has
              already been done by junior and senior engineering students enrolled in
              independent study courses. They have successfully used a data acquisition
              system to gather information about the operation of a laboratory heat exchanger
              and pressure drop device. The information was supplied to a neural network
              which was trained to recognize normal and abnormal fluid flow characteristics
              for that equipment.   The significance of this project is that new laboratory
              equipment is giving the students the chance to be involved in applying AI
              technologies. The project should also be of interest to the maritime industry
              as it looks to improve the operation and safety of its ships. Plans have been
              made to disseminate the results through professional organizations such as the
              Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, American Society of
              Engineering Education, and industry.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
