Title       : Linking Mathematics and Physics With Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650056

Award Number: 9650056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25862              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marine Baehr marieb@elmburst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elmhurst College
	      190 Prospect
	      Elmhurst, IL  601263271    312/279-4100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Elmhurst College Mathematics and Physics departments plan to develop a small
              computer laboratory dedicated to assisting students with learning the
              mathematics and physical concepts in two courses: Electricity and Magnetism in
              physics and Applied Analysis in mathematics. The courses will be linked through
              the use of similar teaching styles and close cooperation between the two
              faculty members, including attendance in each other's classes, planning
              meetings for the two courses, and mutually developed student projects for both
              courses. The emphasis on technology-based projects in each course will
              reinforce concepts, allow for exploration and discovery, increase analytic and
              communication skills, and break down the perception that physics and
              mathematics are unrelated disciplines.                      Elmhurst College
              has been a leader in the use of projects and technology in both the physics and
              mathematics classrooms. The mathematics department has used computer algebra
              systems, spreadsheets, graphing calculators, and other course specific software
              in all of its major courses. Since 1989, the physics department has used
              computers in its laboratories for acquiring data, building models, and
              analyzing collected data. Both of the departments wish to expand their programs
              with added technological and pedagogical links between the two departments,
              thus building upon each other's strengths. The technological link will be a
              small laboratory consisting of five networked, 120 MHz Pentium based
              workstations, a file server, a printer, a classroom computer with a display
              system, two instructors' workstations, and supporting software. The two
              instructors will accomplish the pedagogical link through summer development and
              concurrent sabbaticals which will be partially used for project development.
              Both departments see this as a natural step toward further strengthening their
              technological foundations.
