Title       : Improvement of the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum with High Field
               NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650773

Award Number: 9650773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose M. Workman workmanj@centre.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Miles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. Muzyka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Centre College of Kentucky
	      West Walnut Street
	      Danville, KY  40422    606/236-5211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The chemistry program is among the college's strongest areas, but its further
              progress has been hindered by the lack of a high-field nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) spectrometer. The objective of this project is to enhance the
              instruction and collaborative research of chemistry students by incorporating
              extensive hands-on use of high-field NMR spectroscopy.   The chemistry program
              is revising six courses to accomplish this objective, exposing students to a
              sequence of applications of increasing sophistication. At the sophomore level,
              the introduction of NMR gives students more concrete examples of isomerism,
              conformational changes, and electronegativity, as well as elucidates the
              structures of unknown organic compounds and reaction products. In the junior
              and senior years, students explore the quantum mechanical basis and fundamental
              physical principles of NMR spectroscopy, as well as applications beyond
              structural elucidation. They also use NMR to determine magnetic susceptibility,
              to confirm intermediates in multistep synthesis, to calculate the
              diastereomeric or enantiomeric excess of reactions, and to view interesting
              coordination chemistry. In addition to enhancing laboratory instruction, the
              acquisition of a high-field NMR dramatically improves collaborative research
              projects in synthetic chemistry.   The primary beneficiaries of this project
              are 140 students in six chemistry courses and eight chemistry majors per year.
              Other beneficiaries include 15 precollege teachers attending a summer institute
              in spectroscopy at the college and member institutions in a consortium, that
              can incorporate NMR in their chemistry curriculum.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
