Title       : Implementation of Investigative Laboratories in IntroductoryCell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650915

Award Number: 9650915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelia G. Alexander alexanag@plu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Lindbo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific Lutheran Univ
	      
	      Tacoma, WA  98447    206/531-6900

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the purchase of equipment to implement investigative
              laboratories in Cell Biology, the first course for biology majors. The project
              moves laboratory science teaching in the introductory course away from a highly
              structured format toward investigation and exploration. Students, working in
              pairs, develop technical and analytical competence through projects they have
              planned in consultation with their instructors. Students are able to design
              experiments, think critically about their work, read and understand primary
              literature related to their work, and publicly present and discuss their work.
              The Cell Biology laboratory experience can result in enthusiasm and expectation
              for more challenging investigative work in upper-division courses employing
              cellular and molecular approaches, including Microbiology, Developmental
              Biology, and Molecular Biology. Comprehensive program evaluation will include
              assessment of the work of students in upper-division courses and independent
              projects, as well as compilation of information from graduates, employers, and
              mentors concerning the effectiveness of the investigative approach with respect
              to subsequent employment or education.
