Title       : Enhancement of Mapping Sciences at Murray State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650412

Award Number: 9650412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Burl I. Naugle burl.naugle@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haluk Cetin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              V. Lynn Shelby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      Main Street
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to create a new interactive computer laboratory,
              dedicated to the visualization, manipulation, and analysis of Earth Science
              data for MSU undergraduate students. It is important for students, as future
              teachers, scientists, and citizens, to know how to work with and analyze
              quantitative data. The equipment purchased would allow the Department: I ) to
              provide hands-on experience, education, and training for Geoscience
              undergraduates in quantitative geography, geology, geophysics, remote sensing,
              Geographic Information System (GIS), and computer mapping; 2) to give more
              stimulating and improved learning experience through modern educational
              technology to students enrolled in general education and science electives,
              particularly pre-service teachers and introductory Geoscience students
              utilizing state-of-the-art hardware and software; 3) to provide more productive
              education and experience in the senior year for Geosciences undergraduates than
              presently available; and 4) to establish a bridge between undergraduate and
              graduate curricula of the Department. Geoscience introductory mapping and image
              interpretation courses have recently been modified to introduce students to
              digital image processing and GIS. The new equipment will be used in those
              beginning courses; a new, digital processing-based, intermediate level
              Geoscience course, and senior courses in remote sensing/GIS/computer mapping.
              Planned evaluation and dissemination of the impact of the project are discussed
              in the proposal. Implementation of this plan will impact both majors in
              Geosciences and non-majors with regard to modern technologies associated with
              the rapidly growing fields of remote sensing, GIS, and computer mapping.
