Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Biology Laboratories in "A Course Cluster in the
               Sciences For Freshmen"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1996      
File        : a9650422

Award Number: 9650422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25173              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Conrad peter.conrad@plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice M. Marchut Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Since 1992, the Introductory Biology course has been taught as a tightly
              integrated lecture/laboratory experience involving group-based semester-long
              projects. One theme of the course, and of a special science course cluster for
              freshmen, is the study of light as a signal (gene regulation), as an energy
              source (bioenergetics), and as a tool for studying biological processes. This
              project makes heavy use of UVMS spectroscopy, some fluorimetry, and some
              microscopy. To increase students' understanding and appreciation of the role of
              light in biological processes, the department needs to add the techniques of
              fluorescent microscopy to increase the levels of measurement. In addition, the
              department is arranging to increase the opportunities for observing and
              recording experiments with the addition of another stereomicroscope with video
              camera and printer. Previously, there have only been limited controlled
              environment space and growth facilities for plant tissue cultures, cell
              suspension, and algal cultures. There is an effort to increase the capabilities
              for alternative environments so that students have more choices for
              experimentation.   Students who have completed these sorts of laboratory
              experiences are much more demanding in their later courses and tend to drive
              the department in new directions. They also disseminate to other students the
              message that research is intellectually stimulating and fun.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
