Title       : Using the World Wide Web to Enhance CS1 and CS2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9650241

Award Number: 9650241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47373              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Russell crr@cs.appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice A. McRae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Wilkes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dolores A. Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The primary objective of this project is to create an interactive and
              comprehensive body of materials on the World Wide Web (WWW) for the CS1 and CS2
              courses. This body of materials is being produced through the collaboration of
              faculty already using the WWW extensively in courses; however, the proposed
              work is distinctive both in its use of CGI and JAVA to create interactive
              materials and in the level of integration of WWW applications into the course. 
               Uses of the WWW currently under development include interactive lab documents
              and student-created pages. Interactive lab documents involve students solving
              problems, submitting answers, and receiving immediate feedback; demonstrate the
              desired behavior of programming assignments with links to CGI or JAVA programs;
              accept a student's program and give feedback on programming style; and enable
              students to cut and paste code into a terminal window through which they can
              modify, compile, and run programs. Student created pages are used to design
              programs and write up research results.   This project benefits the students by
              making information about the courses more accessible and more engaging. Course
              materials posted on the WWW can generate more enthusiasm about the course, and
              assist students in previewing course materials and making up missed work.
              However, the benefits are not limited to the students. The project also
              encourages collaboration among computer science faculty on this campus and on
              other campuses. Of particular interest are the benefits that result from area
              community colleges implementing equivalent CS1 and CS2 courses and having
              access to these course materials.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
