Title       : GC/FT/IR/Raman in Undergraduate Teaching Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9650112

Award Number: 9650112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Illies illieaj@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip B. Shevlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the purchase of a gas chromatographic, Fourier-transform,
              infrared Raman spectrometer for use in the undergraduate teaching laboratories.
              The instrument has a modern data system which is being connected to the
              computer network, allowing exposure of large numbers of students to practical
              modern separations and vibrational spectroscopy. The degree of exposure and
              `hands-on` use of the instrument begins at the freshman level and increases to
              the senior level. The department is very excited about the possibility of
              initial student contact in the freshman chemistry honors section, for which a
              spectroscopic experiment on greenhouse gases is being proposed.   In the
              organic laboratory, students separate mixtures and identify compounds that they
              have synthesized. Students in the physical chemistry laboratory carry out
              experiments on hydrogen bonding that require Raman capabilities and experiments
              involving IR and Raman selection rules. The inorganic chemistry students can
              routinely use the instrument to study the IR and Raman spectra of a number of
              organometallic complexes that they have synthesized. In the analytical
              laboratories, students extract a simulated urine sample and carry out a GC/IR
              drug screen.   Existing university IR spectrometers cannot handle the large
              numbers of students or the more sophisticated experiments proposed even at the
              sophomore level. However, careful choice of experiments, efficient use of
              instrument time, and easy data access through the network enables the
              department to expose many students to practical, `hands-on` separations and
              vibrational spectroscopy.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
