Title       : A Laboratory for Teaching High-Speed Networking Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650623

Award Number: 9650623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wuxu Peng wxp@cs.swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wilbon Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Hazlewood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Emerging high-speed networking and data communication techniques are having a
              profound impact on daily life and on the ways that people interact with each
              other. Teaching these emerging techniques in an undergraduate curriculum has
              been difficult for two main reasons: the complexity of these new techniques and
              the cost of hardware needed.   This project establishes a lab of UNIX
              workstations that may be used to develop and teach emerging high-speed
              networking techniques. The lab enables this department to take a
              software-simulation approach to teaching these techniques. The department is
              developing several simulation programs that visualize key concepts and
              protocols in areas such as broadband ISDN, asynchronous transmission mode, and
              other high-speed networking and data communication techniques. The new
              simulation programs provide a stimulating, interactive, and effective teaching
              tool that is helpful to students tackling the complex concepts and protocols.
              The software approach is also financially more sensible. New networking
              techniques are constantly evolving and changing. For a hardware-based approach,
              keeping the hardware up-to-date presents a high financial demand which is
              unbearable for most undergraduate institutions. The software simulation tools
              can be easily modified and revised to reflect any changes and evolutions.   Two
              new courses are being developed out of this project. Several other courses
              related to computer networks and UNIX programming in the undergraduate
              curriculum may also directly benefit from the new lab. The simulation programs
              are jointly implemented by faculty members and undergraduate students. A
              significant number of undergraduate computer science majors gain invaluable
              programming experiences while implementing the simulation packages.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
