Title       : Using Diverse Multi-Media Strategies to Promote Meaningful Learning in Physics,
               Geology, and Biology for Prospective Elementary Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9650829

Award Number: 9650829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric G. Frost   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred M. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              At San Diego State University, about 450 preservice elementary teachers take one
              or more specially designed undergraduate courses in either physics, geology or
              biology each year. These courses incorporate extensive class discussion,
              hands-on experimentation, collaborative learning and the use of computers in
              creative ways.  The computer equipment obtained with NSF support are enabling
              the course instructors to develop and integrate more advanced multimedia to
              enhance the science learning experiences of the students in many new and
              exciting ways. The physics courseis using the new computers with powerful new
              software developed on another project to help students construct conceptual
              models in various domains of physics. This new software provides tools for
              knowledge construction and simulations of physics phenomena. Students working
              in groups build physics understanding by using idea containers, electronic
              journals, bulletin boards and World Wide Web resources to promote meaningful
              conversations as part of learning. They make predictions about experimental
              outcomes and test their predictions with both actual apparatus and computer
              simulations. The geology course is furthering integration of hands-on
              collaborative learning with multimedia and World Wide Web resources through
              enhancement and further development of the World Wide Web page called TREES
              (Teaching Resources for Education in Earth Science). CD-ROMs are being used to
              explore Earth Science, and student field experiences are being used to create
              virtual field trips that are available on the Web. The biology course is
              promoting meaningful learning by engaging students in using their experiential
              knowledge to construct semantic networks. Using new multimedia tools and the
              latest version of the software SemNet, students are able to build networks that
              incorporate images, QuickTime movies and Web resources all  stored on CD and
              made available on the Web. Results of development efforts in all three courses
              are being disseminated widely through  many channels, including Web pages,
              other teacher enhancement projects, and professional meetings and publications.
              A particular effort will be made to share resources with other faculty in the
              California State University system, which graduates nearly 3,000 future K-6
              teachers every year.
