Title       : Capillary Electrophoresis System for Water Quality Analyses and Interpretations
               in the Undergraduate Geochemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9650125

Award Number: 9650125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22308              (Estimated)
Investigator: June E. Mirecki mireckij@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The acquisition of a capillary electrophoresis (CE) system enables analyses of
              dissolved inorganic and organic anions in natural water samples. Dissolved
              anions are analyzed routinely to assess water quality, supplementing the
              analysis of dissolved cations by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission
              spectroscopy (ICP-AES) methods. These data are fundamental to an understanding
              of natural water compositions in the context of geochemical processes including
              water-rock interactions, contaminant migration, and carbon cycling.   Analysis
              of dissolved anions in water is commonly accomplished using ion-exchange
              chromatography. However, recent application of CE methods to water samples
              presents many advantages over ion-exchange methods, especially in an academic
              setting. CE systems have fewer moving parts, less expensive columns, smaller
              solvent waste volumes, and faster analyses.   Upper-level undergraduate geology
              majors in the Introduction to Geochemistry course are being instructed in the
              concepts of aqueous geochemistry (for example, equilibrium, activity and
              concentration relationships, and mineral solubility). These concepts can be
              applied in order to understand the processes governing natural (and possibly
              contaminated) ground and surface water samples. Students proceed through a
              six-part exercise in which they perform the following tasks:  collect water
              samples in the field; prepare water samples for analysis; analyze samples for
              anions by CE; analyze samples for dissolved cations by ICP-AES; perform
              qualitative interpretation of water-quality data by graphical methods; and
              perform quantitative interpretations of water-quality data by computer models. 
               In addition to providing interdisciplinary educational and research
              opportunities at the undergraduate level, acquisition of a CE enhances the
              department's ability to develop undergraduate laboratory exercises focusing on
              water-quality analysis.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
