Title       : Development of Undergraduate Curriculum Through Computer Based Molecular
               Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9650782

Award Number: 9650782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59542              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifton P. Calloway callowayc@winthrop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia P. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Owens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lennart H. Kullberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winthrop Univ
	      701 Oakland Avenue
	      Rock Hill, SC  29733    803/323-2211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Chemistry and Physics is improving the quality of the
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum through the establishment of a
              computer-based molecular modeling laboratory program. Laboratories developed to
              utilize the acquired hardware and software give students graphical
              representations of chemical principles. This hands-on approach gives students a
              better feel for concepts that have heretofore been visualized only in the minds
              of students. Students in the introductory chemistry courses conduct experiments
              to examine chemical bonding, molecular vibrations, the greenhouse effect,
              molecular geometry optimization, and biochemical macromolecular (protein and
              nucleic acids) structure visualization. Organic chemistry students conduct
              experiments to relate energy and reactivity to geometry. Physical chemistry
              students perform experiments developing various levels of theory and relate
              physical properties to electronic charge distribution or changes in geometry.
              Students in the biochemistry class perform geometrical calculations and
              manipulations on molecular systems to predict biological activity. Students
              conducting senior research projects apply molecular modeling principles to
              examine specific research problems.   This program exemplifies the full extent
              to which molecular modeling methodology can be successfully incorporated into
              undergraduate programs at all levels.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
