Title       : Integrating Instructional Computing Into Differential Equations Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650321

Award Number: 9650321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44377              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ieda W. Rodrigues rodrigues@math.csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luiz F. Martins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      2121 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-3630

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The basis of this project is that differential equations present an excellent
              opportunity to learn how the real world works, that a good way to do this is by
              exploring specific real-world problems, and that this exploration can be fun.
              The project makes use of an enhanced version of the Harvard Consortium's `Rule
              of Three` (present things geometrically, numerically, and algebraically). The
              enhancement consistently provides real-world interpretations and applications. 
               Traditionally, introductory differential equations courses concentrate on
              finding, by hand, closed form solutions to a few standard types of equation.
              This project focuses on helping students achieve a better understanding of the
              meanings of these equations. It emphasizes understanding key concepts such as
              linearity, equilibrium points, stability, and dependence on initial conditions
              or parameters.   To make exploring and following up on curiosity a realistic
              goal throughout the course, the project supplies students with a powerful tool,
              the computer algebra system Maple. Maple plots the solutions and direction
              fields which are the keys to presenting things geometrically. There are other
              commands to do the same at the numeric level, and at the algebraic level. In
              addition, the project promotes a much greater involvement in the learning
              process on the part of the students. Cooperative learning is a significant
              aspect of the course. Material developed for the course will be available on
              the Department's web site.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
