Title       : Improving Undergraduate Instruction Through the Inauguration of a
               Multi-Disciplinary Computer Simulation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650726

Award Number: 9650726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard Laule   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Wyatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Vickers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seminole State College
	      P.O. Box 351
	      Seminole, OK  748180351    405/382-9950

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Division of Math, Science, and Engineering has, in the past, been operating
              with an instructional deficiency in teaching 17 courses that span the physical
              and life sciences and mathematics. Faculty have been working with an outdated
              Mathematics and Science Computer Assisted Learning Center (MSCALC) still
              equipped with original Apple II/e computers. The limited capabilities of the
              MSCALC has severely hindered the faculty' s goal of going beyond the currently
              used drill and practice exercises and adding an interactive laboratory
              simulation component to the mathematics and science curriculum.   The project
              aims to remedy this situation by redesigning the MSCALC, equipping it with
              Power MacIntosh computers that can run MacIntosh or IBM PC software. This new
              instructional technology enables science faculty members to offer laboratory
              exercises that can reinforce `wet lab` experiments and familiarize students
              with modern analytical techniques using computer simulations. The computers can
              be used for prelab orientation exercises, for simulations in areas where
              expensive instrumentation or materials are required, for visualization of
              complex lecture concepts, and for postlab exercises to reinforce and assess
              student learning. Mathematics students can use software packages to strengthen
              mathematical intuition and insight by representing mathematical ideas and
              objects (such as functions, matrices, differential equations, and infinite
              series) in a variety of forms that permit them to be experimented with and
              manipulated.   The project also specifically helps the majority_over 60
              percent_of the college's students who are women, a great number of whom are
              returning to school after years at home or work. The project is helping these
              students gain further knowledge, help in their retention, and increase their
              competency and familiarity with modern computer systems.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
