Title       : Computer Laboratory Connecting Mathematics with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9650739

Award Number: 9650739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sachs rsachs@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Sauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Saperstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillippe Loustaunay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project seeks to modernize the undergraduate mathematics curriculum
              through the use of a computational laboratory and the development of related
              course materials. The main goal is to integrate modern computation into
              mathematics instruction, both as course content and as a method of instruction.
              Computation is revolutionizing the way science and engineering are practiced.
              The new curriculum is intended to produce students (both majors and nonmajors)
              more attuned to current developments.   Preliminary efforts to introduce
              computational content and delivery have been successful and have generated
              ideas for further development. Input has come from unusually close contacts
              with science and engineering colleagues. This interaction is crucial to
              integrating mathematics with related coursework. The curriculum changes are
              completely compatible and highly correlated with parallel developments in the
              School of Information Technology and Engineering. Indeed, reform of the
              lower-division mathematics courses is a critical part of that program. The
              positive interaction of mathematics and engineering creates opportunities for
              mutual enhancement of efforts and provides special sharing of resources. As
              part of the development for upper-division applied math, the project can
              explore the teaming of math students with engineers in senior design projects.
              Links with the Mathematics Across the Curriculum initiative are also being
              pursued.   A modern X-window computer laboratory can deepen students'
              understanding of mathematics by permitting use of high-end tools and
              applications. It also opens new possibilities for cooperative and interactive
              learning through the use of graphical interfaces and interactive Web material,
              while preparing students for careers in industry or academia.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
