Title       : Enhancing the Geology Curriculum by Incorporating Cathodoluminescence Microscopy
               into Courses and Student Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9650073

Award Number: 9650073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11809              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia E. Videtich videticp@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               For an enhanced geology curriculum, students need more engaging methods of
              learning. The primary goal of this project is the development of hands-on
              experiences that link geology and chemistry. Many geology students work on
              projects in which they determine the chemistry of natural waters, but the
              department has no instruments with which to do the same using rocks. Thus,
              students are able only to hear about the chemistry of rocks rather than
              determine it themselves. A powerful tool that can help bridge the gap between
              petrography and rock chemistry is cathodoluminescence (CL). CL gives a clear,
              visual picture of trace element distributions in common minerals (e.g., Mn and
              Fe in calcite). Students who have gleaned all that they can from a rock by
              using standard microscopic observations can discover much more about the
              sample's geochemistry by complementing their studies with CL.   In
              Sedimentation-Stratigraphy lab, students are identifying minerals using
              luminescence, observing luminescent zoning, and interpreting diagenetic
              histories. Students then conduct an independent class project using samples
              that they collect. From these exercises, students can see complexities in the
              rock record that they could not see using standard microscopic techniques.
              Geochemistry students can gain further insight into the chemical scenarios that
              produced these complexities through class discussions and a lab exercise.
              Students can continue to pursue their interest in petrography and geochemistry
              by applying CL analysis in Research in Geology.   Project leaders can evaluate
              the proposed project by tracking use of the CL unit and by asking students
              pertinent questions on course evaluation forms concerning the impact of the
              instrument on their learning. At professional meetings and in educational
              journals, the value of using CL as a tool to provide hands-on experiences that
              link two disciplines can be discussed. Students can present results of research
              projects at local and regional professional meetings.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
