Title       : A Laboratory for Integrating Multimedia and World Wide Web Technology Into
               Sociological Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650738

Award Number: 9650738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Heilman heilman@pixie.soc.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Max Kilger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean B. Savage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kapsis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew A. Beveridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Using the emerging technologies of the multimedia and World Wide Web, faculty
              in the Department of Sociology are enhancing instruction in four important
              areas:  (1) ethnographic research and interpretation; (2) impact of digital
              technology on social interactions; (3) sociological data analysis and
              visualization; and (4) geodemographic trends and analyses. All faculty involved
              with this project are experienced in the specialized areas they intend to
              pursue through this project.   This project focuses on creating a shared
              multimedia laboratory that enables faculty members to further upgrade
              integration of these technologies into college-level instruction while building
              on one another's expertise. To date, the department has already initiated
              courses that use video cameras and lap top computers to enhance ethnographic
              research and instruction; analyze the impact of technology on human and machine
              interactions; and use computer mapping systems to link demographic trends to
              specific geographic neighborhoods. Some multimedia instructional materials are
              already in use at the college, including multimedia ethnographic accounts,
              statistical analysis software, electronic library research data resources, and
              demographic maps. Some of these are already available on the World Wide Web,
              and others are being prepared for distribution on the Web and CD-ROM.   This
              project enables five sociology faculty to fully implement their plans to
              integrate this technology into their courses and to disseminate more
              interactive and multimedia sociology on the Web and on CD-ROM. Working
              together, faculty can create a sequence of courses that makes use of this
              technology, enhances instruction, and empowers students in the social sciences.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
