Title       : Digital Video Computer Editing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650693

Award Number: 9650693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13539              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk T. Smallman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin C. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Telecommunications Technology Department is enhancing its curriculum by
              acquiring a digital video computer editing lab. Over the past 5 years, the use
              of high-speed computers in specialized configurations for manipulating video,
              print, and sound has rapidly come into its own. In combination with
              sophisticated software packages, these computer systems have moved into
              increasing use in the teleproduction industry, where they can be made to
              perform a variety of tasks, including the creation of educational multimedia
              CD-ROMs for interactive training.   Acquiring a digital video computer editing
              lab makes it possible to assign students digital video experiments in four
              current courses:  Video Techniques, Video Production, Electronic Media Systems,
              and Informational Video Design. Through these courses, students are learning
              the technical and methodological processes by which video images are conceived,
              captured, and edited temporally using analog tape processes. With the digital
              lab in place for experiments, students are able to experience for themselves
              how transforming analog video to digital form makes possible highly complex
              manipulations performed rapidly and with perfectly controllable precision,
              control of variations of almost any image parameter through software, layering
              of images and sounds in multiple generations without quality degradation, and
              design of variations without destruction of prior versions.
