Title       : High Capacity Flourescent DNA Sequencing for Science and Non-Science
               Undegraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9650731

Award Number: 9650731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Baysdorfer cbaysdor@csuhayward.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria C. Nieto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Tullis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward
	      25800 Carlos Bee Boulevard
	      Hayward, CA  94542    415/881-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project establishes DNA sequencing and sequence analysis modules in
              nonmajors biology labs (500 students per year), 7 majors freshman biology labs
              (200 students per year), upper-division genetics lab (20 students per year),
              and in the proposed Forensic Science Molecular Biology lab (20 students per
              year). The department is also upgrading the existing undergraduate DNA
              Sequencing and Sequence Analysis class (16 students per year) and
              upper-division and graduate-level classes where sequencing is already a
              component of the labs (40 students per year). Undergraduate research involving
              DNA sequencing is also being upgraded. In order to accomplish these goals, the
              department is obtaining a high sample capacity, fluorescent DNA sequencer. This
              machine, together with student-tested, hair-follicle polymerase chain reaction
              protocol, allows a very large number of non-science-majors and freshman
              biologists to amplify, sequence, and analyze a portion of their own DNA.  
              Experiments like this are essential to achieving a greater public understanding
              of the uses and limitations of molecular biology in general and genome and DNA
              analysis in particular. In the upper-division courses, this machine is
              improving the quality of instruction by allowing students to learn automated
              sequencing as well as manual sequencing. The high capacity of the machine and
              the fact that it does not involve radioactivity also allows a much larger
              number of upper-division students to sequence in either the advanced lab
              classes or as part of their own research. The results of this project will be
              widely disseminated because of the large number of students involved. The
              students co-author papers and present abstracts and talks which will ensure a
              broad dissemination to the professional community. Finally, community college
              students in the Summer Bridge to the Baccalaureate Program and middle and high
              school students in the Saturday College Program can also learn about sequencing
              and sequence analysis in this project.
