Title       : Enhancement of the Undergraduate Science Curriculum at Hamilton College through
               the Addition of an X-Ray Microanalytical System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9650148

Award Number: 9650148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48530              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Bart kbart@hamilton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamilton College
	      198 College Hill Rd
	      Clinton, NY  13323    315/859-4011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A quantitative X-ray microanalysis system with image enhancement and processing
              capabilities will be acquired to add analytical and chemical mapping
              capabilities to an existing scanning electron microscope. Our goal is to expose
              students to modern techniques in the analysis of geological and biological
              specimens, improve our instructional capabilities, and strengthen our program
              of undergraduate research.  The specific instrumentation we request is an EDAX
              MX10 X-ray system. The system consists of an energy dispersive spectrometer
              interfaced to a Macintosh Power PC microprocessor with digital imaging
              software. This system will be attached to the Biology Department's existing
              AMRAY scanning electron microscope.     The addition of this equipment to the
              science curriculum at Hamilton College will allow: i) us to expand the current
              one-half semester course to a full semester course with the addition of X-ray
              microanalysis to the curriculum; ii) for considerable improvement in laboratory
              and in-class exercises in both introductory and upper level courses; and iii)
              modernization and improvement of student thesis research and independent study
              projects.     The significance of this equipment addition will be to enhance
              student interest in scientific research, and to provide students with hands-on
              experience using state-of-the-art equipment and techniques used in both
              graduate level research and industry. Students will be encouraged to present
              the results of independent research projects at professional conferences. In
              addition, the co-PIs will make the instructional materials developed from this
              grant available to the educational/scientific community through the Hamilton
              College Electron Microscope lab's WWW-site.
