Title       : A Comparative Animal Physiology Teaching Laboratory That Explores Cellular,
               Systems and Organismal Physiological Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9650536

Award Number: 9650536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexa Tullis atullis@ups.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susannah Hannaford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puget Sound
	      1500 North Warner
	      Tacoma, WA  984160075    253/879-3400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project enhances the training of upper-division undergraduate students in
              the broad field of comparative animal physiology. The goal is to develop a
              comprehensive comparative physiology curriculum where students employ modern
              equipment and techniques to study all levels of physiological organization. The
              new equipment being used to introduce students to cellular and whole animal
              physiology makes it possible to offer more rigorous and up-to-date exercises
              for students taking the animal physiology course and to increase the
              sophistication of, and possibilities for, senior thesis research projects.   At
              the cellular level, the new amplifiers enable students to perform intracellular
              recordings and study basic principles of cellular and membrane physiology. At
              the organismal level, the oxygen analyzer enables students to determine the
              metabolic costs of small terrestrial animals during activity. The program
              design can be adapted to any biology program that emphasizes laboratory
              training, and the department is prepared to communicate the results of the
              laboratory innovations through presentations, publications, and the Internet.  
              In summary, this project can improve the education of upper-level students in
              the core curriculum, provide a model physiology laboratory program for
              upper-division undergraduates, and enrich the possibilities for substantive
              collaborative student/faculty research. Finally, it is likely that this project
              can ultimately result in research publications that influence the field of
              comparative animal physiology.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
