Title       : Electronic Total Stations for Field Applications in Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9650263

Award Number: 9650263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Cruikshank ken@chl.ch.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the late 1980's, the Geology Department at Portland State University decided
              that the future lies in an applied geosciences program. This decision resulted
              in more hands-on experiences for students. The purpose of this equipment grant
              is to continue curricular evolution by providing equipment that enhances
              technology innovation in field programs and trains students with modern
              equipment.    Through this project, the department is replacing obsolete
              surveying equipment. The new equipment supports current curriculum revisions
              for geology majors, especially field-based courses and laboratories, and
              provides additional learning options for nonmajors in the reform of General
              Education requirements, including training of pre-service teachers. The
              equipment supports coursework and undergraduate research wherever accurate
              field measurements are required. Specifically, the project involves the
              purchase of six Sokkia Total Stations to replace the 1950's (and earlier)
              plane-tables and alidades. This change is modernizing the field portions of the
              program and fostering additional major and nonmajor curricular options.     
              Modern surveying equipment has an impact on the curriculum by providing for
              major revisions of the Field Methods and Anatomy of Landslides courses; revised
              labs in Applied Geophysics, Field Geophysics, Field Geology, and Engineering
              Geology; increased undergraduate major and nonmajor research opportunities; and
              support development of nonmajor undergraduate courses (Geology of the Oregon
              Country).      The Geology of the Oregon Country course is of particular
              importance to pre-service teachers because it requires all students to develop
              field-based studies to test a hypothesis, and the use of this instrumentation
              is integral to the course requirements.  Pre-service teachers also have the
              option to take the other courses listed above to fulfill their certification
              requirements.  Use of this surveying equipment will make important
              contributions to the training of pre-service teachers by i ntroducing the
              appropriate use of a modern technology, and by allowing future teachers to
              participate in the design and implementation of field-based class projects.    
                Strengths of the equipment-based program include the extension of a
              well-developed program of curriculum evolution in the Department of Geology;
              furthering of the curriculum not only in geology, but also in other departments
              (Civil Engineering and Environmental Studies); fostering of cooperation among
              students as they develop strategies to accomplish tasks requiring precise
              location and distance measurements; the easy adaptation of existing courses for
              instruction of methods for which the equipment is intended; and the promotion
              of collaborations between senior and junior faculty in projects involving
              undergraduate education.  The Geology of the Oregon Country course, in
              particular,
