Title       : Integration of Computing into the Geology Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9650264

Award Number: 9650264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Jacobson cejac@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Windom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project deals with several items of equipment required to apply computing
              to a wide range of classroom settings within the undergraduate geology program.
              There are two main parts of the project. One utilizes the methods of
              computer-assisted learning, with particular emphasis on the problem of
              motivating non-science-majors in large, introductory service courses. This
              aspect includes computerized lecture presentations that students can later
              review on-line, along with related materials such as glossaries, study guides,
              and old exams. Even more important is the interactive component that includes
              self-grading practice quizzes, computer exercises geared at promoting
              interpretation of geological observations as opposed to memorization, and class
              discussions on the Internet. Similar computer-assisted learning methods are
              also being applied to courses designed for geology majors.   A second major
              aspect of the project involves providing majors with extensive training in
              computer applications similar to those they will use as professional
              geologists. For this accomplishment, a required course, Computer Methods in
              Geology, has already been instituted to cover computer basics (DOS, Windows,
              UNIX, e-mail, and the Internet) and several applications programs. Applications
              include spreadsheets and computer mapping using AutoCAD and several AutoCAD
              add-in programs.   Most subsequent major courses have extensive lab projects in
              which these same programs are applied to a variety of geological problems. In
              addition, students are developing enough general computer expertise that
              instructors of upper-level major courses are easily able to introduce new,
              discipline-specific programs, such as for viewing crystal structures or
              modeling groundwater flow. This work can be disseminated by oral or written
              presentations of the basic principles of the approach as well as by written lab
              materials that serve as detailed guidelines for others planning to implement
              the same methods.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
