Title       : Flourescence, Luminescence and Counting Instruments for Analytical and
               Bioanalytical Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9650316

Award Number: 9650316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25204              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Valente valente@mc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. Cannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi College
	      
	      Clinton, MS  39058    601/924-5131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project provides fluorescence, luminescence, and scintillation equipment
              to serve a range of biology and chemistry laboratory courses. The department
              has been successful in modernizing and enhancing curricula in biology and
              chemistry supporting classroom instruction and independent student research.
              The instruments tie into the existing computing network and enable students to
              use modern methods of data collection and analysis. The resulting laboratories
              and exercises consist of interdependent and multiply specialized methods as
              found in programs offered on many college campuses.   Since the project is
              aimed at a cross-section of science majors and nonmajors, the improved
              facilities represent a cost-effective program for enhancing a modern biology
              and chemistry curricula. The multidisciplinary approach to the improvements
              spring from and enhance interdepartmental collaboration. Objectives are being
              achieved by using modern, efficient instruments for measurement of fluorescence
              and radioactive disintegrations. The specific equipment supports sensitive
              biological, environmental, organic, and inorganic fluorescence analysis, and
              biochemical and bioanalytical micro well applications. The instruments are also
              being used by biology and chemistry student researchers and their faculty
              mentors.   Biology and chemistry faculty can assess student use and performance
              through schedule development and student reports. These can be used to inform
              an active cross-content development of lab exercises and course modernization
              as part of an ongoing process of performance evaluation for both specialized
              applications and networked tie-ins. The inclusion of modern methods of data
              analysis in the curricula can result in graduates who have an enhanced capacity
              to understand the nature of modern scientific data collection and analysis and
              a more solid foundation for future achievement in a technologically demanding
              society.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
