Title       : A Distributed and Parallel Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9650918

Award Number: 9650918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14347              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chao Lu e7c1cha@toe.towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shiva Azadegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kiumi Akingbehin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Through this project, an instructional laboratory is being established to
              provide undergraduate computer science students with hands-on experience in
              distributed and parallel processing techniques. While most undergraduate
              students study various aspects of distributed and parallel computing in various
              courses during their undergraduate experience, very few actually receive
              hands-on experience on such systems. Most general-purpose computing
              laboratories are not designed for the type of system configuration and
              re-configuration needed to illustrate the various concepts involved in
              distributed and parallel computing. In addition, the generally low availability
              and high cost of such systems usually precludes hands-on experimentation. The
              result of this situation is that students graduate and proceed on to
              professional practice with a strong tendency to favor the use of centralized
              computing techniques over distributed computing techniques. One side-effect of
              this situation is that distributed and parallel systems, despite their high
              potentials, are largely underutilized in today's computing technology. The need
              for computer professionals with distributed computing expertise can only
              increase as distributed processing systems such as the Internet and the World
              Wide Web continue to make rapid gains in utilization.   The system established
              in this project provides, at reasonable cost, a system that can be used to
              provide hands-on exposure to distributed and parallel computing concepts in
              three primary undergraduate courses: Parallel Processing, Operating Systems,
              and Data Structures and Algorithms. A number of other undergraduate courses may
              potentially benefit from the laboratory. The system is organized around one Sun
              SPARC station_20 with four processors and four uniprocessor Sun SPARC station_4
              workstations. The choice of Sun workstations is consistent with current
              industrial/academic practice.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
