Title       : Improvement of Field and Laboratory Instrumentation for Environmental
               Hydrogeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9650557

Award Number: 9650557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek G. Zreda marek@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Brusseau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. LaBrecque  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate environmental education for students majoring in hydrology, other
              environmental science and engineering disciplines should be centered around
              practical applications. Students must understand the critical scientific and
              engineering issues and become proficient in solving multidisciplinary problems
              using high-technology tools. The department is significantly improving existing
              field and analytical facilities to provide such tools to undergraduate students
              from several departments.    Faculty have taught undergraduate environmental
              courses with laboratory components, in which the practical aspects of
              environmental science and engineering were emphasized. This project provides
              for the field equipment needed to improve the current disciplinary laboratory
              courses and to initiate new multidisciplinary courses that aim to develop in
              students the ability to integrate knowledge across traditional disciplines.   
              The facility consists of  a field site equipped with pumping/injecting wells,
              monitoring wells, and related monitoring equipment such as pressure
              transducers,  a time domain reflectometry unit, tensiometers, suction
              lysimeters,  a Wellmac logging system, and combination
              gamma/resistivity/temperature probe. Field experiments deal with water flow,
              water resources evaluation, water chemistry and quality, and geophysical
              methods. The following courses are using the field and laboratory facilities:
              hydrogeology, subsurface hydrology, water chemistry, vadose zone monitoring
              methods, vadose zone hydrology, groundwater resources evaluation, well logging,
              and environmental monitoring.
