Title       : Laboratory Activities for an Integrated, Multidisciplinary Science Literacy
               Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9650358

Award Number: 9650358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Rushing Ann_Rushing@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin A. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project provides basic laboratory teaching equipment for a new,
              multidisciplinary science course (the Natural World) that emphasizes the basic
              foundations of natural science, science as a way of knowing, the uses of
              science, historical influences on the development of science, and the
              interrelationships between science and culture. A 2-semester laboratory-based
              course, the Natural World is a part of a new core curriculum of 38 hours that
              seeks to integrate the various academic disciplines within a set of
              comprehensive and cohesive interdisciplinary courses. The Natural World is
              centered around multidisciplinary topics of current relevance. The course is
              being linked to two humanities courses that students take concurrently. This
              project involves 10 faculty members from five science disciplines in the design
              of a modular curriculum for multidisciplinary, collaboratively taught courses
              designed for larger comprehensive universities.   The laboratory activities
              emphasize critical thinking skills, active learning, and collaboration among
              students. The labs involve hands-on, discovery-based learning. The project
              seeks to provide students with an understanding of how science is done by
              helping them explore the scientific method, hypothesis formulation and testing,
              collection of data, analysis of data, and the interpretation of data in the
              context of hypotheses. The equipment is being used to implement the laboratory
              portion of the Natural World course. The goal is to provide students with the
              opportunity to experience science first-hand. With this basic scientific
              equipment and computer resources, students are able to examine and analyze
              important scientific issues and to make rational, objective decisions about
              these issues.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
