Title       : Optoelectronic Device Inspection and Test Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9650350

Award Number: 9650350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahram Nabet nabet@ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Despite the strategic role of semiconductor manufacturing in American industry,
              teaching of courses related to optoelectronic devices is not popular in
              undergraduate curricula. These courses often appear either too theoretical and
              abstract or too skill oriented, with students receiving only vocational
              training. Most laboratory courses at best reiterate some theoretical concepts,
              but mostly test rather than fabricate devices. This scenario is particularly
              troublesome for nontraditional students, including those in community colleges
              and midcareer or experienced workers intending to update their skills. For both
              groups, these courses appear theoretical, with little relevance to the
              manufacturing process.   In response to these needs, a course has been
              developed that has two unique major features:  it proposes an integrated
              approach to the teaching of optoelectronic devices whereby students design,
              fabricate, and test a device of their choice and it enables nonhomogeneous
              groups of students consisting of nontraditional, associate degree,
              undergraduate, and graduate students to work in teams responsible for all
              aspects of design and fabrication.   The scenario played out in this course is
              a replica of concurrent engineering in the work place. What holds the team
              together is the product, the device, and what separates them is their
              responsibilities and backgrounds.   All the equipment and supplies necessary
              for the fabrication of the devices are provided to the students in the
              microfabrication clean-room facility. Through this project, the department is
              acquiring equipment for testing the devices that students fabricate. These
              instruments enable the students to probe and test the electronic and optical
              response of their products.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
