Title       : Laboratory-Based Instruction in Speech Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650390

Award Number: 9650390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori S. Gonzalez lsgonz01@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jodelle F. Deem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Speech is a complex sound that can be described according to its acoustic
              characteristics. During the past few years, digital technology has been
              developed that enhances the ability to display, describe, and analyze speech.
              This department is currently revising a speech science course and laboratory to
              provide undergraduate students majoring in communication disorders with the
              application of state-of-the-art digital instrumentation in order to learn about
              the nature of human speech. In the past, students have not had access to these
              instruments as part of an integrated laboratory.   The instrumentation being
              used in this project represents the most current technology for studying the
              characteristics of speech and utilizes IBM-compatible microcomputer systems and
              integrated hardware. With this instrumentation, students are able to capture,
              display, analyze, and describe the parameters of speech and voice using
              detailed experiments in a laboratory-based science course. This reflects a
              major revision in the existing speech science course because previous
              information about speech was available solely from lectures and in-class
              demonstrations.   By changing the emphasis to a laboratory-oriented course, the
              project provides undergraduate students studying communication disorders with
              opportunities for improved understanding of the scientific bases of speech. In
              addition, students are introduced to the scientific process through a required
              research study involving speech analysis. In order to communicate the results
              of the investigations, the undergraduate students can develop papers and
              presentations and share them with graduate students and professionals at state
              and national meetings.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
