Title       : Laser Materials Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650745

Award Number: 9650745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Vangel Vangel@stcciphub.stcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Massa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Masciadrelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Laser Electro-Optics Technology Department and the Mechanical Engineering
              Technology Department are jointly enhancing their curricula by developing a
              Laser Materials Processing Lab. According to the Department of Defense and the
              Department of Commerce, the field of photonics, which includes laser materials
              processing, has been included in the list of critical technologies to be
              supported by the Federal Government as an enabling technology that will
              significantly enhance global competitiveness. By integrating specific
              components from both the Mechanical Engineering Technology program and the
              Laser Electro-Optics Technology program, this project can develop a working
              laboratory that addresses the need for advanced training in state-of-the-art
              manufacturing technology with specific emphasis on laser applications.   Over
              the past decade, the use of laser technology in the manufacturing sector has
              increased dramatically, especially in the areas of materials processing
              (precision cutting, welding, drilling, and heat treating), submicron marking
              and etching, automated laser-based inspection systems for quality assurance,
              and laser-based micropositioning and measurement systems. Access to such
              equipment by students enriches the already diverse laser and mechanical
              engineering technology curricula.   With the opportunity to engage in hands-on
              applications employing real-world laser processing equipment in a laboratory
              setting, students can be significantly better prepared to pursue technical
              careers in the industrial and manufacturing sectors or to continue their
              studies at the university level.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
