Title       : Laboratories in a Formal Methods-and OOP-Oriented Approach to the Early Computer
               Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1996        
File        : a9650874

Award Number: 9650874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57038              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. McCracken csddm@csfaculty.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Troeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) has gained wide acceptance and is being
              taught at a relatively early level at some institutions. The use of Formal
              Methods (FM) at the introductory level is unusual, but its use has been
              demonstrated to have concrete benefits for students in the first computer
              science (CS) course.   The objective of this project is to integrate OOP and FM
              into an early CS sequence, leading to a sophomore course in which OOP and FM
              are combined in an introduction to object-oriented design. This course becomes
              a capstone of what precedes it and a gateway to what follows.   The plan to
              accomplish this goal is to build on Troeger's demonstrated success in teaching
              the first CS course using FM, and the success demonstrated here and elsewhere
              in using OOP in the second course. This will yield a blend of FM and OOP in the
              second course, traditionally called Data Structures. The blend will be at an
              elementary level, of course, but real. Then in the capstone/gateway course,
              object-oriented design is introduced as a continuation of these ideas, applied
              to larger and more realistic problems and with more of the OOP methodology
              brought in.   The intended audience for this project is every school teaching
              computer science.   This project is expected to have a major impact on how CS
              is taught. The department is planning to disseminate results through workshops,
              papers and presentations, and two textbooks for which it already has contracts.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
