Title       : A Laboratory Experience in Polymers Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9650280

Award Number: 9650280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Schadler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonios Zavaliangos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The emphasis of this project is the acquisition of equipment, computers, and
              software in order to provide undergraduate students in the Department of
              Materials Engineering with a strong laboratory experience in polymers
              engineering. This focus is accomplished by providing the students with a
              "complete" engineering experience. They use fundamental knowledge and apply it
              to a creative design sequence in order to solve a practical problem in polymer
              engineering.   Specific goals of the effort are to introduce the students to
              state-of-the-art software used in the industry for design and optimization of
              injection molding molds and to injection molding processing parameters; to
              provide the students opportunities in the operation and principles of injection
              molding; and to allow the students the opportunity to compare their predictions
              from the software to real part fabrication.   To achieve these goals, the
              contents of a currently offered course can be revised. In order to improve the
              teaching effectiveness and alleviate the current problems, the project develops
              laboratory modules focusing on the use of C-MOLD, a state-of-the-art software
              package, for the prediction of flow times, pressure, temperature, warpage and
              shrinkage, and degree of crystallinity during fabrication of plastic parts; the
              experimental validation of the modeling predictions on a fully instrumented
              mold with pressure gages and thermocouples; and the design of a mold and the
              optimization of processing conditions to produce a part that the students
              select and design. Students give an oral presentation in which they are
              required to convince a manager that the part is possible to produce, an
              improvement over current technology, cost effective, and marketable. They also
              produce the technical/marketing brochure that would be used in sales.
