Title       : Development of a Stereolithography Laboratory for Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9650013

Award Number: 9650013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Cheng-Hsin Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheng-Hsien G. Teng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              No matter how experienced one may be at reading blueprints and
              computer-aided-design CAD) images of a complex object, it is still very
              difficult to visualize exactly what the actual part will look like.
              Conventional model-making methods can require weeks to months. With Rapid
              Prototyping (RP) or Stereolithography technology, however, turnaround for the
              model-making step can be cut to days, and the model itself can often made
              within several hours, a compelling advantages at a time when the global nature
              of the industrial marketplace makes minimizing time to-market cycle times and
              maximizing productivity a matter of corporate life and death. The demand for
              trained engineers and technologists to apply Rapid Prototyping technology to
              manufacturing has exploded in recent years. Some of the practical applications
              of RP technology are visualization, verification, iteration, optimization, and
              even "real parts" fabrication.        RP effects almost every
              manufacturing-related enterprise and an endless list of products from
              automotive, aircraft electronics parts to toys, jewelry, medical implants, to
              architectural and scientific models, and etc. As an indication of the size of
              the prototype market alone, $40 billion is spent in U.S. annually on R&D by
              large companies in prototype-intensive industries, and Fisher Guide Division of
              General Motors alone makes over 250,000 prototypes/models a year. Just as a CAD
              system peripheral for building three-dimensional (3D) prototypes, the need for
              RP systems in U.S. is in the range of 200,000 what at current RP prices of
              $120,000 to $500,000 translates into $20 to $100 billion. Only 1000 RP systems
              are installed now worldwide. The market for production is many times larger.
              American businesses have found that this technology is critical to
              competitiveness in manufacturing in the global marketplace. Although American
              companies currently lead in development of the Rapid Prototyping technology,
              Japanese and European companies are catching up quickly, therefore, skilled 
              engineers and technologists are critical to maintain this lead.        Due to
              the lack of a fully developed laboratory, undergraduate courses currently do
              not provide training on RP technology. Students are not familiar with Rapid
              Prototyping processes, photopolymer fabrication, software architecture, CAD
              Modeling, part building, and testing. These skills will be essential to the
              graduating students at the baccalaureate level within the next ten years since
              the usage of this technology is getting very popular in industry today.        
                           This proposal is to develop a state-of-the art Stereolithography
              Laboratory. The reason we are requesting funds for this laboratory is to
              provide training in capabilities, function and integration of RP technologies
              into manufacturing systems. It is believed that this laboratory can be used to
              create a better balance for an improved undergraduate education in
              manufacturing systems.
