Title       : GC-Mass Spec Across the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9650186

Award Number: 9650186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dhia A. Habboush habboush@shu.sacredheart.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Louey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eid Alkhatib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Farber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Penny A. Snetsinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sacred Heart University
	      Box 6460
	      Fairfield, CT  066060460    203/371-7999

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Chemistry is using gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
              (GC/MS) across the undergraduate chemistry lab curriculum in a series of
              research-oriented, problem-based labs. The objectives of this program are to
              develop a lab curriculum that is appropriate for a wide range of student
              interests by placing students in the role of investigator; to increase student
              (especially women and minority) interest in chemistry by allowing them to use
              modern instrumentation in the study of relevant problems early in the chemistry
              lab curriculum; and to allow students to use state-of-the-art instrumentation
              for increasingly sophisticated experiments through all their years of chemistry
              study. The problem-based approach has already been introduced in the general
              chemistry lab, and the GC/MS makes possible the development of additional
              research-oriented lab modules. Undergraduate students use the GC/MS in
              problem-based experiments beginning with general chemistry and continue to use
              it for organic chemistry, instrumental analysis, environmental chemistry,
              physical chemistry, biochemistry, and finally, for chemistry majors, a senior
              research project. This results in students who, first, have a sense of how
              modern science is done, how scientists know what they know about molecules, and
              how powerful a tool modern instrumentation is and, second, have developed
              critical thinking skills by being active participants in the planning and
              execution of experiments.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
