Title       : A Physics Computing Laboratory With an Interactive Digitized Video Component
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650594

Award Number: 9650594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23330              (Estimated)
Investigator: Purna C. Das   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shihong Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Santaram Chilukuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is primarily one of laboratory curriculum development. We propose
              to develop    digitized video experiments for the general physics curriculum at
              PU/NC. New experiments in mechanics and wave motion will be developed for the
              general physics courses offered to  science, engineering, and technology
              students. The mechanics data would be captured and digitized at the start of
              each laboratory by the students under the supervision of the laboratory 
              instructor. The digitized movie would be played frame by frame by the students
              in a scripted Multimedia ToolBook Application which would allow the use of
              mouse and cursor for data collection and subsequent analysis by comparison to
              numerically modeled data or by curve  fitting procedures. In addition,
              multimedia lessons involving real world situations will be  developed using the
              Multimedia ToolBook authoring software. These lessons will help explore the
              connection of physics principles to real life situations and aid in classroom
              instruction of students majoring in elementary education as well as those in
              science, engineering and technology programs.    In this project, we also plan
              to study the student's learning behavior and understanding of the concepts
              related to the proposed experiments. A survey questionnaire will be devised to
              obtain feedback from the students regarding the usage of the new laboratory
              equipment. The results obtained from this project will be disseminated through
              articles and/or laboratory manuals and through the Purdue Home Page on the
              World Wide Web.
