Title       : An Advanced Communications Curriculum for Undergraduate Technology Students
               Integrated Around a Fully Functional Cellular Base System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9650891

Award Number: 9650891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Munoz mmunoz@sage.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Garrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ross Heitzmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The current and future growth in telecommunications (National Information
              Infrastructure) requires technical expertise at all levels to develop, install,
              and operate the equipment. There are no schools in the midwest that offer a
              telecommunications program for undergraduate engineering technology students.
              Educators have recognized the need and have created a specialization in
              telecommunications. From discussions with GTE Mobilnet, Exxon, Motorola, and
              EDS, it has become clear that telecommunications and networking professionals
              are needed. This project expands the communications curriculum and provides a
              new and innovative advanced communications laboratory.   The project provides
              for an advanced telecommunications lab consisting of a cellular base station
              and supporting lab equipment. This equipment is being integrated into the
              advanced communications curriculum. The project plan has been laid out over
              several years by the department communications team with the active
              participation of GTE Mobilnet.   Project goals and objectives include: 
              developing an advanced communications course sequence for engineering
              technology students; developing an integrated wireless/cellular
              telecommunications laboratory; providing industry standard communications
              equipment for student research and projects; providing hands-on lab experience
              with high-technology test equipment and simulation software used in the
              telecommunications industry; promoting new and continued industry involvement
              in the ongoing development of the communications curriculum; and providing a
              plan for the continued improvement of the communications curriculum.
