Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Science Instruction with a Microscope-Based Raman
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9650393

Award Number: 9650393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17198              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Ping Pan Wei-Ping.Pan@Wku.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dudley F. Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Chemistry and Physics Departments are increasing their efforts to
              strengthen undergraduate degree programs in the sciences. This effort includes
              the construction of a microscope-based Raman system. The benefit of
              constructing such a system, rather than purchasing it as a commercial unit, is
              not only to obtain a Raman spectrometer, but also to gain a better
              understanding of laser techniques. Raman experiments yield information about
              the vibrational and rotational nature of molecules. These data are useful when
              performing structural and chemical analyses. Raman complements infra-red (IR)
              absorption spectroscopy because weak IR absorbers are strong Raman scatterers
              and vice versa. The open optical cavity, exposed components, and adjustability
              of laser optics in this system afford the student a valuable opportunity to
              investigate the workings of a simple laser. As any person who works with lasers
              will testify, hands-on experience with a laser is absolutely essential to
              comprehending its operation.    The primary goals of the project are to train
              undergraduate chemistry and physics students in the use and application of a
              microscope-based Raman system; to develop new laboratory exercises for several
              courses, including Organic Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, Physical
              Chemistry, Optics, and Biophysics; and to extend the breadth of investigative
              possibilities for undergraduate student/faculty research.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
