Title       : Electronic Information Skills for Collaborative Learning in an Undergraduate
               Geography Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9650348

Award Number: 9650348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy Jarosz jarosz@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Zald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gunter Krumme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katharyne Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Geography Collaboratory is a place where undergraduate students, faculty,
              and librarians come together to enhance learning through synergistic
              exploration of course topics using electronic information skills. Collaborative
              learning, as an approach to active learning, engages students on a peer-to-peer
              basis with instructors and librarians. Learning substantive material through
              the use of electronic information skills helps students retain both substantive
              material and skills. A department-wide instructional framework for electronic
              information skills has been articulated to help geography faculty select skills
              appropriate to their courses.   Four courses from the three
              non-geographic-information-systems departmental concentrations are part of this
              project:  Geographic Understanding and Health, International Geographies of
              Production and Trade, Local Economies and Market Areas, and World Hunger and
              Resource Development. A group learning area composed of six conversation
              workpods for three to five students, each with a Pentium computer and 21`
              display monitor, form the configuration for collaboration. An SVGA projector
              and Pentium workstation support group project presentation displays. Individual
              work for group projects is carried out at scholar workstations_Pentium machines
              with 17` display monitors.   Support for evaluation of this project comes from
              several units on campus, including the Faculty Council on Educational
              Technology, Undergraduate Education Office of Assessment, Center for
              Instructional Development and Research, and Classroom Support Services. All are
              interested in the unique computing configuration used for collaborative
              learning through electronic information skill development.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
