Title       : Laboratory in Cognitive and Linguistic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650498

Award Number: 9650498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25098              (Estimated)
Investigator: William Frawley billf@copland.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred A. Masterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Idsardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Timothy Bunnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests  funds for equipment and software to improve laboratory
              activities in four courses in Cognitive and Linguistic Science and to transform
              the present laboratory, which can serve only a small number of students from
              these classes,  into a virtual laboratory that will be accessible to the
              growing numbers of students from their dormitories and other sites on campus.
              Space and equipment will continue to be reserved for close, direct use and
              supervision on site.  Two Unix workstations are central to the project, one to
              serve as a gateway to the campus-wide ethernet network and the other to serve
              as the working laboratory computer and storage node for speech and visual data.
               In addition, five Powermacs and six PCs provide students with access to the
              laboratory and instructional software native to those systems and remote
              connections to the Unix workstations.  Improvements supported by the equipment
              include computer-assisted programs in language analysis, graphic illustration
              of speech mechanisms during articulation, instruction in semantics and logic
              via Tarski's World, experience with design and data  analysis using interactive
              design programs, instruction in parsing via neural net programs, and
              instruction in and manipulation of canonical findings in vision via Visionlab
              and the Active Eye.
