Title       : Interdisciplinary Earth Systems Modeling in Undergraduate Geography Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9650384

Award Number: 9650384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elen M. Cutrim Cutrim@WMich.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chansheng He  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilya Zaslavsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A networked computer laboratory will be developed to promote interdisciplinary
              studies of earth systems in the undergraduate geography curriculum.   This
              technology will be used to Integrate earth systems modeling techniques with the
              data-management and analytical capabilities of the UNIDATA meteorological
              software and datastream, geographic information systems (GIS), and remote
              sensing.  These are important components of active learning in such fields as
              global environmental change, resource analysis, and human-environmental
              interaction.    Traditionally, earth systems modeling and technique-focused
              courses have followed separate sequences in undergraduate instruction. The
              objective of this project is to integrate elements of conceptual modeling of
              geographic phenomena into the "tools" courses through specially designed
              exercises within an integrated laboratory learning environment. These
              exercises, implementing the discovery method of instruction, enable
              undergraduate students to develop systems thinking and analytical and group
              work skills through experimentation with environmental models and working with
              real-world data. The traditional style of laboratory instruction in
              climatology, as well as GIS and remote sensing, is being changed to emphasize
              group and individual problem-solving and decision-making through interaction
              with a modeling environment. Six courses are being redesigned within this
              project. The laboratory can be used by at least 210 undergraduates each year in
              geography and related earth sciences programs.    Implementing this approach
              can be accomplished by integrating state-of-the-art GIS, remote sensing, and
              climatology instrumentation with commercially available simulation modeling
              software. The core of the Earth Systems Modeling Laboratory consists of 18
              Pentium and several SUN workstations linked by a local area network. The
              integrated problem-solving and modeling experience can be evaluated for
              learning processes and outcomes, and results can be prepared for publication 
              and presentation to geographic and educational communities.
