Title       : An FT-NMR Spectrophotometer in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9650166

Award Number: 9650166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62850              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Craig Taylor taylor@vela.acs.oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project introduces approximately 20 new experiments into the undergraduate
              chemistry curriculum and requires the use of a new dedicated undergraduate
              Fourier-transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer. The
              laboratory courses affected include organic, analytical, physical,
              biochemistry, inorganic, and macromolecular. Also, the faculty is able to
              initiate new research projects for undergraduate student participation. In a
              concerted effort to improve all phases of its undergraduate instruction, the
              Department of Chemistry is cognizant of the fact that its majors and nonmajors
              face a technologically advanced workplace in all areas of scientific endeavor.
              It is imperative that students are able to compete effectively in this arena.
              One way of achieving this goal is to provide students with hands-on experience
              with modern scientific instrumentation and techniques.   The department
              believes that the single most important spectroscopic technique previously
              lacking within the department has been a modern FT-NMR instrument. The decision
              to obtain one is clear given the fact that the only NMR instrumentation
              previously available for routine undergraduate use has been a Varian T-60, an
              instrument that is operationally and technologically antiquated. It is well
              established that modern pulsed NMR spectroscopy covers a wider range of
              structural information than any other single technique.   The underlying
              purpose behind the use of the NMR is to introduce the student to relatively
              simple experiments in the initial laboratory course in organic chemistry and
              continually build up to more diverse and more important uses of NMR
              spectroscopy as the student progresses. Concomitant with the inclusion of
              experiments demonstrating the usefulness of NMR is the build up, in lectures,
              of the underlying principles and theory behind one- and two-dimensional NMR.  
              The overall objective of this project is to enhance significantly the
              scientific education of all students who are enrolled in a chemistry-related
              curriculum. The effectiveness of individual experiments can be constantly
              reviewed and evaluated by both faculty and students.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
