Title       : Project PreCALC: Pre-Calculus as a Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9650259

Award Number: 9650259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15615              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcelle Bessman mbessma@ju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Hollister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville University
	      2800 University Blvd N
	      Jacksonville, FL  322113321    904/744-3950

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The purpose of Project PreCALC (PreCalculus As a Laboratory Course) is to
              replace Precalculus Mathematics with a new course, Mathematics of Motion and
              Change. This new course is designed to serve as a preparation for the
              technology-intensive, laboratory-based, calculus program and a fulfillment of
              the mathematical needs of science students for whom this course is intended as
              preparation for successful articulation of their major curriculum. In addition
              to the skills content needed for calculus, this course stresses active and
              cooperative learning and the development of students' written and oral
              communication skills in mathematics.   Each semester, 20 freshmen in the
              Division of Science and Mathematics are expected to enroll in an experimental
              section of the Project PreCALC course. In a computer laboratory setting, they
              use data, graphs, and formulas to explore the concepts of functions, motion,
              and change. They apply suitable technological tools to finding solutions for
              real-world problems in the sciences. Through this process, they strengthen
              their understanding of the role of mathematics in the development and practice
              of science.   Students going on to Calculus I are monitored and compared with
              other students normally registered for the course. The progress of the other
              students can be qualitatively and quantitatively monitored with respect to
              communication and problem-solving skills in their subsequent major course.  
              After 2 years, the project can be evaluated through analysis of students'
              successful participation in Calculus I or, for students who do not go on to
              calculus, through assessment of students' abilities to apply the mathematical
              understanding gained to relevant courses in their majors.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
