Title       : Integration of Molecular Modeling, Computational Chemistry and Artificial
               Intelligence Throughout the Undergraduate Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9650761

Award Number: 9650761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Bock chuck@larry.philau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Les M. Sztandera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Berberian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Philadelphia University
	      Schlhse Lane & Henry Ave
	      Philadelphia, PA  191445221    215/951-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The project provides equipment for a computer facility that enables modern
              molecular modeling, computational chemistry, and selected applications of
              artificial intelligence, including aspects of combinational chemistry, to be
              incorporated throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Advances in
              computer technology and software have made molecular modeling an indispensable
              tool for practicing chemists and have made it possible to introduce the subject
              into the undergraduate curriculum.   Implementation of this project establishes
              a network of high resolution graphics workstations connected to a high speed
              server acting as a computational engine. The computer facility significantly
              enhances instruction in General Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Biochemistry,
              Physical Chemistry, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, Advanced Organic Chemistry,
              Instrumental Methods of Analysis, and Cell Biology. Students are learning to
              visualize molecules in 3D; calculate energy optimized ground state geometries;
              calculate and display LUMOs, HUMOs and electron density maps; perform infrared
              spectra analysis including animation of normal modes; discover
              structure-activity relationships; calculate gas phase reaction thermodynamics;
              refine structures using restrained molecular dynamics; and use genetic
              algorithms in optimal conformational searches. Wherever possible, the
              computational exercises concentrate on aspects of compounds that are the
              subject of experimental studies in the course curricula. Students participating
              in the active undergraduate research programs in chemistry and biology also are
              using these modeling tools to understand and interpret their research results.
