Title       : A Microcomputer Laboratory for Facilitating Undergraduate Psychology Students'
               Research Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9650167

Award Number: 9650167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Green green@numen.elon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elon University
	      Haggard Avenue
	      Elon College, NC  272442010    910/584-9711

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Psychology Department is currently in the second year of implementation of
              a new 4-hour curriculum aimed at facilitating student understanding of the
              research-based, scientific nature of psychology through the inclusion of an
              experiential laboratory component in all psychology courses. Although the
              students are currently able to learn basic research design and methodology,
              they are not being provided the opportunity to learn computer-assisted
              methodologies, which are central to the areas of learning, memory, perception,
              and cognition. Consequently, this project provides equipment and software for a
              microcomputer laboratory that can be used by students to design and conduct
              original and replication research in these, as well as other areas.   The
              project provides for 21 personal computers installed with a variety of software
              and connected to a laser printer, the college's mainframe computer, and its
              Novell network. In conducting research projects, students use the equipment to
              access the mainframe computer for literature searches (campus holdings and
              Internet sources), design and conduct experiments (using MEL and Conduit
              software), perform statistical analyses (using SPSSX on the mainframe
              computer), and write research reports (using Microsoft Word on the Novell
              network). In conjunction with these traditionally sound methods utilizing
              on-campus research participants, the students can use the equipment to involve
              other college students in active research participation and exchange of ideas
              over the World Wide Web (WWW), as well as involving local high school students
              by on-site participation.   Evaluation of project benefits involve comparisons
              of students' scores on the ETS Major Field Achievement Test and the number of
              student presentations and publications before and after project implementation.
              Empirical results of this project can be communicated by undergraduate student
              presentation and publication of their research findings, as well as through
              electronic dissemination over the WWW.   Pedagogical results can be
              communicated through faculty publications and presentations and departmentally
              sponsored yearly workshops in which area college and high school faculty
              participate.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
