Title       : The Integration of Computer-Linked Data Acquisition and Analysis Systems into
               Undergraduate Cell Biology and Physiology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650139

Award Number: 9650139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38575              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Choinski johnc@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A major problem in teaching experimentally based disciplines such as cell
              biology and physiology is that the students spend most of the assigned
              laboratory period working on `cookbook` experiments, with little time left to
              learn about the process of science through independent work. This project
              addresses the problem by introducing computer-linked data acquisition and
              analyses systems to be used in a number of new experiments in the beginning and
              the advanced cell biology courses and the plant physiology course. The new
              experiments focus on studying structure/function relationships in
              photosynthesis and respiration. These new systems empower students to gather
              and analyze data more efficiently, thus allowing students the time to formulate
              and test their own hypotheses as a normal part of the laboratory experience.
              Students are also encouraged to undertake independent research projects.  
              Specifically, two laboratories are being equipped with six computer stations
              each. In the beginning labs, interfaces link computers to sensors designed to
              measure pH, pressure, and oxygen levels in the air for the study of
              photosynthesis and respiration at the organismal level. In the advanced labs,
              computer-controlled liquid phase oxygen electrode systems with attached
              fluorescence probes and high-intensity light sources allow for a novel approach
              to the study of chloroplast and mitochondrial function. The computer-enhanced
              data gathering capability of these systems permits experiments to be done in a
              teaching laboratory that would have been impossible to accomplish with older
              methods. These methods should be of interest to educators committed to new
              approaches of teaching about the scientific method and about structure/function
              relationships in photosynthesis and respiration.   The results of this project
              can be disseminated through presentations in the teaching section of the
              American Society of Plant Physiologists and through publication of materials,
              including articles in educational journals and a cell biology laboratory
              manual.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
