Title       : Integrated Thermofluid Experiments for WPI's Discovery Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650800

Award Number: 9650800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51338              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Olinger olinger@wpi.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Hermanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the implementation of equipment in developing
              nontraditional course materials for the Thermal Science and Aerospace
              Engineering programs. These innovations extensively utilize a
              discovery-oriented learning environment in the Mechanical Engineering
              Department known as the Discovery Classroom. In the Discovery Classroom, the
              traditional lecture hall has been redefined to include a multimedia classroom,
              an adjoining experimental laboratory, and computational facilities to create a
              unique environment where nontraditional learning can take place. The Discovery
              Classroom emphasizes an integrated approach to engineering education by
              simultaneously exposing students to different analysis techniques (theoretical,
              computational, and experimental) on a daily basis. The course materials
              employed are developing student awareness of the interrelated nature of the
              different analysis techniques; the advantages, limitations, and appropriate
              context for the use of each; and the practical incorporation of these
              techniques into the engineering design process.   This innovative approach is
              redefining several basic thermal fluid science courses at the sophomore level.
              Innovations consist of (1) nontraditional lectures that utilize the
              experimental apparatus and computer simulations directly in the lecture hall of
              the Discovery Classroom, (2) interactive classroom exercises in which students
              compare real-time data from the in-class experiments and simulations to
              developed theory concurrently, and (3) open-ended design projects emphasizing
              rapid prototyping and experimental evaluation of candidate designs.   The major
              equipment used in this project includes several heat transfer apparatuses, a
              potential flow table, a flow visualization system, a data acquisition system
              and several computer workstations with software. In addition to its use in the
              Discovery Classroom, the equipment can also support a new Heat Transfer
              Laboratory.
