Title       : Equipment for Acquisition, Processing and Visualization of NMR Spectra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9650943

Award Number: 9650943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Williamson kwilliam@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project upgrades the data acquisition, control, and processing hardware
              and software on three nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometers acquired
              in 1979, 1987, and 1989. The old computer hardware cannot be modified or
              updated. The software is not supported by the spectrometer vendors; it is
              outdated, slow, inflexible, and difficult for undergraduates to use. Off-line
              data processing is either not possible or extremely expensive with the old
              systems. The number of students who can be instructed simultaneously on the
              operation of the spectrometers is limited to the number who can crowd around
              the console.   The objective of this project is to acquire new hardware and
              software that replaces the old operating systems of these spectrometers. This
              allows off-line processing and remote operation of the spectrometers which,
              coupled with data projection equipment, allows the teaching of spectrometer
              control, operation, and data reduction in a lecture setting. Off-line data
              processing greatly increases the number of spectra that can be run on a given
              day.   There is a great demand for NMR spectra in organic chemistry,
              instrumental analysis, NMR, protein chemistry, and two inorganic courses. In
              addition, three faculty make extensive use of NMR in their research on
              biodegradable polymers, organometallic compounds, and studies on myoglobin
              mutants and complexes. New microscale problem-based undergraduate NMR
              experiments, combined with molecular modeling, are constantly being developed
              for the organic chemistry course. Faculty can disseminate the results of this
              project, especially new experiments, through homepages on the Internet,
              lectures, seminars, published research papers, and poster presentations at
              professional meetings, as well as through a widely used organic chemistry
              laboratory textbook.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
