Title       : Participatory Learning Using Interactive Multimedia in Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9650041

Award Number: 9650041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie H. Kanat kanatL@badger.jsc.vsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn D. Sproul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Abajian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Genter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Dolci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johnson State College
	      
	      Johnson, VT  05656    802/635-2356

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The major objective of this project is to provide for the use of multimedia
              computers in mathematics and science courses. This step enables students to
              become more actively involved in their education and to better prepare
              themselves to participate in a society that is increasingly technological and
              scientific. The equipment used supports introductory and advanced courses in
              mathematics and the sciences, as well as courses in the general education
              program.   The new software allows students to develop models of natural
              phenomena, analyze data, and prepare presentations. The computer laboratory is
              used to introduce computer graphics, simulations, and modeling into the
              pedagogical style used in courses in the Departments of Mathematics and
              Sciences (biology, geology, environmental science, and chemistry). Students are
              able to access public domain software, databases, and information using the
              Internet. The computer laboratory is also used to assist faculty members to
              develop the skills required to benefit from the use of interactive multimedia
              in the classroom.   The overall emphasis here is not on equipment, but on
              active modes of student learning. The new hardware and software are intended to
              support and extend existing efforts to encourage students to be active,
              inquiring participants in their science and mathematics courses, rather than
              passive spectators. This laboratory provides for a learning community
              characterized by active engagement in teaching and learning, by high standards
              of academic work and human relations, and by seriousness of purpose.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
