Title       : Near Infrared Spectroscopy for Remote, In-Situ Chemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9650849

Award Number: 9650849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marta Cecilia Yappert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Faguy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves acquisition of a near infrared (NIR) spectrometer,
              filling "the spectral gap" between UV-visible and mid-infrared spectroscopy in
              the department. This instrument represents an opportunity to explore and apply
              one of the spectroscopic methods most neglected in academic course offerings.  
              Interest in the applications of NIR spectroscopy has increased dramatically in
              the last decade, particularly in chemical industrial settings. However, this
              department is not able to adequately convey the current relevance of this
              methodology in industrial, agricultural, and biological applications because of
              the lack of proper instrumentation. To better prepare undergraduate students,
              not only those majoring in chemistry but also those pursuing degrees in
              engineering and biology-related fields, the project is introducing, at the
              sophomore and senior level, several experiments designed to emphasize the wide
              range of applicability of NIR spectroscopy. The project's experiments couple
              remote sensing with NIR spectroscopy to study processes relevant to industry
              and biology. Furthermore, to improve the sensitivity and selectivity of complex
              NIR spectra, students are taught the cautious use of signal processing
              algorithms. Graduates who are exposed to NIR spectroscopy will be better
              qualified and more able to tackle relevant questions with the best available
              technologies.   The impact of this addition to the program's instrumentation
              not only benefits undergraduate students, but also attends to one of the most
              neglected, yet most powerful, spectroscopic methodologies.
