Title       : Enhancing the Teaching of Undergraduate Biology Using Computer Assisted Image
               Capture, Three Dimensional Reconstruction and Interactive Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9650090

Award Number: 9650090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32694              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred L. McKinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Selvestion Jimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State Shreveport
	      8515 Youree Drive
	      Shreveport, LA  711152301    318/797-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project makes use of image capture apparatus, personal computers, and
              interactive software for the enhancement of the laboratory classes in the
              department of biological sciences. The classes targeted in this project have an
              annual enrollment in excess of 1,100 students and encompass the entire
              biological sciences laboratory curriculum. Previously, the department has been
              clearly deficient in computer-linked audiovisual instruction technology. The
              faculty is updating this area of their laboratory teaching by using image
              capture apparatus to prepare a series of tutorials that combine text, visual,
              and audio resources into `show presentations` to be conveyed to students over a
              local area network (LAN).   A major difficulty experienced by large numbers of
              students is their inability to derive a three-dimensional image from several
              two-dimensional images such as consecutive serial sections through an organ or
              tissue. The advent of three-dimensional imaging software offers a means by
              which a three-dimensional image can be reconstructed from two-dimensional
              images. The department intends to use such tools in the upper-level laboratory
              classes to produce reconstructions of specimens to convey dynamic processes
              such as growth and differentiation. Material to be studied in this endeavor
              includes apical meristems, leaf primordia, and selected areas of developing
              chick embryos. These presentations can then be used in the teaching of the
              introductory laboratory classes.   The project makes available to the students
              some educational software that enables students taking genetics, ecology, and
              physiology to advance and test hypotheses by simulating situations that are
              impossible to represent in teaching laboratories and to generate models to
              examine complex biological interactions in the environment.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
