Title       : Using Computing and Modern Measuring Equipment in Undergraduate Fluid Mechanics
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9650169

Award Number: 9650169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis C. Ting francis_ting@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Van Lent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project implements a realistic, inexpensive plan for using computing and
              modern measuring equipment in experiments designed for a civil engineering
              undergraduate fluid mechanics laboratory course. Previously, the laboratory
              study of basic concepts and significant phenomena in fluid mechanics and the
              undergraduate development in experimental fluid mechanics and hydraulics have
              been hampered by a lack of modern instrumentation. With the purchase of an
              Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter for measuring flow velocity in open channels, a
              differential pressure transducer for measuring head loss in pipe flows, and two
              PC-based data acquisition systems for data collection and display, this problem
              can be remedied. The equipment is used in developing six new experiments
              (acceleration field, conservation of linear momentum, hydraulic jump, turbulent
              shear stress, friction loss along a pipe, and fundamentals of data
              acquisition).   These experiments allow for a better understanding of fluid
              mechanics principles and give undergraduates experience with modern equipment.
              Because the experimental setup and procedures are simple and practical,
              experiments may be readily adapted at similar institutions. Test results and
              students' evaluations can be obtained to assess the impact of this project on
              undergraduate learning of fluid mechanics principles and modern laboratory
              techniques. The development plan and the outcome assessment can be disseminated
              through publication in the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE)
              Annual Conference Proceedings. Experiments can also be documented in a Fluid
              Mechanics Laboratory Manual to be published locally at South Dakota State
              University.
