Title       : A Mathematics Computer Lab and Resource Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650020

Award Number: 9650020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Boardman boardman@pacificu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juliet W. Brosing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific University
	      2034 College Way
	      Forest Grove, OR  971161753    503/357-6151

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Mathematical Sciences Department has made a commitment to be on the
              forefront of the current mathematics reform. In line with this commitment, the
              department is developing a Mathematical Sciences Computer Lab and Resource
              Center (MCLRC). The purpose of the MCLRC is to provide a central location for
              students to engage in scholarly activities and discussions; to provide a
              state-of-the-art facility where students can integrate mathematical theory with
              visual discovery; to give student groups with different learning styles further
              opportunities to succeed in mathematics and science; and to develop students'
              ability to solve sophisticated real-world problems with modern software tools,
              thereby better preparing them for the work force or graduate school.   In order
              to realize these goals, this project is modifying existing portions of the
              current curriculum to make use of several software tools. In particular, this
              reorganization involves several phases. Phase I consists of incorporating the
              software tool functions into all sections of precalculus. Phase II is the
              establishment of the MCLRC and the incorporation of MAPLE into calculus,
              multivariable calculus, differential equations, and computational linear
              algebra. Phase III involves the development of a scientific computing course
              that brings students from the natural sciences together in a seminar type of
              atmosphere, analyzing and solving problems in their various disciplines using
              MAPLE and IGOR (data analysis software).   Existing equipment is not sufficient
              for Phases II and III, therefore, the department is acquiring 20 Power
              Macintosh computers with networking hardware, 1 Apple share server, 2 portable
              classroom computers with display equipment, and licenses for MAPLE and IGOR.  
              The department expects this project to have a significant impact on student
              retention in the sciences, particularly among Pacific Islanders, and to result
              in a number of published materials.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
