Title       : Environmental Applications of Supercritical Fluids via the Discovery Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9650675

Award Number: 9650675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36785              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Mauldin rmauldin@shawnee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Bryson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Trampe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shawnee State Univ
	      940 Second Street
	      Portsmouth, OH  456624347    614/354-3205

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Supercritical fluids are gaining increasing importance as chromatographic
              mobile phases and extraction solvent systems. In response to the expanding use
              of supercritical fluids, the incorporation of the extensive study of
              supercritical fluids in the chemistry laboratory curriculum is an important and
              novel aspect of this project. So that the potential of this study of
              supercritical fluids can be fully realized, students are given training on
              equipment that is ubiquitous in industrial, governmental, and academic
              laboratories, a supercritical fluid extractor is being connected on-line with a
              gas chromatograph-mass selective detector.   Another goal of this project is to
              improve upon the scientific reasoning skills of science graduates by
              administering five labs beyond general chemistry that utilize the discovery
              approach. Unlike traditional verification laboratories, the discovery approach
              requires that students devise hypotheses, formulate predictions, design
              experiments, and reach conclusions, thereby participating fully in the
              scientific method. Additionally, environmental samples (air, water, and soil)
              can be analyzed such that the full utility of the equipment is demonstrated.
              The environmental samples give the students experience with complex, real-world
              samples, experience that is not gained with the more traditional `unknown`
              samples that are typically analyzed in undergraduate laboratories.   This
              project influences chemical education by introducing the developed laboratories
              at the regional and national level by way of publications and presentations.
              Primarily, the target audiences are chemistry, biology, environmental science,
              and natural science (with and without certification in education) majors. Also,
              public school teachers can benefit from the project through collaboration with
              the regional office of Project Discovery (housed on campus), and general
              chemistry students can benefit from the project by receiving an introduction to
              this equipment.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
