Title       : An Innovative Student Network Laboratory for Teaching, Research and Development
               for Undergraduate Computer Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1999      
File        : a9650697

Award Number: 9650697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tulin E. Mangir temangir@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray T. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anastasios G. Chassiakos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach
	      1250 Bellflower Blvd
	      Long Beach, CA  908400004    213/498-4121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses a major challenge in training engineers and
              technologists in the extremely fast growing area of communications technology,
              including uses of photonics technology in networking and communications. This
              project is designed to expand and integrate fiber networks, ATM LANs, and
              multimedia to the desktop. In the course of this project, several new
              experiments are being developed, involving newer networking technology and
              techniques integrating technologies for supporting multimedia to the desktop,
              for simulated manufacturing, and for business environments. Recovery,
              fault-tolerance issues, and recovery as it applies to ATM networks can be
              explored. Applied computing using object-oriented tools and techniques, and
              rapid prototyping in a client/server, as well as peer-to-peer arrangement, can
              be introduced as used in workplace and industrial settings. An undergraduate
              textbook and laboratory books are being produced for a variety of applications,
              ranging from vanilla flavored Novell networking issues to more complex
              internetworking issues interfacing with TCP/IP and SPX/IPX, ATM LAN
              environments, and interfaces to wireless. Faculty are also producing software
              programs for various aspects of simulation, protocol issues, balancing, and
              recovery of multiple heterogeneous networks.   This is a very innovative
              project for two reasons. It integrates diverse technologies and allows teams of
              undergraduate students to plan, design, configure, and choose the technology
              components for `their network.` The instructor acts as a guide and facilitator
              for multiple project teams who work together for seamless delivery of final
              projects. Since these networks are designed independently of the campus
              network, students are free to explore various architectures, product
              combinations, internetworking, and fault-tolerance/recovery without any
              restrictions or fear of disrupting other campus operations. The approach that
              is used for assigning laboratory experiments is to choose sample situations
              from industry from local manufacturing, communication, and control applications
              and then to identify suitable technology and configurations. The problems are
              assigned and their progress monitored in a way to emulate real-world issues
              encountered by our graduates in a diversity of settings. Students on each team
              evaluate each other in terms of contributions to the group, teamwork, and
              performance.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
