Title       : Integration of Gas Chromatography - Mass Spectrometry troughout the Chemistry
               Curriculum in a New Major
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9650178

Award Number: 9650178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Friebe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary G. Chisholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to recent national mandates to improve undergraduate science
              education with innovations in teaching and laboratory experience for students,
              the department recognizes the need for modern equipment and computer
              applications in the undergraduate laboratory. The two distinct goals of this
              project are to integrate modern instrumental and computer methods throughout
              the chemistry curriculum and to achieve ACS accreditation for the new major.
              These goals are totally complementary, and somewhat synergistic, in their
              implementation.    To move forward on this commitment, this project uses a
              benchtop gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) system to bring
              innovation and excitement into the laboratories at three different levels. The
              appeal of a GC/MS system is that it is a multipurpose instrument capable of
              capturing the imagination of students and motivating them in new and diverse
              ways. As an introduction, students observe demonstrations illustrating
              molecular behavior and are then guided through personal use of GC/MS in
              structure determination in the organic laboratory. In advanced laboratories,
              they study gas phase reactions and learn how to do more complex trace analyses
              and discover more about the power of the computer system. Finally, they have an
              opportunity to discover the value of GC/MS as a research tool and learn to
              appreciate its role in the undergraduate laboratory.    The department sees a
              GC/MS system as an instrument well suited to motivating students to pursue a
              career in chemistry and as a tool that provides them with many skills they need
              to succeed in either industry or academia once they graduate.
