Title       : FT-NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9650217

Award Number: 9650217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen M. Schoffstall amschoff@uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Beggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Ruminski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This department is obtaining instrumentation suitable to determine high-field
              lH and 13C Fourier-transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectra in an
              undergraduate environment, which includes classroom work and undergraduate
              research. The 200-MHz instrument has excellent sensitivity and resolution
              capabilities at a reasonable cost. The software used is similar to that of
              other sophisticated instruments, so that students going elsewhere after
              graduation will be able to adjust to the operation of FT-NMR equipment at a new
              location. Spectra are to be obtained directly by students, the new equipment
              being amenable to such a policy. Each student-user experiences proving the
              structure of unknowns using lH and 13C FT-NMR, verifying the structure of a
              product of reaction, measuring the percentage of components in an equilibrium
              or a mixture, deriving structural information from both lH and 13C FT-NMR,
              analyzing patterns of coupling through decoupling techniques, measuring
              relaxation times, noting effects in variable-temperature spectra, and analyzing
              other problems. Students also see how FT-NMR spectra can be used in tandem with
              other analytical methods, such as gas and liquid chromatography, and with other
              spectroscopic methods, such as infrared ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy and
              mass spectrometry, to solve structural and analytical problems.   Through
              direct participation in operating the FT-NMR spectrometer and interpreting
              results, students gain hands-on experience with a method of structural analysis
              that has become crucial to the progress and development of chemical knowledge.
              This is important for students who are new to chemistry and also for those who
              are engaged in undergraduate research projects.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
