Title       : Improvement of Chemistry Curriculum and Laboratory Program for Minority Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9650618

Award Number: 9650618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix Roman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn R. Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angel R. Arcelay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Bellamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project, entitled Improvement of the Chemistry Curriculum and Laboratory
              Program for Minority Students, is designed to upgrade the undergraduate
              chemistry curriculum at this university. For this goal, new instrumentation is
              being purchased and its use integrated into the classroom and laboratory
              curricula. The chemistry program was developed to introduce modern laboratory
              techniques at all levels of instruction, to aid in the learning of many
              concepts presented in the classroom through hands-on experience, and to expand
              the undergraduate research program. The specific laboratory programs affected
              by the project include physical chemistry, analytical chemistry, biochemistry,
              organic chemistry, and courses in instrumental analysis.    Implementation of
              this project permits the introduction of additional modern experimental
              procedures in the upper-division laboratory program and provides needed
              instrumentation for student research projects including talented high school
              students involved in special projects. Project implementation affects all
              chemistry majors and students who take organic chemistry as a requirement in
              their majors such as biology, medical technology, and premedical students.  
              The main outcome of this project is the strengthening of the basic
              undergraduate curriculum in chemistry through an improvement in the resources
              that are available to the students. The project affects approximately 150
              students each year including the chemistry majors. The improvement results in a
              better prepared graduate of the campus who, in turn, is better motivated and
              prepared to continue graduate studies or to work in the local industries or
              government. The project is also in line with the priorities of AMERICA 2000,
              especially with the objective of increasing the number of minorities and women
              who complete degrees in science, given that 59 percent of the students are
              female and 98 percent, minorities.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
