Title       : Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy as a Unifying Curricular Element
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9650043

Award Number: 9650043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18627              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leverett R. Smith lsmith@viking.dvc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thuy T. Dang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph E. Ledbetter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Contra Costa CC College
	      2600 Mission Bell Drive
	      San Pablo, CA  948063166    415/235-7800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will use atomic absorption spectroscopy to enhance the chemistry
              curriculum, via relevant issues in chemistry, environmental science, and other
              areas. Both science and non-science majors will be introduced to the use of the
              instrument. The instrument will be used for hands-on student laboratory
              exercises in the introductory, general, and analytical chemistry courses.      
                      The project will make some use of standard protocols for student
              exercises, but will also be committed to developing lab exercises for
              lower-division undergraduate courses. Anticipated exercises include water
              analysis, environmental analysis, food and forensic analyses, and data handling
              exercises. For introductory chemistry, as a followup to electronic spectra,
              application of AA will be brought into a laboratory exercise, for example by
              analyzing water samples for sodium or paint samples for lead. In general
              chemistry, AA is to be used in a more rigorous way, including at least one AA
              exercise each semester. The first semester will compare metal analysis results
              from AA and home water test kits, or a comparable exercise. In the second
              semester, the AA will be used for environmental applications, by incorporating
              a mini-site assessment in the laboratory. Exercises in field sampling and
              sample preparation will be incorporated. In quantitative analysis, the AA
              instrument will be used to educate students in the rigorous standards routinely
              required to meet regulatory agency standards for metals analysis in water, soil
              and other analytes, using both flame and graphite furnace methods in suitable
              "real-world" analysis situations. The instrument will also be used for student
              independent study projects, to examine aspects of local water quality and soil
              pollution. The project intends also to develop short exercises that can be used
              by the administration of justice and biotechnology programs at Contra Costa
              College.
