Title       : Laboratory for Interdisciplinary Instruction in Digital Audio Technology in
               Music
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9650805

Award Number: 9650805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark F. Bocko bocko@ece.rochester  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Headlam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The creation of a digital audio laboratory through this Instrumentation and
              Laboratory Improvement Project will support an interdisciplinary teaching
              venture in Digital Technology in Music involving the Department of Electrical
              Engineering and the Eastman School of Music of the University of Rochester. The
              new laboratory facilities will support key curricular components in the
              education of engineering and science students and it will support a valuable
              component in the technical education of students of Music as well as for a
              large group of students in disciplines spanning these extremes. Digital
              representation and manipulation of signals is one of the keystones of
              Electrical Engineering; and in music study, this technology is being
              increasingly incorporated to the extent that it has emerged as an essential
              aspect. The laboratory facilities created through the project will enable
              practical instruction in digital signal technology to students via hands-on
              experience and the creation of original student work. Additionally, in
              Electrical Engineering the equipment will add new instructional capabilities in
              the areas of Signals, Communications, and Digital Signal Processing, and at the
              Eastman School the equipment will enable new instructional capabilities in
              Digital Technology in Music production, Multimedia Production Technology and
              Music Education. The latter will include CD-ROM based instructional and
              pedagogical materials, as well as research into sound manipulation and
              transmission. The digitized format of these materials will allow for their
              dissemination in conventional computer disk format, CD-ROMs, or networks such
              as the INTERNET via World Wide Web.
