Title       : Environmental Radiation Monitoring Experiments for Radiation Detection
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9650021

Award Number: 9650021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31265              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Johnson wjohnson@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Rudin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Radiation detection laboratory exercises in undergraduate health physics
              programs have traditionally been limited to experiments examining the basic
              properties of radioactive decay, the effects of shielding, and detector
              characteristics.  Applied undergraduate laboratories are normally designed with
              a curriculum that supports reactor health physics and involve experiments using
              basic radiation monitoring equipment in such a setting.  In this project,
              environmental health physics experiments are being integrated into junior- and
              senior-level laboratory courses required of health physics majors. 
              Demonstrations designed to stimulate the interest of non-science-majors in
              applied radiation protection are being included in introductory courses.  
              Experiments utilizing an alpha/beta discriminating liquid scintillation system
              and thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLDs) are being added to undergraduate health
              physics laboratories.  Demonstrations of liquid scintillation counting are
              being performed in an introductory health physics course for nonmajors. 
              Long-term experiments examining the sources and doses resulting from background
              radiation are being designed for use in courses for both majors and nonmajors. 
              Equipment involved in this project is also being used to accommodate the
              growing number of undergraduate research projects in environmental radiation
              that have previously relied on borrowed equipment or off-site analysis.   Over
              the next decade, many undergraduate health physics programs may begin to revise
              curriculums to emphasize environmental applications. With this in mind, the
              experiments developed or improved under this program can be evaluated and the
              successes and difficulties reported to other health programs at national
              meetings and through literature.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
