Title       : Improvement of Laboratory Instrumentation in the Freshman General Biology Course
               for Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9650425

Award Number: 9650425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ed R. Pickering epickeri@stokes.wilberforce.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hammed A. Agboola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wilberforce University
	      Brush Row Road
	      Wilberforce, OH  45384    513/376-2911

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This university attracts primarily African-American students. Many students
              come to this department with an interest in science but, as with most college
              freshmen, a limited understanding of what scientists actually do and what is
              required to become a professional scientist. As they discover the technical
              nature and rigorous demands of a career in biology, many become discouraged and
              seek a different career, unless they are given personal instruction and
              encouragement and allowed to experience the excitement of using current
              scientific equipment successfully at the introductory biology level.   The
              objective of this project is to increase student interest in pursuing a
              biological career by providing more effective personal instruction using the
              Socratic method, aided by a video/microscope system, and by providing more
              hands-on experiences that both provide excitement and build scientific skills
              through the use of different kinds of scientific instruments.   The target
              students are the freshmen who indicate an initial interest in a biological
              career.  The success of this project can be indicated by increased performance
              on General Biology I and II examinations and reports, a greater positive
              attitude toward the course as expressed on course evaluation instruments,
              reduced student attrition during the freshman year and beyond, a higher
              percentage of students graduating with a Bachelor of Science degree in Biology,
              and a higher percentage entering biological careers.  This will result in
              increased representation by African-Americans in the biological professions. 
              The outcomes of this project will be reported before the Education Section of
              The Ohio Academy of Science.
