Title       : Rapid Prototype Printed Circuit Board Work Cell to Support Design Across the
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9650981

Award Number: 9650981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt L. Kosbar kosbar@ee.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy H. Moss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin T. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The faculty of Electrical Engineering (EE) have started implementing a major
              revision of their BSEE curriculum. The new program integrates engineering
              analysis with open-ended engineering design projects at all levels of study.
              Virtually all EE students are required to design, fabricate, evaluate, and test
              a number of electronic circuits prior to graduation. The current practice of
              using outside vendors to produce printed circuit boards (PCBs) for these
              projects is becoming very costly. In addition, students have a very limited
              amount of time to test their designs, while the high fabrication cost
              discourages experimentation. The EE department is faced with the choice of
              severely limiting the complexity of hardware projects or finding a cheaper
              alternative for rapidly producing prototype PCBs. The equipment used in this
              project makes possible the construction of an automated PCB fabrication work
              cell. This rapid-prototyping system dramatically reduces the recurring cost and
              turnaround time of PCB fabrication and enables students to experience a more
              realistic design cycle.   In addition to supporting the engineering design
              component of various classes, the equipment can also be a test-bed for the
              machine vision and factory automation courses. The new video equipment enables
              students to develop algorithms for a PCB inspection application. The robotic
              equipment can be used in an existing factory automation class for path control
              experiments. The new equipment is compatible with commercial grade
              computer-assisted design packages already in use. It would be reasonable to
              duplicate this effort at a variety of universities for a reasonably modest
              cost; this project should attract the interest of many institutions since there
              is a simultaneous push to increase the amount of engineering design and
              shrinking of budgets for EE programs.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
