Title       : Testing-Comparison-Origin (T-C-O): A New Model for Mechanical Behavior of
               Materials Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650531

Award Number: 9650531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34888              (Estimated)
Investigator: Blair London   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project focuses on enhancing undergraduate materials engineering education
              in the area of the mechanical behavior of structural materials. An innovative
              methodology is being presented, in which students perform experiments to
              measure key mechanical properties on a range of materials (Testing), use
              materials selection charts to compare the properties measured with those of
              other materials (Comparison), and then use this information to get at the
              fundamental concepts behind the properties at hand (Origin). The T-C-O approach
              uses both laboratory and lecture to promote true learning in the mechanical
              behavior of materials. A state-of-the-art tensile testing system is also being
              used in this project. This system, of appropriate size and capability for
              undergraduate use, is the cornerstone of the mechanical behavior of materials
              laboratory facility. Several sets of T-C-O experiments are presented at the
              sophomore through senior level for materials engineers and other engineering
              disciplines where students can use the new tensile testing system, plus other
              mechanical testing equipment, to discover the nature of the mechanical behavior
              of materials.   The T-C-O method is being evaluated by student surveys at
              several levels and by Beta Testing at San Jose State University and the
              University of California, Davis. Successful results can be disseminated to the
              materials and mechanics communities at the Beta Test sites, by presentation at
              a national technical meeting, and by publication in a refereed technical
              journal.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
