Title       : Postharvest Lab Enhancement: Controlled Environment Chambers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650479

Award Number: 9650479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43570              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Wyatt Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Warfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Postharvest technology is recognized as the means to increase crop productivity
              by decreasing loss due to mishandling and decay. Thus, in a time of increasing
              population and decreasing production `tools,` it has become critically
              important to impart to students of agronomic and horticultural curricula a
              practical knowledge of postharvest technology.   The postharvest technology
              effort of the Crop Science Department has been severely hampered by a lack of
              controlled temperature storage. This project provides the moneys to purchase
              three controlled-environment chambers to be used in the department's
              undergraduate instruction. The chambers allow the development of more
              meaningful laboratory exercises and demonstrations for the course, Fruit
              Science/Vegetable Science 421: Postharvest Technology of Horticultural Crops.
              The chambers also allow a much broader range of senior project (required
              undergraduate research) and special problems topics to be offered to both
              traditional and underrepresented students who desire careers in agriculture
              outside that of field management.   Agriculture has become a highly technical
              industry. The acquisition of controlled-temperature chambers allows the
              university to better educate students in hands-on, practical aspects of
              postharvest technology.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
