Title       : Undergraduate Applied Environmental Geochemistry Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9650587

Award Number: 9650587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolph Hon hon@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Lesmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Spooner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Christopher Hepburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Approximately a decade ago, the Department of Geology and Geophysics initiated
              a new major program in the Environmental Geosciences. The program was designed
              with the objective of giving the undergraduate students a primary understanding
              of surface and near subsurface geologic phenomena that directly influences the
              quality of our natural surroundings. The topics that were initially included
              were geologic hazards, hydrology, marine processes, chemistry of natural
              waters, sedimentation processes, and geophysics.   In response to student
              interest, the program has recently been extended to include the effects of
              anthropogenic changes, fate and transport of pollutants, and the role of metals
              in the near surface environment. In addition, increasingly more Environmental
              Geoscience majors are getting involved in actual field and laboratory projects
              at environmentally contaminated sites. Student participation in these projects
              occurs in a variety of ways, including laboratory exercises, senior theses,
              honors program studies, and individual research projects.   The department's
              analytical facilities include gas chromatograph, neutron activation
              instrumentation, x-ray diffraction, multisensor water quality probe, and
              several other smaller instruments. However, the department has previously had
              no method of measuring concentration of inorganics in water/solid samples.  
              This project addresses the acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP)
              spectrometer, an instrument that greatly enhances the `hands-on ` educational
              experience and provides research opportunities for the Environmental Geoscience
              majors. The undergraduate students are learning the principles of the ICP
              analytical technique and instrument operation and are getting the opportunity
              to perform course exercises as well as student senior research. The ICP
              instrument was selected for its relative ease of use, for its ability to detect
              low levels of wide range of elements, and because ICP is the EPA standard for
              analysis of metals in aqueous and other environmental samples.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
