Title       : Integrating X-Ray Diffraction in the Composite Materials Engineering Curriculum
               at Winona State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9650921

Award Number: 9650921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryam Eslamloo-Grami maryam@vax2.winona.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beckry Abdel-Magid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winona State University
	      8th and Johnson Streets
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/457-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Engineering is purchasing an x-ray diffraction (XRD) system
              for the study of material crystal structure and phase identification. An x-ray
              diffractometer is needed to complement major courses in the Composite Materials
              Engineering curriculum. These courses are Properties of Material, Composite
              Characterization Techniques, and Mechanical Characterization Laboratory. In
              these courses, students learn material science and material characterization
              and begin to understand the relationship between the internal structure of
              materials and the properties of materials.   For understanding the properties
              of engineering materials, one needs to understand their structure on the atomic
              and/or microscopic scale. XRD is a powerful technique used to identify the
              crystalline phases present in materials and to measure the structural
              properties of the phases. It offers unparalleled accuracy in the measurement of
              atomic spacing. In addition, XRD is noncontact and nondestructive and can be
              used in most environments.   The new equipment is being used to offer
              undergraduate students in Composite Materials Engineering hands-on experience
              in the analysis of materials at the atomic and microscopic level. The equipment
              is crucial for preparing undergraduate students in materials engineering with
              the basic knowledge that is highly needed for the analysis, synthesis, design,
              and processing of advanced materials. Advanced composite materials are
              nationally recognized as one of the key technologies in the next few decades.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
