Title       : Laboratory and Instructional Innovations in an Interdisciplinary
               Biochemistry/Biotechnology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9650507

Award Number: 9650507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel S. Fan sfan@bradley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle R. Fry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project aims to improve a budding undergraduate program in
              biochemistry/biotechnology that is already receiving considerable regional
              interest, to ensure its blossoming into national significance. This aim is
              being approached by developing and implementing state-of-the-art laboratory
              sequences in cell and molecular biology, biochemistry, and immunology to
              augment existing courses and by presenting three-dimensional molecular models
              in a lecture/discussion setting. The laboratory sequences lend relevance to
              lectures and illustrate that science is built from bricks of knowledge
              supported by the pillars of investigative process; the molecular modeling
              presentations help to ease student understanding of macromolecule
              structure/function relationships. About 50 undergraduates are directly affected
              by the main body of this project each year, with another 300, primarily
              nonscience-majors, receiving additional benefits due to the downward migration
              of exercises developed for the three courses in question.   Several innovative
              approaches to laboratory design are being used to develop laboratory sequences
              appropriate and feasible to an intermediately sized program such as this. Some
              of these approaches are to integrate individual laboratory exercises into
              continuous projects; to miniaturize exercises, thus reducing reagent and animal
              use while maximizing results; to replace radioactive tracers with calorimetric
              or fluorescent ones; and to incorporate, as they become well established and
              refined, exercises developed for upper-level majors' courses into large classes
              for nonscience-majors.   These innovations not only make it feasible for this
              institution and those who follow to implement state-of-the-art technology at
              the undergraduate level, but also begin to address issues of practical concern
              in biological and chemical education.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
