Title       : Department of Economics Computer Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9650659

Award Number: 9650659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Byron David bydcc@ccunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell Kellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              OBJECTIVES  To provide the opportunity for minority students in economics to
              routinely use computers for their assignments.  To provide a computer
              laboratory for economics majors who need to import data and use advanced
              statistical methods and quantitative models.  To provide the opportunity for
              non-engineering or science majors_e.g., architecture and humanities
              students_taking electives in economics to use computer applications.   To
              provide computer support for an undergraduate program being developed in
              Telecommunications; which will be supported mainly by Economics, Computer
              Science, Electrical Engineering, and Management courses.     METHODS TO BE
              EMPLOYED   A dedicated computer facility will be established in proximity to
              the Department of Economics office in CCNY's North Academic Center.  This will
              initially be furnished to accommodate at least 18 students at a time, and be a
              highly secured and supervised spaced.  A separate secured room within the
              facility will house the file server computer. The NSF and matching funds will
              be used to purchase the following:  One file server computer with a high
              capacity printer; eighteen terminals; and the required hardware and software
              for networking through a LAN and accessing the Internet.    SIGNIFICANCE TO
              ADVANCEMENT OF EDUCATION    The proposed PC lab will enhance the quality of
              existing economics courses that involve the teaching and use of: economic and
              managerial modeling, including forecasting and simulation; applied statistics;
              empirical data analysis; and what-if (scenario) analyses.  It will also enable
              the introduction of new courses heavily focused on empirical application and
              experimentation.  Literature searches and data gathering for papers will also
              be greatly facilitated.  Most importantly, these capabilities will be available
              to a sizable population of minority students.
