Title       : Enhancement of Undergraduate Education in Plant Biology and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9650025

Award Number: 9650025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26434              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grace C. Ju ju@faith.gordonc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell R. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon College
	      255 Grapevine Road
	      Wenham, MA  019841895    978/927-2300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               One of the more neglected areas in Biology education is Plant Biology.
              Agricultural research universities have seen an increasing drop in enrollment,
              especially in the plant sciences. Yet, the reality is that agricultural
              research, crop management and improvement, land management, and environmental
              problems are a growing concern in the world. The contribution of plants to
              society is ubiquitous. For example, plants have always been a critical
              component of the pharmaceutical industry. More recently, gasohol has quickly
              come to be viewed as a realistic source of renewable fuel. However, the lack of
              education in Plant Biology is sadly evident within Biology curricula in many
              colleges and universities.    The department proposes to elevate the importance
              of Plant Science education in a Biology curriculum by adding a more hands-on
              approach to science laboratories using plants as a model system. Plant
              metabolism studies provide a good laboratory experience for students to observe
              a process involving organismic, cellular, and molecular aspects. Research
              projects are being set up that examine the effects of environmental stresses
              such as heavy metals and salt on plant functions. The effects can be quantified
              using physiological and biochemical measurements as well as being viewed at the
              level of gene expression.   A model Plant Biology program, using new equipment,
              can be used to ask questions about important processes involving plant
              metabolism. This model for investigative research can specifically influence
              undergraduate Plant Biology education and investigative science education in
              general. The instrumentation may also enhance other advanced courses and a
              Biology core course for nonmajors.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
