Title       : Scientific Equipment to Improve Science Education Aboard the Vessel W.G. Jackson
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9650023

Award Number: 9650023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29698              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Ward wardr@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet H. Vail  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/336-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is expanding the hands-on, investigative approach to science
              education, an approach that this department has successfully used with
              preservice elementary teachers as well as K-12 students and teachers. This
              successful model for science education is now being extended to include the
              upper-division science instruction and undergraduate research at this
              university. The newly acquired, advanced equipment is being used aboard the new
              65-foot floating laboratory and classroom, G. JACKSON. This new vessel is being
              constructed and equipped with basic science and safety equipment. Its principal
              focus is science instruction and research for undergraduate science majors and
              prospective teachers. The new equipment is providing greater opportunities for
              these students to experience an investigative approach to science in numerous
              courses as well as through faculty supervised research. This equipment also
              provides an introduction to current technology in several areas of science and
              enhances student opportunities for higher level experience in experimental
              design, data collection and analysis, and computer modeling.   The university
              is making the vessel and its inventory of science equipment available as a
              regional science education resource. The vessel offers educational programs in
              various port cities around Lake Michigan. Additionally, it is expected to be
              used by other colleges and universities including Hope College, Western
              Michigan University, DePaul University, Cornerstone College, and the following
              community colleges: West Shore, Muskegon, Lansing, and Petoskey. The impact of
              the project is to convey scientific principles and techniques with greater
              effectiveness; enhance student understanding of how scientific data is
              collected, processed, and applied to environmental questions; and introduce new
              content into the students' aquatic science experience through working with
              advanced equipment.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
