Title       : Applying Instrumental Analysis to a Computerized Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9650996

Award Number: 9650996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35684              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Hicks ghicks@brazosport.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brazosport College
	      500 College Drive
	      Lake Jackson, TX  775663136    409/265-6131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project, Applying Instrumental Analysis to a Computerized Process, seeks
              to improve the instructional methodology by which analytical instruments are
              taught. Students have been receiving training in the Chemical Technology
              program with regard to performing analysis of a sample, but they also need the
              ability to evaluate the analytical results in terms of what they indicate about
              a given chemical process.   The objectives of the project are to set up a
              complete computerized process in glassware, providing a lab environment for
              teaching instrumental analysis in which the student learns not only to operate
              the analytical instruments but also to interpret the analytical results in the
              context of a multistep process; enhance computer skills through a computerized,
              controlled lab process, data collection, calculation, and analytical instrument
              control; provide students with an overview of an entire multistep process on a
              small scale, and of how these operations are linked together and how one
              operation affects succeeding operations; provide students with a representative
              sample of the analytical instruments used in the local chemical industry; and
              provide the organic lab students with instruments with which to do product
              analysis, giving them feedback on the purity of the products they are
              synthesizing. This project also provides students with hands-on experience at
              interpreting spectra.   To accomplish these objectives, the department is using
              Fourier-transform-infrared and ultra-violet spectrophotometers to provide a
              representative sample of the instruments used in the chemical industry.
              Assembly of a computerized, small-scale, glassware, multistep process is used
              to illustrate the interrelation of processes and how the analysis is tied to a
              particular operation.   As a result of the project, other colleges may be able
              to design a lab facility that better meets the need of the chemical industry.
              Information on the project can be disseminated through journal articles,
              conference presentations, and lab tours. The project is evaluated based on
              enrollment and input from instructors, students, and industry.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
