Title       : A World Wide Web-Based Laboratory for Undergraduate Analog VLSI Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9650733

Award Number: 9650733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Caverly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The World Wide Web's (WWW) current explosion in popularity and accessibility is
              shaping the way educational institutions provide future service to their
              students. At the present time, there is a sporadic, but growing, movement to
              provide WWW access to laboratories. This capability promises to provide those
              teaching undergraduate-level courses the ability to access truly
              state-of-the-art educational facilities from distant locations, with little or
              no additional cost to the distant campus. This project centers around the
              development of an undergraduate web-based laboratory in the area of analog
              integrated circuit design and testing. The plan is to develop a suite of
              automated instrumentation to be used for measuring the characteristics of the
              prefabricated analog integrated circuit in several undergraduate level
              laboratories. The instrumentation is controlled and the measurement results
              transmitted over the WWW. The equipment acquired to implement this
              instrumentation suite is a personal computer controller (featuring an interface
              to the WWW), a GPIB-controlled signal analyzer, a function generator, a
              programmable power supply, a frequency counter, a digital storage oscilloscope,
              and a high-frequency digital multimeter. The instrumentation is being
              controlled in a similar fashion as the current senior laboratory equipment at
              the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, which is based on a similar
              equipment suite.
