Title       : Linking Agricultural Curricula with Global Positioning (GPS)Total Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9650591

Award Number: 9650591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lon R. Shell ls04@al.swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dee Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A Trimble SSi GPS Total Station System is being used to link Agricultural
              courses, Agricultural Surveying, Machinery and Equipment, Fertilizer and Soil
              Productivity, and Range Science. This curricular link is more than sharing
              equipment; it requires the transfer of knowledge and the interaction of
              students, faculty, and resources among courses with planned outcomes.   The GPS
              total station uses signals from a constellation of 24 NAVSTAR satellites to
              provide three-dimensional point positions on the earth with accuracies of 1
              centimeter, real time kinematic. This GPS instrumentation affects all students
              in the department and also influences students in the departments of
              Technology, Geography and Planning, and Biology.   Course linking is
              accomplished through teaching Precision Farming, which is dependent on GPS for
              georeferencing of soil sampling, a soils and fertilizer application,
              variable-rate applications, and real-time yield monitoring, an agricultural
              machinery and equipment application. Range courses also have GPS applications.
              Data collected using GPS are stored and referenced using Spatial Mapping, a
              Geographical Information Systems (GIS) technology. For example, the
              Agricultural Surveying class stakes out the fields to be used in Precision
              Farming, and those coordinates are saved to a database to be used in the other
              courses. In agricultural surveying, GPS is being used in topography, control,
              cross sections, and boundaries.   The scientific equipment used in this project
              reinforces basic mathematical and scientific principles. Use of geodetic GPS
              receivers strengthens the current use of algebraic, trigonometric, and
              geometric mathematics and adds the use of statistical theorems. For example,
              error checking methods and theories dealing with probabilities, least-square
              adjustments including stochastic and mathematical models, along with
              propagation of mean and variance-covariance are being applied to data collected
              in the Surveying Laboratory Exercises.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
