Title       : Integrating Computerized Instruction and Learning into the MWC Economics
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9650070

Award Number: 9650070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret A. Ray mray@mwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mary Washington College
	      1301 College Avenue
	      Fredericksburg, VA  224015300    703/899-4100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supplies equipment for a 20-station computerized classroom for
              teaching economics. The computerized classroom allows for the integration of
              computer-aided instruction throughout the economics curriculum. The project
              targets students taking courses for general education, interdisciplinary
              majors, business, international affairs, environmental science and economics
              majors.    In recent years, both the pedagogy and practice of economics have
              increasingly relied on and employed computer applications. Computer simulations
              and packages for statistical analysis are highly effective for teaching
              economics. The use of computers increases both student motivation and success.
              It gives real-world relevance to material taught in class. Students are able to
              manage computer-simulated firms and economies and see how economic principles
              affect the outcomes of their decisions. They use computers to conduct their own
              analysis of data. In addition, the practice of economic analysis in the real
              world now requires proficiency with computer applications. Students planning
              careers involving economic analysis and decision-making must learn how to use
              available software.  Finally, in both the classroom and in the real world, the
              use of the Internet and World Wide Web is essential for investigation and
              research.      The goal of the project is to improve learning in economics
              classes by effectively integrating computer applications in most, if not all
              economics courses. The project focuses on five objectives:  (1) incorporate
              computer laboratories into general education courses, (2) introduce
              Internet-based curriculum into introductory Principles of Economics courses and
              continue its use at higher levels, (3) implement a "tools and methods"
              introduction to the major course, (4) further integrate up-to-date statistical
              analysis packages into quantitative economics courses, and (5) enhance
              interdisciplinary courses using computerized economic applications and
              simulations.
