Title       : Optical Measurement and Testing Systems for Undergraduate Optics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9650719

Award Number: 9650719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Joenathan charles.joenathan@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Testing optical components and making physical measurements using optical
              techniques are important topics in an applied-optics program. These subjects
              are multidisciplinary in nature. In recent years, advancements in electro-optic
              technology, computers, and electronics have made optical measurement and
              testing tools more reliable, accurate, and repeatable. Until the present,
              students had been exposed to outdated testing and measurement tools and
              analysis. They made qualitative measurement on the images obtained using
              photographic techniques. Such predictions have limited impact because of the
              highly speculative nature of the results. Many times this shortcoming added to
              the frustration of both the teacher and students because the potential use of
              the measurement and testing technique had been obscured by large error and very
              little repeatability.   Students in the optics course should be provided with
              the opportunity not only to develop the basic skills but also to acquire
              expertise using the most modern hardware and analytical tools. In addition, the
              incorporation of computer data acquisition systems in the experiments leaves
              more time for the students to concentrate on concept and methodology. For this
              reason, the measurement and testing capability of the department is being
              strengthened. To this end, new laboratory experiments are also being
              introduced.   The equipment used in this project is being used to provide
              automated as well as quantitative analysis for the new laboratories in an
              optical metrology course (which will find its use in other courses as well),
              develop new laboratory experiments that play a pivotal role in the many fiber
              optics industries and communication, upgrade some present laboratories with
              tools of higher precision and control so that the student gets a better feeling
              for the data and the calculation, and improve the integration of data
              acquisition and analysis for some experiments.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
