Title       : Towards the Lifelong Use of Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650469

Award Number: 9650469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Giorgio P. Ingargiola ingargio@joda.cis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Aiken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Munir Mandviwalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the development of an undergraduate workstation
              laboratory that supports closed (structured classroom) use, open use, and
              access from remote locations over the Internet. The laboratory is being used
              for a new course, CIS100:  Information Technology, that is giving  nonmajors
              the tools to support lifelong learning and the use of Information Technology
              (IT). The proposal is based on the belief that accelerating changes in society
              and technology mean that the worker of the future must be an effective user of
              IT.   The computers and networks that constitute IT are now capable of much
              more than numerical computation and symbolic processing. They are tools for
              enhanced communication and individual and cooperative problem solving. More
              profoundly, IT provides a basis for learning and applying mental models needed
              to solve problems in virtually every discipline. IT is both an agent of change
              and an aid in the lifelong learning required to adapt to change. The objective
              of the laboratory is to help make IT an essential component of the scientific
              and humanistic education of a broad range of students, but not CIS-majors, who
              are already well grounded in this technology.   The hardware for the laboratory
              consists of 28 high-end PC workstations, a server, and auxiliary equipment
              (video cameras, document scanners, laser printers). The software consists of
              Windows NT, WWW and Notes servers, Microsoft Office Professional, and a number
              of packages for multimedia and advanced applications.   A number of case
              studies developed by researchers in disciplines such as social science,
              chemistry, English, and engineering are being presented. Students build on
              these case studies, thus acquiring a feeling for the use of IT for solving
              real-world problems.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
