Title       : Mathematics Learning Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9650658

Award Number: 9650658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge A. Perez pzjlg@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dehlly Porras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yvonne C. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Assad Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Laguardia Cmty Col
	      31-10 Thomson Avenue
	      Long Island City, NY  111013071    718/626-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is reforming the mathematics program by dividing the curriculum of
              the second level developmental mathematics course into two courses. The
              decision to restructure the curriculum is based on an analysis of students'
              difficulties in successfully completing the extensive content to be covered in
              this course in a semester of only 12 weeks and the fact that the success rate
              in upper-level courses indicates that even students who pass may be in jeopardy
              in precalculus and calculus. In addition, in the present structure, students
              receive no college-level algebra instruction prior to precalculus. While the
              department has had significant success in infusing new teaching methodologies
              in precalculus and calculus resulting in significantly higher pass rates,
              hundreds of students never make it to these upper-level courses because of
              their poor preparation. The department is using this project to do a better job
              of preparing the vast majority of students who start out in developmental
              mathematics for upper-level precalculus and calculus courses.    Central to
              this project is the transformation of sections of these developmental courses
              along with sections of precalculus and calculus into multimedia laboratory
              courses where students work individually and in small groups on
              state-of-the-art, interactive, CD-ROM-based instruction, supported with
              accompanying texts that contain exploratory environments, video clips,
              simulations, explanations, and exercises. Using this new technology, students
              work on modules at their own pace, taking proficiency exams when they are
              ready. The self-paced nature of the new CD-ROM technology makes better use of
              the additional time students have in this course.
