Title       : 3-D Visualization in a Computer-Mediated Design and Communicational Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1998  
File        : a9650748

Award Number: 9650748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erv Bales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Loeb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses improving students' ability in three-dimensional (3D)
              visualization in courses now under development. Courseware for these courses
              has application in multiple disciplines and as such enhances the possibilities
              for student and faculty cross-discipline interaction and collaboration
              involving Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Architecture, Economics,
              and Interactive Media Technology. The focus of the project is the creation of a
              completely computer mediated environment, where students can work on their
              designs and problems, communicate with each other and others more distant, and
              receive courseware at the workstation.   The innovative aspect of this project
              is that it is interdisciplinary and that it is being designed from the
              beginning in a comprehensive manner to provide the format for the perpetuation,
              replication, and dissemination of the project in a continually upgradeable
              hypertext format that allows for the combination of Distance Learning and
              Internet browsing. Computer-based tools are being used to provide conceptual
              organization and structure to laboratory work and to establish unbreakable
              links between the lectures and the laboratory.   The major equipment being used
              to nourish the growing use of visualization and analysis software in the
              laboratory includes four high-speed graphic workstations, a software and
              hardware system that links computer monitors in the teaching environment, and
              one video production workstation with supporting peripherals. The increased
              scope of 3D visualization in the interdisciplinary courses made possible by the
              equipment in this project will serve as the catalyst for increasing the scope
              and effectiveness of 3D visualization in other disciplines as well.
