Title       : Reforming Mathematics Curriculum Through Computerized Laboratories and
               Cooperative Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9650737

Award Number: 9650737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Lightbourne                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn A. White   (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Parrish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brevard Community College
	      1519 Clearlake Road
	      Cocoa, FL  329226503    305/632-1111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Brevard Community College, a multi-campus, co-educational community college
              located on the east coast of Florida, is establishing three computerized
              mathematics laboratories at the Melbourne Campus and one at the College's
              Institute for Space Technology. The laboratories will be part of a
              comprehensive effort to reform the entire mathematics curriculum that addresses
              improving teaching techniques and focuses on increasing students' understanding
              of and success in mathematics at all levels. The target student audience
              includes all students requiring an introductory college level mathematics
              course or greater to complete degree requirements, and student employees of the
              Kennedy Space Center requiring mathematics as a component of space technology
              related training programs.    Cooperative learning techniques will be
              implemented as small student groups use the computer to simulate mathematical
              equations, explore related mathematical concepts, and test possible solutions.
              As they perform computer-based activities in their groups, students will
              organize their own mathematical concepts, enabling them to learn more
              effectively and improve their mathematical problem solving skills.   
              Evaluation of the project will consist of comparing student success rates,
              satisfaction, and retention in classes using the reformed pedagogy to
              traditional lecture-based classes. Assessing project impact will also take into
              consideration how improving mathematical competency will contribute to enhanced
              job skills of Kennedy Space Center employees. The proposed reforms can serve as
              a model for other institutions wishing to initiate similar changes to their own
              curricula.
