Title       : College Physics in a Studio Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9650732

Award Number: 9650732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44766              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Swez phswez@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe J. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Vesper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valentina A. French  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Physics Department offers several sections of an algebra-based introductory
              physics course to a total of about 200 students each semester. The course is
              taught using a traditional large lecture and separate lab format. Research has
              shown that this format is not effective in motivating students and producing
              significant learning results. This finding has led to the need to redesign the
              introductory physics courses. The purpose of these changes is to increase
              student comprehension, interest, and performance in introductory physics
              classes; better integrate labs and lectures; and tailor the class to the needs
              of the students' major fields of study.   Participants in this project are
              accomplishing these objectives by implementing a 'studio' instructional format.
              This format is an interactive instructional system based on networked computer
              workstations linked to a server controlled by the instructor. Between short
              lecture segments, students can perform experiments or run computer simulations
              at their desks. The instructors can videotape demonstrations, digitize the
              data, and pass those data directly to the students for analysis. For each
              physical concept, students at different workstations can study different
              applications relevant to their respective majors. The studio replaces
              traditional lectures and labs by combining both into a single learning
              experience.   Most technology programs and several science curricula require
              introductory algebra-based physics. Making it into an exciting discovery
              course, adapted to the students' respective fields of study, can have a great
              impact on many programs throughout the university. Software modules developed
              for this project can be disseminated through the Internet and possibly a
              workshop.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
