Title       : Direct to Film Digital Imaging Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1996   
File        : a9650842

Award Number: 9650842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84392              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Woodley cfdaw@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Armel  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the establishment of a digital imaging instructional
              laboratory. Surveys conducted on the printing industry suggest that the use of
              digital imaging will increase dramatically in the next few years. At the recent
              Graph Expo printing equipment and supply show held in Chicago, most of the
              major manufacturers of printing equipment were demonstrating some form of
              computer to film, computer to plate, or computer to press system. These systems
              replace most of the labor-intensive film preparation work with the preparation
              of digital images. Now, the computer operator can be the designer, typesetter,
              scanner operator, film assembler, color separator, and platemaker, all in one
              computer system. This means that the computer operator must become familiar
              with a broad range of printing knowledge as it applies to digital images.  
              Through this project, students can experiment with scanning images, manipulate
              images with digital special effect, and test output image quality based on
              varied input resolutions. Traditional printing course content is still valid
              but must be reframed in a computer environment. New lessons and supporting
              instructional materials are being created for this model laboratory setting.  
              It is important to the university that students learn the methods and outcomes
              of inquiry in the sciences and professions guided by faculty. The School of
              Technology's mission is to provide state-of-the-art experiences and to maintain
              model laboratories related to its instructional areas. Updating the digital
              imaging equipment in the Graphic Communications laboratory helps the school and
              the university meet their goals.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
