Title       : Incorporation of Cell and Tissue Culture Techniques and Environmental Physiology
               into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9650526

Award Number: 9650526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy McCullen wmccullen@cscc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amine Kidane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbus State Cmty Col
	      550 East Spring Street
	      Columbus, OH  432151722    614/227-2629

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The purpose of this project is to continually enhance the educational
              opportunities available in biological sciences and to improve efficiency of
              instruction in the classrooms and laboratories. The project has a far-reaching
              impact on the campus which has extended beyond the Biological and Physical
              Science Department.   As a direct result of the project, two new courses,
              Environmental Science and Ecology have been added to the curriculum. This
              enhancement also involves the purchase of two labline environmental chambers,
              three ecology study chambers, and two plant growth racks, which are all housed
              in the lab classrooms in Nestor Hall. Upon development of the environmental
              science course, the Environmental Technology Department made a decision to
              require it for all of their technical students as a basic related course. All
              equipment has been integrated into the biology curriculum across the board and
              is being utilized to its fullest capacity.   The videomicroscopy system is
              being used to teach dissection techniques, to teach microscopy techniques, and
              to study specific specimens as a group for discussion. Especially significant
              is the dimension that this equipment adds to the two introductory-level,
              nonlaboratory courses. Videomicroscopy is such a successful teaching technique
              that the college has purchased additional systems so that the technique can be
              made available to any faculty member. The department has recently purchased
              photoprinters to capture images from the monitors. These images may then be
              used on quizzes, exams, hand-outs, etc.   Interactive computer/video
              applications are continually being developed using the Media Argus Master
              Authoring software and hardware purchased. In anatomy, these applications are
              being used as supplements to lecture material and also, more recently, to
              provide alternative teaching methods to those students opposed to the
              dissection of animals. Applications in invertebrate biology are also in use.  
              The results of this project have been disseminated in workshops presented at
              both the departmental and divisional levels. The authoring software has been
              widely viewed and interest in developing interactive software applications has
              grown across campus.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
