Title       : Computational Chemical Modeling Throughout the Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650584

Award Number: 9650584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Tecklenburg mary.tecklenburg@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leela Rakesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Computers are now accepted in the scientific laboratory not only for data
              collection and analysis but for actually predicting experimental results.
              Computer modeling of chemical structure and reactions is a way to quickly make
              predictions of structure and reactivity regarding many molecules. The graphical
              input of molecules and visualization of results makes computational chemistry
              accessible to undergraduate students in a laboratory setting with very little
              training time. The student's understanding of fundamental chemical principles
              can be greatly enhanced using this tool. The goal of this project is to
              introduce and use molecular modeling throughout the chemistry, physics, and
              mathematics curricula.   For the large numbers of students, workstation
              computers are being installed in the upper-level computer lab, while Macintosh
              computers are used for the general chemistry labs (majors and nonmajors). The
              Spartan software, which runs on all of the computers, offers a wide range of
              computational sophistication and yet is simple enough to use at all levels,
              from freshman to senior. The general chemistry student is introduced to
              molecular structure and polarity with molecular mechanic and semi-empirical
              calculations. In organic chemistry lab, regio-selectivity, transition states,
              and activated complexes of reactions are explored with semi-empirical and ab
              initio calculations. Physical chemistry, quantum physics, and applied
              mathematics courses can use quantum mechanic calculations to examine molecular
              wave functions beyond H2 and a host of available molecular properties. Chemical
              modeling can then be used by students in advanced organic and inorganic
              chemistry, biochemistry and polymer chemistry, mathematics, and physics as a
              familiar aid to understanding chemical concepts and solving chemical problems. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
