Title       : Integrating Environmental Geosciences and Geophysics Instruction by Means of
               Seismic Refraction and Reflection Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9650452

Award Number: 9650452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roswitha B. Grannell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Isam Amin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth L. Ambos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project centers around the purchase of a 24-channel seismic unit, vertical
              and horizontal geophones, geophone cable, and seismic refraction interpretation
              software (generalized reciprocal method). These items make possible the
              introduction of a geophysical component into hydrogeology instruction for
              aquifer characterization and basin analysis and the introduction of an
              environmental/hydrogeological component into geophysics instruction. A large
              project, in which both types of undergraduate student participate, allows all
              parties to obtain hands-on experience in the design of experiments, data
              collection, reduction, and interpretation. The use of joint field trips between
              classes and joint work sessions allow each student to see the scope of the
              project. The first project, representative of what could be accomplished, is
              being performed at Pine Mountain Club, a rural resort community in the
              semi-arid mountainous region north of Los Angeles. The community lies in the
              trace of the San Andreas fault and produces its scanty water supply from fault
              gouge. The project not only focuses on standard exploration techniques for
              additional water supplies, but also on characterization of the aquifer and its
              enclosing schistose bedrock. Peripheral projects include landslide
              investigations.   Seismic reflection, refraction, and shear wave studies are
              being undertaken in conjunction with already-available gravity, magnetic, and
              ground penetrating radar studies and conventional hydrogeological
              investigations (aquifer testing and water chemistry).                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
