Title       : Improvement to Three Undergraduate Chemistry Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9650313

Award Number: 9650313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13798              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Jayne Wilcox jwilcox@harper.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Duane Sell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie E. Ellefson-Kuehn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Rainey Harper Col
	      Algonquin & Roselle Roads
	      Palatine, IL  60067    312/397-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               For the past several years, the Chemistry Department has been engaged in a
              program to modernize its facilities and instrumentation.  A new organic lab has
              been built.  The chemistry storage area, preproom, balance room, and
              instrumentation room have all been remodeled and updated.  New instruments have
              been purchased including two infrared spectrometers, an ultra-violet-visible
              spectrophotometer, two high pressure liquid chromatographs, and a nuclear
              magnetic resonance spectrometer.  Acquiring a new atomic absorption (AA)
              spectrometer is the next logical step in this modernization program.  It is the
              perfect addition to the department's array of state-of-the-art equipment. 
              Recent chemical education literature has stressed the need to improve student
              interest and success in general chemistry courses.  One way to do this is
              through active participation in laboratory experiments that have an obvious
              relevance to everyday life.  Direct, hands-on experience with AA can spark
              interest in learning science while teaching basic instrumentation and research
              skills to undergraduate chemistry students.  The plan to use AA spectroscopy
              involves its immediate implementation in the laboratory component of three
              freshman-level chemistry courses.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
