Title       : Wireless Circuit and System Design: A New Introductory Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9650529

Award Number: 9650529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf E. Henning henning@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Horace C. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Flikkema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence P. Dunleavy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The instrumentation for this project is designed principally for an innovative
              laboratory course to help students grasp both system and circuit aspects of
              modern wireless systems. This rapidly growing area includes personal
              communication networks, intelligent transportation systems, and other
              applications that employ micro-, meter-, and millimeter-wave frequency bands.  
               This project establishes a Wireless Systems Design Laboratory and an
              associated course that enables students to develop knowledge of the principles
              of wireless systems and circuits and the relationships between them, gain
              practical experience in related system and circuit engineering techniques, and
              acquire key skills in using modern engineering tools.    To motivate students,
              the project uses a simple personal communication system (a pager) as a case
              study. Experiments are based on signal flow through the system together with
              performance characteristics of its individual components. The course also
              features computer simulation, computer-assisted design (CAD), and fabrication
              and test of component designs.    The unique integration of circuit and systems
              engineering fundamentals makes the course a model for electrical engineering
              curricula. For students specializing in related areas, this lab provides an
              excellent foundation for further study. The course is also part of an
              integrated curriculum development effort in the wireless/radiofrequency and
              communications area. The ability to develop new senior elective courses with
              hands-on content for the revised curriculum bodes well for highly productive
              use of the equipment. For example, additional use of the proposed
              instrumentation is planned for senior design projects.
