Title       : Teaching at the Interface of Biology and Chemistry: Use of Capillary
               Electrophoresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9650994

Award Number: 9650994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Rammelsberg arammelsberg@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Cote  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The main goal of this project is to increase the emphasis on quality education
              at the interface between biology and chemistry. For this goal, there is a
              critical need for modern instrumentation that can be used to teach the
              technical and intellectual methods of biochemistry and cell biology to majors
              in chemistry and biology and can also be used to introduce science to students
              at all lower levels and to non-science-majors. This project involves the
              purchase of a capillary electrophoresis system for use in upper-division
              laboratory courses in biochemistry, molecular and cellular biology, and
              instrumental analysis. Students in specific chemistry courses can also be
              trained as technical experts in the use of the instrument and assist students
              and instructors in lower-division courses and courses for non-science-majors.
              In this way, the benefits of the instrument can be realized at all
              instructional levels and the student "experts" gain practical experience
              applying what they have learned to real problems.   The capillary
              electrophoresis system is ideal for an undergraduate institution because of its
              advantages of speed and safety. The instrument also significantly increases
              opportunities for undergraduate research projects in biology and chemistry. The
              benefits to students include improved instrumentation available for instruction
              and student research, improved exercises and projects in laboratory courses,
              the ability to perform sophisticated analyses even in lower-division courses
              and courses for non-majors, and the opportunity for upper-division chemistry
              students to apply what they have learned by serving as "technical experts."
