Title       : Introduction of Research-Based Instructional Laboratories Using GC-MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9650709

Award Number: 9650709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa B. Lewis lblewis@albion.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the purchase of a gas chromatography/mass spectrometer
              (GC/MS) system, including both headspace equipment and an automatic sampler.
              This instrument is an integral part of new research-based experiments in
              general chemistry, chemical analysis, organic chemistry, and instrumentation
              and in undergraduate research. Chemical educators recognize the value of
              introducing students to research early in their careers, as it increases their
              interest and enthusiasm; however, few have implemented such experiments in the
              general chemistry laboratory. This project develops new research-based
              environmental experiments that can be introduced into the general chemistry and
              analytical chemistry curricula and serve to support the newly formed
              environmental science and studies concentrations. These experiments introduce
              students to the applicability of GC/MS to environmental study, particularly in
              the analysis of organics in natural water samples. This project further
              illustrates the usefulness of this technique by incorporating it into
              laboratory experiments that emphasize its importance in the bioanalytical (drug
              analysis, peptide structure) and organic fields.   The GC/MS system has the
              capability to perform the analysis of volatile organic contaminants of water
              (headspace equipment), mass spectral library searches, single ion monitoring,
              and deconvolution (difference spectra) of overlapping peaks, and is able to
              facilitate the timely analysis of many samples (automatic sampler). This
              instrumentation can have a broad impact on science (chemistry, biology, and
              geology) majors and non-science-majors and especially on those students
              interested in environmental science.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
