Title       : Geographic Information Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9650404

Award Number: 9650404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26259              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Todd Stradford geostrad@acs.eku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Zurick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Sambrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Marionneaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Kentucky Univ
	      Division of Sponsored Programs
	      Richmond, KY  40475    606/622-3636

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A Geographic Information System laboratory will be developed to support broad
              applications in the Dept. of Geography and Planning, and in the associated
              physical, life, and social sciences.  This project also provides a number of
              opportunities for undergraduate students to work directly with faculty members
              on research projects making use of GIS or related spatial analysis techniques
              using state-of-the-art PCs and peripherals. The ultimate goal is to prepare
              students better for quality professional service and technical jobs in today's
              highly competitive marketplace.    In addition to improving the applied
              technical course offerings in geographic information systems (GIS) for students
              of the social and behavioral sciences, the department aims to satisfy an
              increasing demand for course work in GIS among students of law enforcement.
              Additional undergraduates from other colleges may benefit from an enhanced
              teaching laboratory for GIS and Spatial Analysis. Secondary instructional
              objectives focus on the ability to offer technical workshops for individuals in
              law enforcement and related public safety and service professions. Summer
              workshops in GIS can be held for individuals in the teaching profession wishing
              to increase their general knowledge of this rapidly changing spatial
              information technology and, perhaps, for recertification requirements as
              teaching standards change in light of new Federal and state laws. Service
              objectives include the potential use of GIS technology for outside applied
              studies in cooperation with city, county, or state agencies, which may also
              actively involve undergraduate students. A number of ongoing and potential
              service/research projects have been identified where a strong level of support
              for an expanded GIS laboratory is indicated.
