Title       : Mathematica Laboratory for Upper-Level Science and Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650128

Award Number: 9650128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31089              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred J. Clark clark@me.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl M. Gracewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               In the past 6 years, the Department of Mechanical Engineering has developed a
              set of six upper-division undergraduate courses in applied mathematics. These
              courses combine training in traditional mathematics with strong and frequent
              connections to engineering and scientific problems. The courses meet a major
              need and have grown to a combined yearly enrollment of about 265 students. They
              are taken to satisfy degree requirements in Mechanical Engineering,
              Geomechanics, Physics, and Optics and as electives for some majors in
              Electrical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Mathematics.  The objective
              of this project is to add a Mathematica Computational Laboratory to all of
              these courses. This laboratory can also be used in the Mechanical Systems
              course and other traditional engineering courses that feature a strong
              mathematical component. The numerical and graphical capabilities in Mathematica
              allow for the weekly assigning of more interesting problems and more realistic
              term projects. The symbolic capabilities of Mathematica allow extensions of
              traditional analytical techniques. The notebook interface makes it possible to
              supply each group of students with material of exactly the right level.
              Beginning students can simply execute notebooks with various parameter choices,
              whereas more advanced students can be asked to extend the given notebooks to
              handle more complex problems.   This Mathematica Laboratory can be used by
              several hundred students a year. These students can gain greater insight into
              the use of mathematics in visualizing and analyzing physical processes. The
              students can also acquire skills in Mathematica, a mode of computing now
              essential in science and engineering.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
