Title       : Development of Theme-Based Biology Labs Using Computer- Assisted Lab Experiments
               and the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9650211

Award Number: 9650211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Farmer nfarmer@emhl.otc.cc.mo.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel LaReau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Crocker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ozarks Tech CC
	      P O Box 5958
	      Springfield, MO  658015958    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project introduces a four-module protein theme into the
              Computer-Assisted-Science-Education (CASE) biology lab to improve lab-to-lab
              and course-to-course continuity. Lab modules involve experimentation,
              computerized analysis of results, and linking of results to material on the
              World Wide Web and elsewhere on the Internet. Module themes are reinforced by
              concept review kiosks in the classroom corridors and by computer-controlled
              multimedia material in the classroom.   To update the CASE lab, the project
              involves acquiring Macintosh Power PC computers and Logal instrument Interface
              bundles and networking the computers to a server and to the Internet. Lab
              instructions are produced as HyperText Markup Language documents located on the
              server. Also located on the server are a commercial networkable database,
              statistical analysis package, and a multi-user version of HyperCard.   The
              kiosks house computers with continuously running HyperCard stacks that provide
              spoken pronunciation of terms, definitions, and illustrations where useful. The
              programs can be manipulated through touch screen controls. Identical programs
              are available to students in the Learning Resource Center (LRC). Kiosk and LRC
              computers can be networked to the CASE lab for ease of maintenance and
              updating.   Mobile stand-alone computer carts with multimedia control devices
              enable instructors to refer to the lab modules while in the classroom and also
              to reinforce the protein themes through use of laser discs, videocassettes, and
              CD-ROMs .                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
