Title       : Microbial Diversity and Molecular Identification: Reconfiguring the Microbiology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9650036

Award Number: 9650036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20362              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Lobo alobo@acad.ursinus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ursinus College
	      Office of the Treasurer
	      Collegeville, PA  19426    215/489-4111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is revitalizing the teaching of microbiology by implementing two
              novel approaches at the undergraduate liberal arts college level. The aim is to
              make connections between original questions in organismal and environmental
              biology, and the new molecular techniques that may be used to answer them.  
              First, the microbiology laboratory course is being reconfigured to focus on
              enrichment, isolation, and culturing of metabolically and physiologically
              diverse microorganisms. This approach is motivated by the declining
              appreciation of microbial diversity by students who will be the scientists of
              tomorrow. The project seeks to familiarize students with methods to grow and
              handle strict anaerobes, phototrophs, thermophiles, and others. At the same
              time, training in techniques with which all microbiologists must be familiar,
              such as aseptic technique, quantitation of microbes, and isolation techniques,
              will be incorporated.   Second, Microbiology is being linked to our Molecular
              Biology course through the use of molecular methods to identify microbial
              isolates. According to various estimates, perhaps less than 1 percent of
              bacterial species have been cultured in the laboratory; hence, microbiologists
              today are turning to other means for identifying microorganisms. The project
              introduces students to methods for amplifying ribosomal RNA genes by the
              polymerase chain reaction, cloning the amplified fragments, and sequencing the
              cloned fragments using thermal cyclers. With their sequence data, students can
              search databases, including a ribosomal RNA database, in order to identify
              isolates from Microbiology or organisms from enrichments or other samples.  
              There is expected to be an increased interest in independent research by the
              students on the basic biology of "difficult" microorganisms. This expectation
              is based not only on the availability of equipment to study them, but also on a
              heretofore undeveloped appreciation of their significance.
