Title       : A DNA Diagnostics Facility for Undergraduate Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9650920

Award Number: 9650920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Carson carsonm@snycorva.cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               DNA diagnostics are taught in the context of many fields within the Biology
              Program, but reinforcement in the laboratory has lagged. The major goal of this
              project is to incorporate into Cell Biology and Genetics a cohesive series of
              DNA analysis laboratories. Together, these courses serve 150 biology majors in
              the liberal arts or secondary science education each year. The laboratories
              being developed demonstrate the utility of DNA as a molecular marker, provide
              our students with earlier and more individual hands-on experience in a variety
              of techniques, and relate to interesting issues in human disease. A new
              facility is being established with six stations to do DNA restriction
              endonuclease mapping, a thermal cycler to amplify DNA by PCR, a freezer, two
              microcentrifuges, and a photographic recording system for gels. A novel feature
              is the establishment of a network of three personal computers for data
              acquisition and analysis. Students access and discuss human genetic disease
              information found on CancerNet and OMIN on the Internet.   With its focus on
              human genetic diseases, the material in the new series of laboratories may be
              more relevant and especially useful to secondary science education majors as a
              classroom resource. Supplemental use of the facility can be arranged for select
              laboratories in electives, for student research, and for a laboratory component
              added to a nonmajors course in Human Genetics.    One way in which information
              in the facility can be disseminated is through the Internet World Wide Web page
              set up for the students, the teacher graduates, and other local area teachers,
              to whom the depatment can provide occasional workshops.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
