Title       : Acquisition of a Fourier-Transform IR Spectrometer to Enhance Undergraduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9650908

Award Number: 9650908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar E. Gooch gooche@numen.elon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Elon University
	      100 Campus Drive
	      Elon, NC  272442010    336/278-6603

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               For a number of years dispersive infrared (IR) spectroscopy at this college has
              been done only by a small number of chemistry and biology majors. Students
              majoring in other disciplines have had no contact with the instrumental
              technique. The experiments performed were inefficient and limited in scope, and
              there was no provision for the rapid analysis of many samples in large
              instructional laboratories.   This project provides a Fourier-transform
              infrared (FTIR) spectrometer with 0.5-cm resolution and attenuated total
              reflectance accessory. This modern instrument can have a dramatic impact on the
              program. It makes possible the rapid analysis of many samples in large
              instructional labs. This enables many more students to use the instrument,
              including majors in the new environmental studies program and liberal arts
              majors in first-year chemistry courses. This project targets primarily freshman
              and sophomore students. To a smaller extent, the project benefits juniors and
              seniors, some undergraduates doing research, and selected high school students
              interested in the sciences.   An FTIR enriches the undergraduate experience,
              attracts current and prospective students to careers in science, and enhances
              the career marketability for graduates in the sciences. It enables faculty to
              develop new experiments in instructional labs which had not been possible
              because of the poor resolution and low sensitivity of dispersive IRs.   The
              success of the project can be measured by the increased number of students
              using IR, the production of new experiments and lab manuals in lower-division
              chemistry courses, and the number of undergraduate research publications and
              presentations based on projects using FTIR.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
