Title       : Computerized Data Acquisition for the Physiology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9650435

Award Number: 9650435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17249              (Estimated)
Investigator: George B. Delahunty GDELAHUN@GOUCHER.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Goucher College
	      
	      Towson, MD  21204    301/337-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project strengthens an experimental approach to physiology. Previously,
              the physiology laboratory has employed equipment and experimental approaches
              generally developed in the 1960's. Given the computer literacy of today's
              students and the advances in modern instrumentation, the use of chart recorders
              and manual calculations for data analysis is both simplistic and outdated. With
              these approaches, an opportunity to generate student interest in science is
              lost, and students graduate without being properly prepared to function in a
              modern research laboratory.   To correct this problem, the department is
              purchasing the MacLab Physiology Recording System from ADInstruments and the
              MacIntosh computers needed to support the instrumentation. This
              computer-interfaced instrumentation, with modern data acquisition and analysis
              programs, provides a new set of teaching tools for animal and human physiology
              experiments in introductory and upper-level biology courses. The MacLab
              instrumentation provides the ability to capture data in real-time and quickly
              analyze the results through menu driven software. The immediate feedback
              provided by the software enables students to draw conclusions about their work
              and to ask new questions. Students can then redesign, retest, or extend their
              experiments during the same laboratory period. This approach should reinforce
              the idea that investigative work is truly an iterative process and provide an
              increased degree of student ownership of the experimental work. In addition,
              the ability to store and retrieve data provides for some new ways of conducting
              laboratory practicals for the students. The new instrumentation also enables
              the department to conduct new experiments in respiratory physiology and to
              expand its ability to study exercise physiology.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
