Title       : A Novel Hands-On Approach to Teaching Undergraduate Immunology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9650162

Award Number: 9650162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Walker tmwalker@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project facilitates the development and implementation of an
              upper-division immunology course (Basic and Applied Immunology). This course
              fills several existing gaps in the biology curriculum and may help retain
              students in the Biology Department. By applying the newly acquired animal
              housing materials, biosafety cabinets, CO2 incubators, pipetting equipment,
              refrigerated tabletop centrifuge, X-irradiation cabinet, microplate washer, and
              data-acquisition software into the new teaching approach, students are able to
              learn traditional immunochemistry, in addition to contemporary humoral,
              cellular, and molecular immunology, through an innovative hands-on learning
              process.    The new equipment is being used in conjunction with on-hand
              immunology laboratory equipment. After sufficient instruction and training,
              students use the equipment to design and perform experiments. During this
              process, they learn aseptic technique, gain familiarity with recent
              technologies, and apply statistical analyses to their data. This approach is an
              improvement to conventional, passive approaches that require students to
              perform only limited steps in predesigned experiments. Furthermore, the
              instructor for the laboratory functions as an educator rather than as a
              technician.    This approach empowers students in the classroom, develops
              critical thinking and scientific writing skills, teaches students contemporary
              immunology techniques and equipment applications using a relevant disease
              model, fosters collaboration and interaction among students, promotes
              communication skills and dissemination of student work, and facilitates student
              networking with other immunologists. Equipment used in this project can also be
              used in undergraduate immunology research and by other courses in biology and
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
