Title       : Development of Design Facilities to Facilitate Curriculum Revision of the
               Engineering Design Graphics Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9351186

Award Number: 9351186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Krueger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, engineering programs have developed courses                   
              that teach sketching and computer applications to design as                    
              separate concepts. The next step is needed in the development                  
              of these programs - that of integrating the sketching and                      
              computer aided design into a unified course with clearly                       
              defined purposes and goals. Courses are still taught by using                  
              the manual drafting lab for half of the course and using a                     
              computer laboratory for computer experience. The time has                      
              arrived to admit that the computer is the design tool of the                   
              present. There is a need to teach sketching skills that                        
              encourage problem solving and planning and then using the                      
              computer for the practical computer applications of design and                 
              analysis. It is essential to integrate the sketching process                   
              into the instruction of computer aided design. This method of                  
              instruction will enhance the correlation between sketching and                 
              the computer. The complete integration of the computer in the                  
              first course of the design sequence will accelerate the                        
              students' progress toward its applications in the areas of                     
              solid modeling, finite element analysis, computer aided                        
              manufacturing, computer integrated manufacturing, and computer                 
              numerical control. The concept of solid modeling and how it                    
              relates to the field of manufacturing has become an important                  
              issue and must be addressed. This issue will be addressed and                  
              the development of curriculum materials will be enhanced with                  
              the equipment requested in this proposal.
