Title       : Instrumentation And Laboratory Improvement For Undergraduate Environmental
               Analytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9351422

Award Number: 9351422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Gray   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Francois Gaillard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this ILI project is to develop a two semester                       
              undergraduate course in Environmental Analytical Chemistry                     
              covering both inorganic and organic analysis. The course will                  
              provide students with the analytical skills to make precise and                
              accurate measurements on environmental samples using state-of-                 
              the-art instrumentation. In addition, this endeavor seeks to                   
              achieve the following objectives: 1) demonstrate and reinforce                 
              principles taught in the general curricula of geological sci-                  
              ences and environmental engineering; 2) improve integration of                 
              science and engineering cultures. Methodology will be taught                   
              with careful attention paid to common analytical problems. This                
              course, however, will not focus solely on teaching specific                    
              techniques, but instead will seek to illustrate the critical                   
              relationship between analysis and elucidation of process                       
              dynamics. Moreover, special emphasis will be placed on                         
              interpretation of results and critical reasoning.  The                         
              equipment purchased with this grant will be used in combination                
              with instruments on hand to perform trace inorganic and organic                
              analysis, quantify and characterize natural organic material                   
              and compare techniques of pollutant analysis in water, sediment                
              and soil samples. It is hoped that this project will spark                     
              student interest in environmental research and in the pursuit                  
              of advanced degrees. The development of this laboratory course                 
              and facility is consistent with the educational mission of UND,                
              the federal mandate of environmental education and the future                  
              needs of our society.
