Title       : Innovative Use Of Digital Video Technology In Instructional Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1993     
File        : a9351104

Award Number: 9351104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56977              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Idoine Idoine @ Kenyon. Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas B. Greenslade  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Schumacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Digital Imaging is an emerging discipline with widespread                      
              applications in science and engineering.  We are introducing                   
              digital image acquisition and processing as standard techniques                
              throughout our laboratory curriculum.  Recent advances in                      
              digital video and in the power of microcomputers have made                     
              imaging technology a powerful and cost-effective new tool for                  
              data acquisition and analysis in undergraduate physics                         
              laboratories. Inexpensive systems are now available which can                  
              capture full-motion digital video directly to computer disk at                 
              live video rates.  We are using these systems to improve                       
              laboratory instruction in our introductory, modern physics, and                
              advanced laboratories.  Each laboratory station is being                       
              networked and equipped with a television camera, video                         
              acquisition hardware, and a computer capable of processing and                 
              displaying video images. In the introductory laboratory these                  
              systems are being used to study motion, wave phenomena and                     
              optical diffraction and interference.  Live video is especially                
              well suited for the quantitative motion studies since it is                    
              capable of capturing and quantifying a wide variety of                         
              phenomena without the construction of special apparatus.  With                 
              video, motion is recorded far more completely than is possible                 
              with photogates even when trajectories cannot be predicted.                    
              For advanced laboratories we have purchased an instructional                   
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and a powder camera and                    
              develop experiments using digital image processing techniques                  
              to compare images of atomic structures (ATM) with electron and                 
              x-ray diffraction patterns. Standardization of imaging hardware                
              and software across our curriculum allows students to build                    
              skills efficiently, preparing them for research with four                      
              faculty members who use digital imaging techniques.  We make                   
              full-motion and still frame images and curricular materials                    
              available to others by maintaining a listserver and supporting                 
              anonymous file transfers (FTP) via the Internet.
