Title       : Metabolic System for Physiology Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9351271

Award Number: 9351271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond B. Huey hueyrb@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Kenagy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              In recent years physiologists in the Department of Zoology have                
              made a major effort to incorporate computerized data                           
              acquisition as a regular component of our undergraduate                        
              laboratory courses. Our long-term goal is to customize data                    
              acquisition so that students can quickly get down to the                       
              business of doing physiology rather than wasting time and                      
              energy struggling with antiquated equipment. Student enthusiasm                
              has been so exceptional that we are encouraged to continue to                  
              modernize undergraduate (primarily major) courses in laboratory                
              physiology and in physiological ecology. A computerized "turn-                 
              key" system is being used to measure the metabolic rates of                    
              both aerial and aquatic animals, with capacities to measure                    
              small ectotherms such as insects. Metabolism is a basic                        
              physiological focus that is relevant to diverse aspects of                     
              biology. The facility is being used primarily by students doing                
              original research projects (e.g., "cost" of locomotion in                      
              insects, metabolic consequences of acid rain on plankton) in                   
              the laboratory sections of our physiology courses. The system                  
              is superbly suited for a student laboratory setting. Moreover,                 
              it is remarkably flexible and can measure and analyze the                      
              instantaneous metabolic rate of animals ranging in size from                   
              individual Drosophila or Daphnia to humans. The equipment used                 
              consists of a sensitive C02 analyzer, a compatible O2 analyzer,                
              dissolved O2 meter and oxygen electrode, respiration cell,                     
              mass-flow meter, A:D board, computer, as well as data-                         
              acquisition and analysis software. Students using this                         
              sophisticated but user-friendly system are able to explore                     
              physiological problems (and organisms) previously inaccessible                 
              to them and indeed even to most professional physiologists.                    
              This system is not only enhancing the physiological training of                
              students, but also encouraging them to consider a research                     
              career in physiology.
