Title       : Undergraduate Astronomical Imaging Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9351887

Award Number: 9351887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24697              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Quigley rquigley@Physics.WWU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9351887  Quigley  The aim of this project is to develop an undergraduate 
              astronomical imaging laboratory. This laboratory enables  physics majors during
              their junior year to acquire the know-  ledge, skills, and experience needed to
              undertake astronomy  research projects during the following year.  To
              accomplish this goal, the department is purchasing a CCD   charge-coupled
              device  camera and controller system, three Sun  SPARCstation computers, and
              associated peripheral equipment.  The CCD imaging system enables students to
              carry out both  laboratory imaging experiments and actual star-field imaging 
              using the department's Celestron-8 telescopes. The Sun  workstation allows
              students to carry out detailed analysis of  CCD images and NASA satellite
              telescope spectra of astronomical  objects. IRAF, the powerful astronomy image
              analysis software  package used by professional astronomers throughout the
              world,  is the primary tool used for data analysis. The Sun  workstations are
              networked and connected to Internet so that  data can be routinely retrieved
              from NASA centers and on-line  astronomy data services. Students also are able
              to transfer  data to and from observatories and other universities that they 
              may work at during the summer after their junior year.  This project is
              significant because it enables undergraduate  physics majors to become actively
              engaged in astronomy  research. Students also become "plugged in" to the modern
               astronomical community by becoming users of NASA's  Astrophysical Data System
              and other astronomy data archives and  services that are available over
              Internet. It enables Western  to offer a solid Astronomy Concentration within
              the Physics  B.S. degree, a concentration that gives students a good idea of 
              what to expect if they go on to graduate school or other  professional work in
              astronomy.  ***
