Title       : Enhancing Calculus Instruction Through The Use Of TechnologyIn Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9351478

Award Number: 9351478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda H. Boyd LBOYD @ DEKALB.DC.PEACHNET.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Perimeter College
	      3251 Pantherville Rd
	      Decatur, GA  300343897    404/297-9522

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Increasing the number of students, particularly the under-                     
              represented groups of non-white and female students, who major                 
              in mathematics and science is essential to the economic well-                  
              being of our country; and success in calculus is essential to                  
              majoring in mathematics and science. Engaging students in                      
              calculus courses when they work in small groups, explore                       
              mathematics with the use of technology, and produce a final                    
              product of which they can be proud is attracting many students                 
              who have not previously been attracted to mathematics or                       
              science. DeKalb College has a student population that is 29%                   
              non-white, and female students outnumber male students in a                    
              ratio of three to two. To provide calculus courses which open                  
              the door to the year 2000 and beyond for these and other two-                  
              year college students, this project is incorporating                           
              technology-based laboratories in DeKalb's calculus courses.                    
              These laboratories are actively engaging students in doing                     
              mathematics, and constructing coherent written arguments to                    
              support their laboratory findings is help these students form                  
              and understand important underlying mathematical concepts.                     
              Another advantage to two-year college students of technology-                  
              based laboratories is that it forces them to become members of                 
              laboratory groups, to meet outside of class, and to become                     
              familiar with available technology. Most students who attend                   
              residential colleges have these experiences, while students                    
              commuting to college and working part-time usually study alone                 
              and away from the campus. To accomplish the goal of providing                  
              technology-based laboratories in calculus courses, the project                 
              is providing four computer laboratories. DeKalb College is                     
              supporting workshops for faculty to select and modify                          
              laboratory materials and to train the faculty in the use of                    
              Mathematica. Local high school teachers of AP calculus and an                  
              advisory team of faculty from sister senior institutions is                    
              involved in the workshops. This provides valuable bridges for                  
              our college and its students as they progress from high school,                
              to two-year college, to other colleges and universities.
