Title       : Video On The Computer: A Microcomputer-based Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9351677

Award Number: 9351677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44082              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Daryl Pedigo dpedigo@ccwf.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin Community College
	      5930 Middle Fiskville Road
	      Austin, TX  78752    512/223-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will demonstrate the use of video lab exercises as                
              part of a complete program of microcomputer-based laboratory                   
              physics instruction. Recent technological developments which                   
              allow live video to be captured directly on standard computer                  
              memory will be exploited to eliminate the need for laser video                 
              discs. This should prove to be a very cost-effective method for                
              creating and storing new physics video experiments. A Local                    
              Area Network composed of twelve Macintosh IIvx student                         
              workstations and two Macintosh Quadra video capture stations                   
              will be assembled. Each workstation will be interfaced with                    
              appropriate sensors and probes, allowing data acquisition and                  
              analysis as well as video playback and editing. Students will                  
              perform selected video experiments in addition to more standard                
              laboratory work. Physics and pre-Engineering students will                     
              design, shoot and analyze their own video lab experiments.                     
              Students in all courses will produce electronic lab reports--                  
              audio/video clips stored in computer memory together with text                 
              and graphics detailing their analyses. Along with their video                  
              work, students will employ spreadsheets in analyzing data from                 
              experiments modelled on those developed under previous NSF- and                
              FIPSE-sponsored work -- notably Workshop Physics and Tools for                 
              Scientific Thinking. The focus will be on active involvement of                
              students and conceptual development based on hands-on                          
              experience.
