Title       : Eastern Kentucky University Mathematica Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9351052

Award Number: 9351052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Bland matbland@eku.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Metcalf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Buskirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Augustine K. Maison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amy C. King  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Charles H. Franke  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Eastern Kentucky Univ
	      Division of Sponsored Programs
	      Richmond, KY  40475    606/622-3636

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351052  Bland       The mathematics faculty at Eastern Kentucky University is
              using  the software package Mathematica for teaching calculus, linear  algebra,
              and differential equations. This is being accomplished  through non-traditional
              instruction which is taking place in a  technology classroom. The emphasis of
              the program is on having  students explore problems of such computational
              complexity that  they will have to use Mathematica to analyze and solve the 
              problems. This is leading to good problem solving skills and to  a deeper
              understanding of important principles in mathematics.  In the technology
              classroom students are being placed in an  environment where they are required
              to use approximation  procedures, graphical analysis, and data analysis in
              order to  solve problems. Computing is being used as a tool for  experimental
              problem solving as opposed to the usual deductive  and theoretical approach
              most often found in the traditional  classroom setting. Students are required
              to submit written  reports on their technology classroom projects. Student 
              understanding is being enhanced since they are required to  write a clear and
              concise explanation of their  results.Mathematica materials are being developed
              for use in  teaching these courses. The faculty is building on Mathematica 
              materials developed at other institutions under NSF grants as  well as
              developing new materials. New Mathematica materials  developed are being made
              available to the mathematical  community upon request.  ***
