Title       : Computers Interacting with the Real World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9351513

Award Number: 9351513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria L. Gini gini@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              We propose to create a Laboratory for Undergraduates in                        
              Computer Science where students will be exposed to programming                 
              issues in a variety of real world problems. The Laboratory will                
              give students a basic understanding of real time programming,                  
              distributed systems, communication, simulation, and graphics by                
              exposing the students to applications in robotics, computer                    
              vision, and 3D modeling. Students will gain leadership skills                  
              and experience with project teams by going beyond textbook                     
              exercises in areas such as computer hardware, interfaces,                      
              distributed systems, communication, and real-time control. The                 
              Laboratory will be used both for independent projects for                      
              undergraduates and for assignments in specific courses, from                   
              the sophomore year through the senior year, including senior                   
              and honors projects. The Laboratory will have a major impact on                
              the quality of Computer Science education by giving students                   
              access to state of the art equipment they would not otherwise                  
              see until they find employment. As has happened with recent                    
              improvements in our curriculum, this Lab will have a major                     
              impact in higher education throughout the State of Minnesota.                  
              We envision this Laboratory as a collection of reconfigurable                  
              workcells, each equipped with cameras, manipulators, and other                 
              specialized devices, where students can conduct a large variety                
              of experiments. Equipment will be standardized to simplify the                 
              reconfiguration of the workcells and for ease of maintenance.                  
              We will acquire off-the-shelf equipment that can be used in                    
              different combinations for a large collection of projects. This                
              will increase the flexibility in the use of the Lab and will                   
              easily accommodate student initiated projects.
