Title       : An Affordable CCD Camera System for Introductory Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9351999

Award Number: 9351999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20600              (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Wilkinson dtw@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              The introductory physics laboratory is the first opportunity                   
              for most college students to experience the basic elements of                  
              experimental science.  It is important that the experience be                  
              a positive and rewarding one.  Although most of our current                    
              experiments are interesting, and can teach important concepts,                 
              students frequently get bogged down in lengthy sessions of data                
              taking and manipulation, activities which they correctly regard                
              as "archaic" and "boring."  This project (part of a 3-year                     
              effort by the Physics department to improve the teaching and                   
              equipment in introductory laboratories) seeks to introduce CCD                 
              cameras and 486-based PC computers into the lab, starting with                 
              four experiments from the fall semester. (1) Projectile Motion.                
              Students get a strobed image of a bouncing superball, showing                  
              that the trajectory is a parabola and that the x and y motions                 
              are constant speed and constant acceleration, respectively.                    
              The CCD camera and PC make the (otherwise laborious) data                      
              reduction fast and fun. (2) Two Dimensional Collisions.  Pucks                 
              collide on an air table and strobed pictures are analyzed to                   
              investigate conservation of linear momentum.  Currently,                       
              students spend 1 to 2 hours getting a picture (Polaroid) and                   
              analyzing the data.  A CCD/PC system gets a picture in seconds                 
              and offers a number of optional studies to the student --                      
              elastic vs. inelastic, energy conservation, center of mass                     
              motion, varying mass.  (3) Kinetic Motion (a new experiment).                  
              A 2-dimensional "gas" of pucks on an air table is excited by                   
              shaking walls.  Students can measure the mean free path or                     
              speed distribution.  (4) An optional experiment measures the                   
              motions of Jupiter's moons.  The goal of this proposal is to                   
              begin to move the introductory lab away from step-by-step                      
              procedures which lead to an encircled number, toward a lab                     
              where students, using modern sensors and computers, can have                   
              options to explore concepts and try their own ideas.  The                      
              project is made feasible by the low costs of highly capable CCD                
              camera systems and 486-based personal computers.
