Title       : Undergraduate Experiments In Polymer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9351527

Award Number: 9351527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62787              (Estimated)
Investigator: Davide A. Hill Davide.A.Hill.l@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the formation of an undergraduate polymer                
              laboratory course. The instruments acquired are used in an                     
              existing undergraduate laboratory course, for additional                       
              experiments. The two instruments are:  a Size Exclusion                        
              Chromatography unit to determine polymer molecular weight                      
              distribution; and a Torsional Rheometer to characterize the                    
              rheological behavior of the material. The project also involves                
              the construction of controlled-environment glove boxes to run                  
              polymer synthesis reactions. Students are guided through the                   
              three basic stages of synthesis, characterization, and                         
              fabrication. Several groups are formed, each with the                          
              responsibility of producing and characterizing a sample of                     
              given molecular weight.  The characterization involves                         
              measurement of the polymer's molecular weight distribution and                 
              its moments, study of the thermo-rheological behavior of the                   
              material, and establishment of a correlation between the two.                  
              Samples from different groups are blended to achieve                           
              predetermined characteristics and finally processed in model                   
              operations such as extrusion, molding, or spin coating.  By                    
              being allowed to experiment with the above instruments, the                    
              students develop a natural feeling for cause-and-effect                        
              relations associated with material properties. The instruments                 
              have been selected to minimize operator-training times, while                  
              achieving a most favorable compromise in terms of versatility,                 
              sophistication, and cost.
