Title       : A Prototype Computer-Aided Meteorological Analysis Workstation for Undergraduate
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9351904

Award Number: 9351904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Merrill robertm@ssecmail.ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Tripoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351904  Merrill  "Meteorological analysis" is the process of estimating the
              four-  dimensional distribution of temperature, pressure, humidity, and 
              velocity in the atmosphere from irregularly spaced measurements.   Objective
              computer methods which produce gridded fields are  available, but educators
              agree that the underlying principles are  best learned by drawing "weather
              maps" of isopleths of the above  variables.  Manual methods are also used in
              both research and  prediction when the highest quality analyses are needed. 
              The  necessary visualization, reasoning, and graphical abilities are  learned
              in a series of two or more undergraduate courses.  There are three main
              drawbacks to manual analyses: 1) teaching and  applying it is very time
              consuming, 2) quantitative physical  constraints (such as balance between the
              pressure force and the  wind) are difficult to incorporate, and 3) the
              resulting analyses  (maps) are not readily usable for subsequent calculations
              of  physical processes, which typically require values on a grid for  finite
              differences.  We are developing a Computer-Aided Meteorological Analysis (CAMA)
               laboratory which will overcome these limitations while retaining  the
              advantages of manual analysis.  Analysis students are able to  draw isopleths
              on a pen tablet attached to the CAMA workstation and  have them immediately
              recast as a gridded field. The workstations  provide immediate feedback about
              the accuracy and consistency of  their work, allowing the instructor to spend
              more time on  interpretation and less on mechanics.  CAMA also links the
              existing  analysis curriculum directly with theoretical meteorology by 
              allowing students to diagnose dynamic processes directly from their  analyses. 
              CAMA also is finding immediate applications in research  and eventually in
              weather forecasting as well, and has wider  application wherever analyses of
              state variables of fluids must be  made.
