Title       : Group Discovery and Communications: A Computer Lab Approachto Lower Division
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9351502

Award Number: 9351502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tina H. Straley                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joaquin O. Carbonara carbonjo@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project is based on the premise that mathematical                         
              knowledge is acquired through research, synthesis, practice and                
              teaching. To effectively implement this belief, the mathematics                
              department at Buffalo State College is creating a computer                     
              based Math Lab where faculty and student groups can do                         
              mathematics. We are assigning team "discovery" projects which                  
              complement the coursework, emphasizing the written and oral                    
              presentation of these projects. This project is impacting a                    
              large number of mathematics/secondary education majors in                      
              addition to other students taking these mathematics courses.                   
              Laboratories are being designed with the NCTM Curriculum and                   
              Evaluation Standards in mind.  These future teachers are                       
              learning mathematics as it is hoped they will later                            
              teach.Students and professors also use computers to do                         
              classroom demonstrations, which will be made available to                      
              students to view on their own in the lab. Finally, the lab is                  
              serving as a tutorial center conducted in part by the young and                
              enthusiastic members of the math club, which is an active part                 
              of our math department.The laboratory consists of 20 Macintosh                 
              IIci computers, one laser postscript printer, and a powerbook                  
              with an overhead projector interface. The primary software                     
              packages are Mathematica, APL, and TEX. The courseware Matrix                  
              Algebra and Tarski's World are also used.They are making a                     
              substantive addition to their core courses by giving students                  
              "field" experience in a computer lab setting. Students are                     
              being actively involved in learning, and have the opportunity                  
              to explore new concepts, to collect and synthesize data                        
              obtained in the Math Lab, and then formalize and present their                 
              discoveries to the class.
