Title       : Incorporation of Flow Visualization, Computational Fluid Dynamics and Data
               Acquisition into Laboratory Instruction & Classroom Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9351608

Award Number: 9351608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel E. Bormann ext. 3528  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gonzaga University
	      502 East Boone Avenue
	      Spokane, WA  992580087    509/323-6102

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Civil Engineering program at Gonzaga University includes a                 
              laboratory course that provides instruction in fluid mechanics,                
              hydrology, hydraulics and environmental engineering. This                      
              course will be made more effective by introducing new equipment                
              that allows students to perform activities which combine                       
              "seeing" by using flow visualization, "doing" by using data                    
              acquisition systems (DAS) in flow models or field measurement                  
              exercises and "thinking" by using computational fluid dynamics                 
              (CFD) analysis to simulate flow. This same equipment will be                   
              used to perform in-class activities that will make the                         
              instruction more vivid in the fluid mechanics course. The new                  
              equipment will allow velocity and turbulence to be measured                    
              easily. Video cameras will be used by student during                           
              demonstrations to provide a record of the work and to increase                 
              student interest and participation.                                            
              In elective CE courses, flow model equipment will be used to                   
              clarify the complex behavior in alluvial channel hydraulics.                   
              Students will be able to measure the scour at differently                      
              shaped piers at various velocities. In another course, water                   
              quality (WQ) sensors will be used to collect data from local                   
              streams and lakes using the PC-based DAS. Students will benefit                
              from making WQ calculations using "real" WQ data collected in                  
              these local water bodies.                                                      
              This equipment will also accommodate inter-disciplinary use by                 
              students in the Mathematics and Computer Science (MCS)                         
              Department who will use the equipment as an illustration of a                  
              physical process that can be simulated by sophisticated                        
              numerical models. Results from the CFD software can be directly                
              compared to the physical flow situation. The CFD software can                  
              also be used to support senior projects for CE, ME and MCS                     
              students.
