Title       : Workstations for the Undergraduate Physiology of Exercise Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9351841

Award Number: 9351841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred W. Kolkhorst   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Forrest A. Dolgener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351841  Kolkhorst   The acquisition and unique configuration of modern 
              instructional equipment will expand and strengthen the  students' experience in
              the undergraduate physiology of  exercise laboratory at the University of
              Northern Iowa  resulting in a higher order of understanding of basic human 
              physiological principles. The design of this proposal is two-  fold: a) to
              promote active learning by the students through  individualized and small group
              investigation and b) to provide  instrumentation enabling students to study
              several fundamental  exercise physiology principles that cannot be investigated
              with  the current equipment. The primary instruments in this request,  a
              metabolic measurement system with several available options,  and five
              networked personal computer work stations, will  facilitate more active
              learning by students as compared to  traditional presentations in exercise
              physiology laboratories.  The configuration of the peripheral work stations
              will provide  for a "hands-on" approach to understanding exercise physiology 
              by allowing for the observation and investigation of laboratory  problems by an
              individual or small groups of students either in  scheduled laboratories or
              out-of-class projects. Also, the  metabolic measurement system will provide
              experiences for our  students not normally examined in an undergraduate
              laboratory  but integral to the study of exercise physiology. Specifically, 
              students will be able to test the effects of exercise on  myocardial function
              and arterial oxygen saturation as well as  investigate real-time changes in
              energy metabolism as exercise  intensity is varied. Furthermore, sensitivity
              and precision of  metabolic measurements will be improved from the present 
              system. The enhancements in the laboratory will foster a direct 
              problem-solving approach to the learning process and be  reflected in the
              students' increased comprehension of  scientific principles, concepts, and
              methods.  ***
