Title       : Leadership In Laboratory Development For Visual Reasoning InEngineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9351994

Award Number: 9351994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75328              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yong Se Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Pleck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Woodley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop an innovative instructional software                 
              system which will increase visual reasoning capabilities of                    
              engineering students. We will provide a learning system with                   
              which a student can develop visualizing and spatial reasoning                  
              capabilities in a self-paced series of exercises. Specifically,                
              we will take the missing view problem which forms the                          
              foundation for all visual reasoning processes. This problem                    
              requires both visual analysis and visual synthesis, and has                    
              been identified as the one for which students show immense                     
              diversity in their solving capabilities. We will draw from                     
              solid modeling and artificial intelligence technology and the                  
              power of interactive computer graphics to implement such an                    
              instructional system. The system will capture and critique the                 
              reasoning steps of each student. The system will select a                      
              suitable level of difficulty based on perceived capability of                  
              the student in solving previous problems so that a suitable                    
              path of exercises can be provided for each student. The system                 
              will provide a discovery-oriented learning environment where                   
              the students develop visual reasoning skills from their own                    
              accumulated experiences guided by the system.                                  
              The software system will be tested and evaluated in the                        
              laboratory curriculum of Engineering Graphics and Design course                
              at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. This is a                   
              required course of most disciplines in the College of                          
              Engineering. The software system will then be ported to diverse                
              computing platforms and disseminated to other institutions                     
              nationwide. The project results will also be disseminated by                   
              holding workshops in ASEE meetings.
