Title       : An Imaging Laboratory Curriculum in Earth and Planetary Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9351686

Award Number: 9351686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Wood cwood@badlands.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grady Blount  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Hammen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Gosnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9351686  Blount  Recent advances in computing hardware and software have, for 
              the first time, brought massive numbers of earth and space-  derived data sets
              into the realm of undergraduate instruction.  Affordable storage and
              image-manipulation hardware coupled with  user-friendly analysis software for
              scientific visualization  are the major advances.  In addition, the rapid
              expansion of  regional supercomputing centers and ubiquitous networks have  led
              to computing facility surpluses which now allow  undergraduate students access
              to computing time previously  reserved for graduate and post-graduate
              researchers.  To  address these realities, we are developing an
              interdisciplinary  earth and planetary science teaching curricula centered on 
              coordination between formerly disparate academic departments.   To spearhead
              this effort, we have formed the Earth System  Science Institute (ESSI), which
              includes the departments of  Space Studies, Geography, and Geology.  A
              networked  undergraduate imaging laboratory is being established for  training
              of undergraduate earth and planetary science students  in the emerging fields
              of scientific visualization of  multispatial and multitemporal data sets. 
              Individual graphics  workstations are being networked to a Cray X-MP
              supercomputer.  The coupled hardware system is capable of both acquiring and 
              analyzing a suite of in-situ and space-derived data sets  including the
              high-resolution (1 km) multiband imaging data  sets of the NOAA AVHRR sensors
              acquired by our newly installed  satellite ground station.  The curricula
              includes exercises in  data acquisition, data visualization, scientific
              programming,  information extraction and computer modeling. Undergraduates 
              exposed to these curricula will be well prepared to deal with  the plethora of
              earth and planetary data to be generated as a  part of the International Global
              Change Research Program in the  next decade and beyond.  ***
