Title       : Improving Cell Biology Laboratories and Research Access for Biology Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9351203

Award Number: 9351203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37925              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Cohen cohen@genectr.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9351203  Cohen  The Department of Biological Sciences at Hunter College is 
              seeking to retain more majors and attract them into research-  oriented
              careers. In addition to enhancing students' laboratory  experiences during
              their first year of required major courses,  a two-semester Cell Biology
              sequence, we will facilitate  earlier and more productive entry into
              undergraduate research  by providing a Practical Research Techniques Facility
              in which  undergraduates gain working knowledge of laboratory equipment  and
              procedures. Undergraduates will have their first experience  with research
              techniques under non-intimidating conditions,  prior to entry into a research
              laboratory. The Cell Biology  equipment will provide hands-on experience with
              some of the  most powerful modern research techniques, including  fluorescence
              and video microscopy, gel electrophoresis, and  immunoblotting.  Of the present
              21 laboratory exercises, 14  will be directly improved by the equipment, and
              three new ones  added. A state-of-the-art microscope video camera and image 
              processor will demonstrate modern methods for data capture and  analysis, and,
              coupled with image recording and display  equipment, will markedly improve
              laboratory teaching throughout  the year and will enhance undergraduate
              research. The  Techniques Facility will allow students to overcome the start- 
              up barrier to undergraduate research: lack of practical  experience. By means
              of computer simulations, video tapes, and  tutorials with real instruments, it
              will provide students with  experience using basic lab equipment (centrifuge,
              pH meter,  spectrophotometer, balance), and with the state-of-the-art 
              techniques required for the research lab. Students and their  faculty mentors
              can then spend their time together on the real  science to be done.  ***
