Title       : The Economics in the Antebellum South
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0109165

Award Number: 0109165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Bodenhorn bodenhoh@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A post-Revolutionary relaxation of manumission restrictions in Maryland,
              Virginia and North Carolina brought about a marked increase in the proportion
              of free African Americans in the antebellum Upper South.  While free African
              Americans made up just 2.4 percent of the free population in Maryland in 1790,
              they grew to nearly 14.0 percent of the free population by 1860.  A similar
              increase occurred in Virginia; lesser ones in North Carolina, Tennessee,
              Kentucky and Missouri.  Although historians provide detailed and valuable
              accounts of the social, political, literary, artistic and religious lives of
              these free blacks, the economic status of free blacks remains unclear.  This
              project fills this void.  Using modern economic analysis, this project
              establishes the free African Americans' position on the economic ladder.  It
              first considers the ability of rural free blacks to climb the agricultural
              ladder, from daily farm laborer to renter to eventual farm owner/operator, and
              shows that free blacks made unexpected moves up the ladder.  Although many free
              blacks lived in the country, they were the most urbanized ethnic group in late
              antebellum America, so the second part of the project considers the economic
              status of free African Americans in Baltimore, Richmond, Petersburg, Louisville
              and Nashville.  It compares wealth accumulation and occupational status of
              whites and blacks and shows that while whites typically held better jobs,
              blacks made significant inroads in certain occupations and accumulated
              substantial wealth.  These findings are important because they place current
              racial differences in occupation, income and wealth accumulation in historical
              perspective.

