Title       : Experimental Examination of Factors that Affect Public Information Use by
               Starlings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0109024

Award Number: 0109024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98056              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Valone valone@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer J. Templeton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Understanding the behavior of animals often requires knowledge of how
              individuals make decisions.  This requires understanding the kinds of
              information animals possess about their environment.  The proposed research
              will study decision-making in socially feeding starlings by examining how
              individuals acquire and use information obtained from other foragers. This
              information is known as public information and its existence and use can
              provide an important benefit to individuals in social aggregations. This work
              will test hypotheses regarding factors that affect the use of public
              information and evaluate how individuals combine public information with their
              own personal sampling information to estimate the quality of food patches. 
              There are three potential broader implications of the proposed work.  First,
              public information use appears to be widespread in several different contexts,
              including foraging, mate choice, habitat selection, and sequential assessment
              of opponents.  Thus, a better understanding of how individuals acquire and use
              public information should allows greater understanding of a potentially
              widespread general benefit of sociality.  As such, it may provide insight into
              the evolution and maintenance of a variety of social systems.  Second, this
              study will employ several undergraduate students and target those students from
              groups traditionally under-represented in science early in their academic
              careers.  Early exposure to the process of scientific discovery may encourage
              such students to pursue careers in science.  Third, starlings are agricultural
              pests in many regions of North America.  Insight from this work regarding how
              starlings estimate the quality of food patches, derived from understanding the
              factors that affect the use of public information, have the potential to be
              incorporated into mitigation strategies in agricultural systems.     


