Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Grid Computing for Authentication of Arabic Text
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0109038

Award Number: 0109038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tarek A. El-Ghazawi tarek@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5944,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0109038
Elghazawi

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Tarek El-Ghazawi, Department of Computer Science, George
              Washington University, Washington, DC and Dr. Mohamed F. Tolba, Department of
              Computer and Information Sciences, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.  Dr.
              Nadia Hegazi of the Electronics Research Institute (ERI) in Cairo, Egypt will
              also be involved in the project.  The project deals with two problems
              simultaneously.  One is machine recognition of Arabic handwritten text, and the
              other is utilizing distributed systems to solve problems that normally require
              massive supercomputing facilities.  The goal of the research is to develop a
              grid computing methodology to recognize Arabic handwritten text, using advanced
              techniques based on neural nets and wavelets.  The project will produce results
              in Arabic text recognition, and in grid computing, and will provide the
              necessary computational resources to solve a complex problem. 

Scope: The
              project supports collaboration between two experienced investigators.
              El-Ghazawi has extensive experience with high performance computing which would
              cover the grid computing aspects of the work. The Egyptian scientists have
              experience in various areas, including Arabic text recognition. The involvement
              of the ERI is important because of the technical rescues available at that
              institute.  The success of research will benefit research on other problems
              that are computationally intensive. It also will provide the foundation for
              practical prototypes for Arabic character recognition applications, which is a
              unique problem due to the complexities of the written Arabic language.  The
              project will include exchange of students between the two countries.  The
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
              of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
              Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities.
