Title       : SBIR Phase I: Distributed Sensor Networks for Autonomous Management of Small
               Parts Inventories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0109753

Award Number: 0109753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Garman cgarman@redpointcontrols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Redpoint
	      364 Patteson Drive
	      Morgantown, WV  265050000    304/292-4485

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses an
              automated vendor-managed inventory (VMI) system for distributors of small
              parts.  Small parts inventories introduce several difficulties because of the
              large quantities that are maintained and the multitude of different part types
              that have similar physical appearances.  For such systems, where inventory is
              stored in many racks of bins, it is labor intensive to provide continuous
              accountability for each part.  Distributors are often left with two choices: 
              maintain high inventory levels to avoid short-term surges in demand; or monitor
              levels closely by hand to ensure an adequate supply without unnecessary
              overhead.  Phase I will develop an economical means of providing real-time
              usage statistics for small parts through the use of intelligent electronic
              sensing bins.  Each bin reports the quantity of parts enclosed to a central
              communications module, which in turn compiles a report listing the
              replenishment requirements for each part.  This information is then provided to
              vendors so that they may create a timely order for the customer.

VMI
              technology will find use by suppliers that wish to provide VMI services to a
              large number of small clients.  By avoiding continuous human monitoring and
              intervention, VMI will be applied to small contracts, resulting in savings for
              both parties. This technology is expected to be used in the industrial fastener
              market, which is growing at a rate of 3.7% annually. 

