Title       : Numerical Analysis of Transient Slab-on-Grade Heat Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0109143

Award Number: 0109143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian A. Rock barock@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Numerical Analysis of Transient Slab-on-Grade Heat
              Transfer

Abstract

Building mechanical systems are selected to quickly
              respond to time-varying conditions that occur outside and within buildings.
              Designers of these systems must often balance conflicting needs such as, for
              example, the requirements for improved indoor air quality and reduced energy
              use. But where concerns dictate increased energy use, conservation measures may
              be employed elsewhere to offset that increase. One place in many buildings that
              still has the potential for significant energy savings is their foundations.
              Unfortunately, mechanical systems designers do not have  sufficient models
              readily available to quickly and accurately evaluate building foundation energy
              use. The objectives of this grant are to model heat transfer between modern
              slabs-on-grade and the ground, to evaluate their dynamic behavior, to prepare
              enhanced simplified equations that describe that behavior, and to evaluate
              coefficients for these equations.
To achieve these objectives a dedicated and
              detailed computer code will be written and hour-by-hour weather data will be
              used to predict and observe the transient phenomena.  Via enhanced simplified
              equations and their coefficients found in this project, others can improve
              their building heating and cooling loads and energy-use prediction software. 
              Such tools will then be used by building design engineers to further optimize
              energy use, predict thermal comfort, improve indoor air quality, and increase
              workers productivity.

