Title       : SGER: Distributed Measurements of Temperature, Moisture and Strain for Civil
               Engineering Applications in Subsurgace Using a Fiber Optic Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0109080

Award Number: 0109080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sibel Pamukcu sp01@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Toulouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This SGER project is for the development of a new fiber optic sensor assembly
              for continuous monitoring of temperature, moisture and strain over extended
              subsurface environments, such as road embankments, wall back-fills, and
              landfills.  At present, the cost of fiber optic sensors is prohibitively
              expensive for large-scale applications in such Civil Engineering facilities. 
              The proposed sensor is based on Stimulated Brillouin Scattering (SBS)
              phenomenon to achieve spatially distributed measurements. It meets the
              necessary requirements of subsurface monitoring by measuring selected
              parameters at different locations with only a single fiber, rendering it a
              relatively low cost tool. 

The objectives of this project are to construct a
              prototype SBS sensor system, and evaluate its functions in the laboratory.  The
              system will consist of a sensing element and a signal generator/analyzer. The
              signal generator uses a single laser source that is modulated through an
              electro-optical modulator to generate both pump- and probe- lightwaves.  The
              sensing element will be developed using standard optical fibers. Two bare
              fibers will be used to measure strain and temperature as calibrated to their
              signal variation. For moisture sensing, a third fiber will be coated
              intermittently with a hydrogel material along its length. A semi-rigid and
              permeable composite polymeric fiber braid jacket will be used to encase the
              hydrogel-coated optical fiber.  The jacket will provide protection to the fiber
              as well as a constrained space for the hydrogel. The swelling of the hydrogel
              in a constrained space around the optical fiber is expected to induce axial
              strain on the encapsulated fiber. The magnitude of the axial strain will be
              dependent upon the degree of swelling and, in turn, to the degree of available
              moisture in the surrounding. 

Bench-scale laboratory tests will be conducted
              to test and verify the spatially distributed sensing capability of the SBS
              sensors. The strain sensing experiments will be conducted by using simple
              pulley and weight assemblies. The moisture and temperature sensing will be
              tested using test chambers instrumented with heating elements, thermocouples,
              humidifiers and humidity sensors to control and measure the temperature and
              humidity. In all the experiments, the variation of the sensor signals will be
              mapped to the variation of the actual measurements. The prototype sensors will
              be tested and evaluated for coupling effects of temperature, moisture and
              strain when all three parameters may induce signal variation at the same time.
              The final set of tests will be conducted by embedding the prototype sensors
              into a bench-scale test box filled with layers of soil at different moisture
              contents, representing near real subsurface environments. 

The proposed
              sensor assembly and its methodology is envisioned to significantly advance the
              state-of-art in monitoring of civil infrastructure systems in the subsurface
              with highly precise measurement capability over extended area and depth at a
              relatively low cost.  This project will involve the collaboration of
              investigators with diverse expertise from two institutions.  The graduate
              students will be exposed to multi-discipline subjects and research experience.
              

