Title       : Dissertation Research: Religion and the Politics of Ethnic Identity in Bahia,
               Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0109146

Award Number: 0109146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Liliana R. Goldin goldin@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0109146
Goldin  / Selka
	Brazilians of African descent can choose among
              several religious alternatives to express their faith.  These alternatives
              range from traditional Catholicism to local variants of a global proselytizing
              religion such as Pentecostalism, and include many African-derived religions
              such as Candomble. This project involves the dissertation research of a
              cultural anthropology student from the University at Albany, SUNY, studying the
              relation between religious affiliation and ethnic identity in the state of
              Bahia, Brazil. The research will focus on two sites, the rural town of
              Cachoeira and the nearby capital city of Salvador, to analyze how Brazilians of
              African descent construct their ethnic and religious identities. Using a
              discourse-centered ethnographic approach as well as local surveys, the student
              will focus on twelve religious organizations: two Pentecostal churches,
              Catholic devotional associations, and Candomble centers in each place. Three
              hundred questionnaires will be administered to the twelve organizations and an
              additional 100 will be divided between local communities in the two locations. 
              The data collected will be used to assess general demographic information, the
              ways in which people view and express their identities as Brazilians of African
              descent, and their personal opinions about cultural and racial issues of
              concern to the Afro-Brazilian community. The project will show how cultural
              tourism in Bahia, transnational movements for racial equality (of which
              Brazil's Movimento Negro is one expression), and international religious
              movements like Pentecostalism affect Brazilian's ethnic self-identity and
              perceptions of issues such as racism. The results should advance our
              understanding of Brazilian religious culture and the interaction of race,
              ethnicity and religious identity, as well as contribute to the training of a
              young social scientist and advance our knowledge of this important region of
              the world.
