Title       : Cryptanalytic study of the AES finalist and its variants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0109425

Award Number: 0109425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yvo G. Desmedt desmedt@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) is to become the new encryption standard.
               In contrast with the development of the DES (Data Encryption Standard) and the
              EES (Escrow Encryption Standard), the development process of AES was open.  The
              motivation was that a new scheme would be easily accepted by the community and
              widely used by the government and by industry.  The outdated DES has been used
              extensively to protect industrial secrets, protect financial transactions in
              the billions of dollars, to protect internet security, etc.  It is therefore
              expected that the new AES will also be used in such applications and new ones. 
              After 3 years, a finalist for the AES has recently been chosen.  Seeing the
              critical application of AES an analysis of the security of the AES finalist
              before it becomes a standard is primordial.

After DES was developed,
              scientific research lead to new cryptanalytic techniques (such as Differential
              Cryptanalysis and Linear Cryptanalysis).  These techniques are currently used
              when evaluating new cryptosystems.  The goal of the research on the AES
              finalist is to develop new cryptanalytic techniques that can be used in the
              future to analyze the AES finalist, its variants, and other future
              cryptographic algorithms.  The ultimate goal is to attempt to break the AES
              finalist.  If this goal would be unachievable, the new techniques may
              contribute to the scientific understanding of the design of secure ciphers.

