Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: The effect of home literacy factors
               on English and Spanish linguistic proficiency and pre-literacy skills for
               Spanish-speaking children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0109201

Award Number: 0109201
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Lopez lopezli@gse.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L,Lopez
	      18 Day Street
	      Somerville, MA  02144    305/207-7077

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Literacy development is one of the most important components of a child's
              education.
Both oral language skills and pre-literacy skills are strong
              predictors of young children's future reading ability. The child's home
              experiences are considered the foundation for the development of these skills.
              The purpose of this postdoctoral research and training project is to determine
              a relationship between home literacy factors and the development of language
              and literacy skills in young low income Hispanic children, during two major
              transitional periods. These transitions include moving from home into a
              preschool program followed by moving from preschool into a kindergarten
              classroom. The sample will be divided into clusters based on English and
              Spanish proficiency levels, determined at the beginning of pre-k. Pre-literacy
              skills will be assessed for the entire sample at the beginning and end of pre-k
              as well as once during kindergarten. Home visits to collect information on home
              literacy factors will occur for a subset of the sample during three time
              points. Analyses will be conducted to test the hypotheses that home literacy
              factors shape language proficiency, jointly influencing pre-literacy skills
              between and across languages. Additionally, changes in home literacy practices
              during transition will be investigated.


