Title       : Novel Reactivity, Structures, Properties and Materials Based on Sulfonimides,
               Sulfones and Iodine Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0109377

Award Number: 0109377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl D. DesMarteau fluorin@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Pennington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Darryl D. DesMarteau, III, Department of Chemistry, Clemson University, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for research into sulfonimides, sulfones and iodine
              Compounds. The research capitalizes on the unique properties of
              perfluoroalkylsulfonimides, a class of strong nitrogen acids, to stabilize
              unusual molecular structures and to promote unusual reactivity. The project has
              three main thrusts. First, a new class of zwitterionic diaryl iodonium salts
              containing both the anion and cation directly bound to the aromatic ring will
              be investigated. A variety of these compounds, which have a broad range of
              functionalization on the aromatic rings, will be prepared. These compounds have
              excellent potential for use in photolithography as photoacid generators and may
              aid in extending photolithography for integrated circuit manufacture to shorter
              wavelengths for smaller device geometries. Second, a novel iodonium compound
              that has the ability to selectively place a trifluoroethyl alkyl group onto an
              amino acid in a water solution will be used to prepare new, potentially
              bioactive compounds. Third, sulfonimides will be incorporated into dendrimer
              polymers to give the first examples of perfluorinated dendrimers. Parallel to
              this effort, a new functionalized crosslinking agent for ionene polymers will
              be developed in order to obtain higher molecular weights and decreased
              crystallinity, which will aid these species to form membranes.

The proposed
              research combines fundamental chemical science with applications of importance
              in microelectronics, drug discovery, electrochemistry and catalysis. The
              systems selected for study have potential as polymer electrolytes in fuel cells
              and battery applications, as media in which nanoscale materials can be formed,
              and as polymer based reagents. One objective is the design of new catalysts for
              a number of `acid catalyzed` processes (petroleum refining, for example, often
              uses acidic catalysts). Another is to design ways to introduce fluorine into
              molecules that may have biochemical significance. This combination will provide
              an excellent platform to train undergraduate, graduate and  postdoctoral
              students in basic research in the chemical sciences in technological areas of
              high current interest. 


