Title       : Novel, New Palladium Migration Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0109332

Award Number: 0109332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Larock larock@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Richard C. Larock, of the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State University, is
              studying novel palladium migration chemistry. Intramolecular palladium
              migration from an alkyl group to an arene or from an aryl group to another aryl
              group in biphenyl derivatives, followed by subsequent functionalization, offers
              promise for the synthesis of a variety of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and
              heterocycles. Professor Larock is exploring the generality and scope of these
              novel migration/functionalization processes. Palladium also migrates "through
              space" from a vinylic position to an aryl position, affording access to
              9-alkylidenefluorenes. Additional migration reactions can lead to synthetically
              useful pi-allylpalladium complexes, acylpalladium intermediates, and
              imidoylpalladium species.

Palladium is arguably the single most versatile
              metal employed in modern organic synthesis. A remarkable array of
              organopalladium species have been generated and shown to undergo a multitude of
              synthetically useful processes. This versatility is being broadened still
              further by the work of Professor Richard C. Larock, of the Department of
              Chemistry at Iowa State University. With the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Larock is exploring novel reactions
              in which easily accessible organopalladium species undergo rearrangement
              through migration of the palladium atom to new sites within a molecule. In this
              way, new intermediates are generated, from which may be prepared a variety of
              cyclic organic compounds. By virtue of the unique structures afforded by these
              reaction sequences, new synthetic strategies for the preparation of the complex
              molecules forming the basis of the modern chemical industry are presented.
