Title       : SBIR/STTR Phase I: New Magnetoelastic Force/Corrosion Sensor for Cable-Stays in
               Bridges Using Measurement of Anhysteresis Curve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0109473

Award Number: 0109473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gui-Zhong Qi gzchi@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : InfraTech Inc
	      6 Valleyfield Court
	      Silver Spring, MD  20906    301/598-5101

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              the feasibility of direct measurement of live forces in civil infrastructures
              such as the cables of cable-stayed bridges, using a new magnetoelastic sensor. 
              Knowledge of stress conditions is essential for detection of stress changes due
              to fatigue, overload, or corrosion and thereby, to prolong a structure's
              service life and/or to improve its 
performance.  Knowledge of the stress
              state is also valuable for evaluating the structural integrity of cables during
              and after natural disasters such as earthquakes or severe winds.  These
              measurements should be made rapidly and cost-effectively.  Conventional
              sensors, such as strain gages and accelerometers, do not respond to stress
              directly.  The new magnetoelastic sensor depends on the magnetic properties of
              structural steels in a stressed state.  The sensing circuit is external to the
              steel, simple to install, and sensitive to in-situ stress with an error less
              than 3%.  A magnetic property called the anhysteresis curve is measured.

The
              commercial application of the new magnetoelastic force/corrosion sensor is in
              maintenance and repair of cable-stays in bridge structures and numerous other
              steel and metal-based infrastructural elements.  The end-users include
              infrastructure managers, bridge engineers, and officials of transportation
              authorities of Federal and local governments.

