Title       : NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Modeling Traditional Southwestern
               Water Control Technologies: Flood Water and Seepage Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0109216

Award Number: 0109216
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Dominguez drsdomingz@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S,Dominguez
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    505/248-1168

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Settlement distributions of prehistoric and historic agriculturists in the arid
              to semiarid Southwest have changed often over the past 2500 years.
              Resettlements may result from associated decreases in precipitation, although
              the mechanisms involved are unclear and not all climate changes resulted in
              resettlement. Determination of the causes of resettlements will require
              clarification of relationships between precipitation changes and productivity
              of traditional Southwestern agricultural technologies. This postdoctoral
              research and training project will address that problem by physically modeling
              two of the three types of agricultural fields responsible for most traditional
              agricultural production. Physical modeling will estimate quantities of soil
              moisture across a landscape based on precipitation, soil distribution, soil
              hydrologic parameters and land form. The field types to be modeled are flood
              water and seepage fields which are still in common use by the Hopi of northern
              Arizona. These fields will provide excellent test cases for modeling and will
              allow testing of the hypothesis that fields will form at the boundaries between
              individual soil units. Research will involve mapping of fields, soil units and
              associated catchments, as well as recording and analysis of soil hydrologic
              parameters. A digital model of each catchment will be constructed and
              simulations will be run using physical hydrologic modeling software.
