Title       : Dissertation Research: Made in America: Globalization and the Construction of a
               Multi-Cultural Religious Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0109262

Award Number: 0109262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Augutus Norton arn@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Norton  / Walters
	The image of Islam in contemporary American media is
              negative, portraying a monolithic, fundamentalist, fanatical ideology hostile
              to ideas of adaptation and change. However, at this time Muslim immigrants from
              diverse cultures are creating multi-cultural ethnic, national and linguistic
              religious communities in the US. The Muslim religion is this nation's fastest
              growing religion. This dissertation research project by a student of cultural
              anthropology studies the process of creating a religious community where
              adaptation and similarities of belief and custom are emphasized over
              significant differences.  The research will be conducted in the Islamic Society
              of Vermont, in northern Vermont, where immigrants from the Middle East,
              Bosnia-Herzegovina, India/Pakistan, Southeast Asia, North America and elsewhere
              are creating a Muslim center. Using ethnographic techniques of participant
              observation and structured in-depth interviews the student will examine how
              immigrants manage their significant internal differences in order to construct
              a cohesive religious community.  Focusing on religious law, parenting
              strategies, community leadership and conflict management, the student will
              examine how a uniquely American vision of Islam is being created. The results
              of the study will be valuable to society at large, as a corrective to the
              prevalent image.  In addition the new information will be valuable to policy
              makers dealing with immigration from Muslim regions.  The project also
              contributes to the training of a young social scientist. 


