Title       : SBIR Phase I: Gallium Nitride High Temperature Gas Sensor for Measuring
               Combustion Gas Product Concentrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0109860

Award Number: 0109860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Pyke spyke@empnet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Peterson Ridge LLC
	      PO Box 1257
	      Sisters, OR  97759    541/318-8265

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project comprises the
              design, fabrication and testing of continuous and discontinuous catalytic metal
              films as detection elements on a gallium nitride
              metal-semiconductor-field-effect transistor (MESFET) gas sensor for measuring
              combustion gas products in high temperature gas streams. Gas adsorbs and reacts
              on the metal surface. The steady state composition of adsorbed species changes
              the metal work function. The significant innovation is a gallium nitride (large
              bandgap) semiconductor device which will advance this emerging technology to
              high temperature (ca. 600 C) applications. The multiple catalytic metals:
              platinum, palladium/silver and rhodium have different sensitivities and
              detection limits. These differences can in principle be used to distinguish the
              effects of up to three concentration variables. This is the first time rhodium
              will have been used in this kind of sensor.  The outcome of this work will be a
              proof of the concept that quantifying high temperature gas compositions
              is
possible with the multiple catalytic gate FET sensor technology. A work
              product will be:  (1) the isotherms for gas (propane, methane, propylene, NO,
              NO2 and CO) adsorption on polycrystalline films of Pt, PdAg and Rh; (2)
              investigation of anticipated significant interactions of multiple gases on
              these metals; (3) the documentation of any solid-state reactions between the
              metals and the gallium nitride substrate by x-ray, TEM and other surface
              techniques; and, (4) the mechanical and electrical effects on the FET structure
              in
various gases and at temperatures as high as 850 C.  The goal of the
              research is a robust sensor structure and composition that can be used to
              monitor combustion gas including automobile exhaust for "breakthrough"  of the
              catalytic converter and possibly engine control for better efficiency.

The
              potential commercial applications of the research is a sensor for monitoring
              emission to meet anticipated regulatory requirements for
              ultra-low-emissions-vehicles for the future. Other applications include a
              variety of combustion gas environments and monitoring and real-time control of
              refinery and other industrial chemical processes.


