Title       : 2001 International Conference on Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a0109063

Award Number: 0109063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meigan C. Aronson maronson@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1710,5915,5919,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The past 20 years have seen the discovery of strongly correlated electron
              phenomena such as unconventional superconductivity, exotic non-Fermi liquid
              metals, intrinsically inhomogeneous electronic and magnetic phases, and novel
              moment configurations in a broad array of seemingly distinct material families.
              This award provides support for the International Conference on Strongly
              Correlated Electron Systems (SCES 2001), to be held August 6-10,2001 in Ann
              Arbor, MI. The conference will explore the most recent experimental and
              theoretical developments, in addition there will be overview talks assessing
              the current status of the field. The topics for the conference include: heavy
              fermions, Kondo physics, and mixed valence, the interplay of superconductivity
              and magnetism, non-Fermi liquid phenomena and quantum criticality, correlations
              in low dimensional metals, novel f- and d- electron materials, and low carrier
              density systems.  Additionally, the conference includes emerging topics such as
              time resolved spectroscopies of correlated materials, hidden and orbital
              ordering, and spin-charge separation.  The NSF support will help ensure the
              continued vitality of this field by providing financial assistance to graduate
              students, postdocs, and young faculty who are attending the conference for the
              first time. In addition, it will foster new collaborations among established
              researchers from India and Eastern Europe with other conference participants by
              providing travel support. 
%%%
Strong electron correlations are the origin of
              such technologically important phenomena as superconductivity and magnetism,
              and can even render a material to be electrically insulating when it would
              otherwise be a metal. By its nature, the strongly correlated electron problem
              is a central intellectual theme that cuts across traditional physics,
              chemistry, and materials science boundaries. The pre-eminent international
              conference in this area is Strongly Correlated Electron Systems (SCES), and for
              the first time in almost 10 years it will convene in the United States in Ann
              Arbor, MI  from August 6-10, 2001.  It is the aim of this conference to
              identify and explore common issues of both experimental and theoretical
              importance in a variety of different classes of correlated electron materials.
              This award provides support to the conference to help ensure the continued
              vitality of this core research field in the United States by supporting the
              participation of young scientists - graduate students, postdocs, and new
              faculty. In addition, the conference will foster new collaborations between
              established US scientists and their counterparts in India and Eastern Europe
              through a satellite workshop. This award will also supplement the travel funds
              of these participants. 
***

