Title       : SBIR Phase I: Out-of-Plane Ultrasonic Inspection of Paper Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0109702

Award Number: 0109702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Brodeur pbrodeur@sonisys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SoniSys
	      1734 Cooper Lake Dr.
	      Smyrna, GA  300806400    404/310-4047

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates
              advanced ultrasonic techniques for out-of-plane laboratory inspection of paper
              materials.  Experimental ultrasonic test methods are available to probe
              thickness direction elasticity, predict internal bond strength of paperboard,
              detect delamination defects in multi-ply boards, and evaluate the softness of
              tissue products. However, an analysis of these methods indicates serious
              shortcomings in the measuring principles:  presence of interfering signals,
              poor resolution, simplified interpretation of sound attenuation commercial
              ultrasonic instrument already exists to investigate wetting and liquid
              penetration in paper, but the technique cannot distinguish between penetrating
              depth and amount of penetrating liquid.  Also, other measurement needs such as
              coating thickness evaluation are not addressed.  Since the future of the
              U.S.Pulp and Paper Industry largely stands on the manufacturing of low volume
              but high quality value-added products, product development, superior quality,
              and end-use performance are critical elements of a competitive market
              environment.  In that context, SoniSys plans to develop new ultrasonic
              measuring tools, which will sustain the subsequent development of a versatile
              commercial ultrasonic instrument for out-of-plane paper inspection.

SoniSys
              anticipates at least seven market segments for its instrument in the paper
              industry:  (1) Nondestructive prediction of internal bond strength and
              evaluation of board structural integrity (paperboard mills;paper testing
              companies);  (2) Measurement of elastic stiffness for product development,
              quality control purposes and calibration of on-line measurements (paper and
              paperboard mills;R&D centers); (3)
Detection and localization of delamination
              defects (paperboard mills); (4)  Investigation of amount of penetrating liquid
              and liquid penetrating depth in wetting and liquid penetration tests (paper and
              paperboard mills, R&D centers); (5) Determination of coating thickness and
              assessment of paper substrate-coating layer interface (paper and paperboard
              mills,R&D centers); (6) Quantitative evaluation of bulk and surface tissue
              softness (tissue industry); and (7)  Testing of wood coupons and prediction of
              pulp and paper properties from raw materials (pulp and forest industries).
.

