Title       : Support for the Center for BioDynamics at Boston University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0109427

Award Number: 0109427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2011  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1409910            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Kopell nk@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tasso J. Kaper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9236,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator and her colleagues collaborate in a group
project at the
              Center for BioDynamics (CBD) to provide
interdisciplinary education and
              training for graduate students
and postdoctoral-level investigators in the
              context of a vigorous
interdisciplinary research program that focuses on areas
              of
mutual interest in mathematics (especially dynamical systems),
biology,
              and engineering.  Disciplines include mathematics,
biomedical engineering,
              aerospace/mechanical engineering,
biology, psychology, and physics.  Training
              extends beyond the
usual classroom activities by engaging participants in a
              variety
of research projects as well.  One of the major topics is dynamics
of
              the nervous system.  The projects, which involve experiments,
modeling, and
              analysis, all deal with the variety of rhythms in
the nervous system and the
              potential functions of these rhythms
in key cognitive states and processes
              such as attention,
awareness, learning, and recall.  A second major topic
              is
dynamics of gene expression.  Progress in genomic research is
leading to
              maps of the building blocks of biology and fueling the
study of gene
              regulation, where proteins often regulate their own
production or that of
              other proteins in a complex web of
interactions.  CBD projects focus on using
              techniques from
nonlinear dynamics, statistical physics, control theory,
              and
molecular biology to model, design, and construct synthetic
              gene
regulatory networks, and to probe naturally occurring gene
regulatory
              networks.  The third major topic is the dynamics of
patterns and waves. 
              Training activities include two weekly
working seminars, extra journal clubs
              and reading groups,
seminars to educate the CBD members in the research going
              on
within the Center, and a CBD-initiated team-taught course.
     The Center
              for BioDynamics (CBD) helps to advance
understanding of difficult
              interdisciplinary problems at the
intersection of mathematics, biology, and
              engineering, and it
trains mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for the
              21st
century workforce.  It does this by combining traditional
classroom
              education with significant engagement of students and
postdocs in
              interdisciplinary teams working on current problems.
The disciplines involved
              are mathematics, biomedical engineering,
aerospace/mechanical engineering,
              biology, psychology, and
physics.  One of the major topics is dynamics of the
              nervous
system.  The projects in this topic seek to shed light on the
origin
              of the electrical activity in the brain, and how the brain
uses this activity
              to process sensory information, to think, and
to regulate movement.  A second
              major topic is dynamics of gene
expression.  The web of interactions among the
              proteins that are
produced by genes is complex; the projects associated with
              this
topic involve the design and construction of artificial gene
regulatory
              networks, and techniques to better understand
naturally occurring gene
              regulatory networks.  The third major
topic is the dynamics of patterns and
              waves, occuring in a
variety of applications.  Training activities include two
              weekly
working seminars, regular sessions to read scientific
              journals,
seminars to educate the CBD members in the research going on
within
              the Center, and a CBD-initiated team-taught course.  The
project is supported
              by the Computational Mathematics, Applied
Mathematics, Computational
              Neuroscience, and Biological Databases
and Informatics programs and by the MPS
              Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities.

