Title       : Polycarbosilanes as Precursors to Ceramics As Functional Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0109643

Award Number: 0109643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard V. Interrante interl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Apple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this awards to
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  With this award, Professors Leonard
              Interrante and Thomas Apple will synthesize and study linear and hyper-branched
              polycarbosilanes with alternating silicon and carbon atoms in their backbone. 
              Basic reaction chemistry and characterization of carbosilanes based functional
              polymers including worm-like dendrimers, copolymers, block copolymers and ionic
              conducting polymers will be carried out with this award.  Determination of
              structure function relationship by solid state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance,
              preparation of thin films and determination of ionic conductivity will be parts
              of this award.  Pyrolysis of polycarbosilanes and polycarbosilane-boronitrides
              will be evaluated to prepare novel ceramics with controlled microstructures.
              Graduate and undergraduate students, who will be working on this project, will
              get training in synthesis of polymer precursors, synthesis of polymers based on
              carbosilanes, functionalization and characterization of these polymers. 
              

Worm-like dendrimers, copolymers, block copolymers and ionic conducting
              polymers will be prepared from linear and hyperbranched polycarbosilanes with
              alternating silicon and carbon atoms in their backbone.  Basic reaction
              chemistry and characterization of carbosilanes based functional polymers
              including determination of structure function relationships; and preparation of
              thin films and determination of ionic conductivity will be parts of this award.
               Pyrolysis of polycarbosilanes and polycarbosilane-boronitrides will be
              evaluated to prepare novel ceramics with controlled microstructures. Graduate
              and undergraduate students, who will be working on this project, will get
              training in polymer sciences and different methods used to characterize
              polymers based on carbosilanes.   


