Title       : Ca2+-Signaling in Growth Cone Guidance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0109776

Award Number: 0109776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521412             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Q. Zheng zhengjq@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Each function of the adult nervous system, from a simple reflex response to a
              complex behavior, depends on the actions of distinct neuronal circuits. These
              circuits operate correctly because their component neurons are appropriately
              connected to each other.  Precise wiring of these circuits requires guided
              growth of nerve fibers to reach the specific targets.  Recent studies have
              identified a variety of molecular cues that provide the "road signs" for
              growing nerve fibers to navigate through their complex environment, with some
              of these cues attracting but others repelling growing nerve fibers.  It is
              believed that the tiny, motile tip of each growing nerve fiber, known as the
              growth cone, is responsible for reading these "road signs" to steer the fiber
              in the appropriate direction (steering).  Dr. Zheng's study aims to elucidate
              the mechanism by which motile growth cones accurately read direction from these
              extracellular cues.  The research team will specifically focus on the role of
              intracellular calcium ions (Ca2+) in the growth cone's sensing of direction
              from diffusible cues.  The hypothesis to be tested is that tempo-spatial Ca2+
              signals in the growth cone provide the cellular mechanism for encoding of the
              directional information in the growth cone to initiate appropriate steering
              responses.  Dr. Zheng's research team will use a combination of high-resolution
              digital imaging and manipulation techniques to examine the tempo-spatial
              pattern of intracellular Ca2+ signals associated with growth cone steering in
              response to different guidance cues.  Furthermore, the research team will
              directly generate a similar tempo-spatial pattern of Ca2+ signals in the growth
              cone using a sophisticated laser-induced photoactivated release method to
              elucidate the precise role of these Ca2+ signals in guidance.  The long-term
              goal of the study is to understand the molecular and cellular mechanisms that
              allow nerve growth cones to accurately sense direction in the complex
              extracellular space for the generation of highly ordered brain architecture.  
              


