Title       : SBIR Phase I: Stable High Volume Cu Precursor Evaporation Module
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a0109525

Award Number: 0109525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Tompa gstompa@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SMI
	      120 Centennial Ave.
	      Piscataway, NJ  08854    732/885-5909

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address
              development of an advanced precursor evaporation module with a specific focus
              application to copper metalization. Rapid large area CVD is required for the
              copper seed layer or, preferably, for deposition of the full contact layer. 
              CVD equipment manufacturers have responded to the deposition tool need; as have
              developers of the copper precursors to enable Cu CVD.  However, the copper
              precursor of choice, Cupra Select TM (a liquid), has a relatively low vapor
              transport rate because of its low vapor pressure, compounded by a narrow
              temperature operating range (vapor pressure equals 0.4 Torr at 43 C and beyond
              ~ 45 C this precursor begins to decompose).  Flash Evaporation is not a
              solution because of the low decomposition temperature.  The limited vapor
              transport hinders high speed large area growth.  This has led to the
              development of a multistep-multimachine copper metalization process (CVD seed
              layer followed by electrochemical deposition of the whole layer).  This is
              tolerable but highly inefficient and hence costly. SMI proposes to create a
              patentable high volume liquid vaporization source. Our proposed source offers
              at minimum a 5 fold increase in available Cu vapor transport and is expected to
              allow CVD to replace the present two-step process.  If successfully developed,
              SMI's source will be made available commercially. This effort will help
              accelerate the large scale manufacturing of ICs with Cu interconnects, and may
              apply to any other CVD process utilizing low volatility liquid precursors.
              

An improved liquid vaporization source will find immediate use on all Cu
              CVD systems and hence be a strategic SMI component product.  The unit will also
              find applications to similar temperature sensitive, low volatility liquids and
              well meets SMI's CVD components sales thrusts.

