Title       : SBIR Phase I: Trait-Targeted Activation Tagging in Rice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0109736

Award Number: 0109736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95416              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat R. Bommineni venkat@agritope.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : EPS
	      16160 SW Upper Boones Ferry Road
	      Portland, OR  972247744    503/670-7702

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
              innovative approach for targeting genes involved in a specific trait or pathway
              using the model cereal plant, rice. Rice is known to have highly conserved
              disease resistance signal transduction pathways and yet so far a very few
              signaling molecules have been studied. Application of Activation Tagging
              methods may allow for the discovery mechanisms involved in disease and other
              defense-related signal transduction pathways. Therefore, instead of using the
              common activation tagging vector, this project proposes to use a rice chitinase
              gene promoter RCH10 and luciferase reporter gene fusion expression cassette in 
              activation tagging T-DNA binary vector to activate genes in defense-responsive
              pathways. This approach will allow the identification of chitinase or
              chitinase-related genes or transcription factors in luc+ expressed rice tissues
              and plants both at earlier and in later stages of the experiment. The RCH10
              gene promoter is highly inducible during pathogen response both in plants and
              in cell culture and therefore, transformed and non-transformed in vitro tissues
              and leaf discs can easily be subjected to high throughput screening. This
              trait-targeted activation tagging approach will enable collection of only
              chitinase or chitinase-related overexpressed phenotypes and thereby expedite
              the process of gene isolation and recapitulation of potential disease
              resistance phenotypes in rice.

The commercial applications of this project
              will be in agriculture for screening and isolation of agronomically important
              genes in major crops.
