Title       : SBIR Phase I: Microchip-Laser-Based Optical Alloy Analysis Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0109257

Award Number: 0109257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joda C. Wormhoudt jody@aerodyne.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerodyne Research Inc
	      45 Manning Road
	      Billerica, MA  018213934    508/663-9500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has as its goal
              the demonstration of the feasibility of an optical alloy analysis instrument
              based on a microchip laser excitation source.  This instrument will determine
              elemental composition using laser-induced plasma spectroscopy (LIPS).  It will
              have the advantage over existing portable instruments of being able to
              determine concentrations of light elements such as carbon, aluminum and
              silicon. The key to this innovation is the microchip laser, which has been
              shown to have several advantages in LIPS applications, while being remarkably
              small, lightweight and robust. In Phase I observations will be made using a
              laboratory LIPS apparatus, and a set of specifications will be derived for an
              instrument capable of determining carbon in steel at levels of interest to
              potential customers in industries where alloy identification is critical. This
              proposal involves collaboration with a manufacturer with a dominant position in
              the market.  With their input, the optimum instrument configuration which can
              offer both useful capabilities and easy, portable operation will be
              determined.

There currently exists a strong market for alloy identification
              instruments, even though existing devices are either limited by inability to
              determine some of the most important elements, or by significant drawbacks in
              portability and ease of use. An optical device with important advantages could
              lead to a much expanded market.



