Title       : GOALI: Direct Numerical Simulation of Slurry Transport Focusing on Engineering
               Correlations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0109079

Award Number: 0109079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Joseph joseph@aem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Conway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0109079
D. D. Joseph, University of Minnesota


The proposed
              effort is a GOALI association between the University of Minnesota
Fluid
              Dynamics Lab and the oil-industry supported laboratory STIMLAB from Duncan,
              Oklahoma.  It is an attempt to explore the application of the direct numerical
              simulation technique to slurry transport and also to proppant transport in
              reservoir fractures.    In both cases, the emphasis will be to identify the
              force interaction between the particles and the ambient liquid.   Also,
              numerical flow field calculations will be fitted to experimental results with
              the help of relevant non-dimensional power law parameters.  This "method of
              correlations" should reveal self-similar properties not immediately apparent
              from the traditional conservation equations of fluid dynamics.
The PI presents
              an extensive evaluation of the progress he has already accomplished in that
              direction, in part with NSF support.  Many results have been obtained for a
              variety of applications, from the simple (Poiseuille flow) to the very applied
              (foaming bubble columns, bitumen froth transport...).  Several finite element
              codes have been evolved (ALE, DLM), and successful correlations (some of them
              by other groups) are presented.  Out of this abundance of results, the PI has
              produced a number of proposed research extensions into interdependent
              properties: particle life off, circulation, bifurcation, and levitation to
              equilibrium.  A partial outline of the correlations which the PI intends to
              investigate is given, as well as a short statement of the more applied kind of
              problems where STIMLAB could use its abundant data bank: proppant transport,
              collision models.

