Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships and Supporting Activities:
               Racial/Ethnic Subjectivity and Grassroots Community Organizing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0109227

Award Number: 0109227
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel A. Gomez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M,Gomez
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    512/478-8276

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this post-doctoral fellowship research project is to conduct a
              comparative analysis of how African American and Mexican American grassroots
              organizations in Austin, Texas struggle against institutional racism manifested
              in various levels of the education system. Through an ethnographic approach,
              the fellow will conduct a series of interviews with community activists to
              outline the political tactics and strategies created by working-class people of
              color in order to secure equal access to education. The fellow will also carry
              out participant-observation in particular school settings and interview school
              officials. He will work within a theoretical framework that illuminates the
              impetus for transformative social change to be rooted in social movements that
              overtime induce policy responses by the State and institutional change. The
              fellow will benefit from further training in policy analysis and institutional
              practices, and, for this reason has planned the research project in close
              collaboration with several interdisciplinary senior scholars working at the
              School of Social Work and the Dana Center at the University of Texas at Austin.
              The project can increase minority representation in the social sciences by
              enhancing understanding of the mutually productive relationship that can
              develop between researchers and activists of color who share similar concerns
              and objectives. This project will hopefully not only draw researchers into
              minority communities in a collaborative role, but also draw minority activists
              towards the university and the important contributions that formal education
              can make to community-based struggles.


