Title       : RUI: Characterization and Purification of Mg-protoporphyrin IX Monomethyl Ester
               Cyclase from Photosynthetic Prokaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0109909

Award Number: 0109909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324598             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Bollivar dbolliva@titan.iwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Wesleyan Univ
	      
	      Bloomington, IL  61701    309/556-3151

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The biochemical steps that are required for chlorophyll and bacteriochlorophyll
              synthesis have been identified and in most cases the genes that encode the
              various enzymes have been identified.  One enzyme that is not as well
              understood is the  Mg-protoporphyrin IX monomethyl ester cyclase.  This enzyme
              converts Mg-protoporphyrin IX  monomethyl ester into protochlorophyllide.  To
              further understand this enzyme in plants and bacteria, the following research
              will be carried out.  a) Demonstration of in vitro activity of the anaerobic
              cyclase from Rhodobacter capsulatus and purification of the enzyme components. 
              Purification of the enzyme will allow determination of cofactor requirements. 
              Determination of the cofactors is key to testing the hypothesis that the
              anaerobic cyclase utilizes a radical mechanism mediated by adenosylcobalamin. 
              b) Determine components of the anaerobic cyclase by genetic analysis.  It is
              clear from experiments in plant systems that two proteinaceous components are
              required for cyclase activity.  Recent results  suggest that two components are
              required for the anaerobic cyclase activity.  Genetic approaches will be used
              to identify additional loci affecting enzymatic activity.  c)  Test if the
              putative chlE gene product from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 is a functional
              homolog to bchE from R. capsulatus.  This will be accomplished by expression of
              the chlE gene in R. capsulatus. This hypothesis will be tested more fully by
              purifying the ChlE polypeptide and characterizing its function in the cyclase
              enzyme from Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. In addition, experiments will be
              performed to test whether the cyanobacterial enzyme can function anaerobically.
              d)Involve undergraduate science students in a research project that will
              prepare them for advanced studies or for teaching at the secondary education
              level.  Chlorophyll is a very important compound because it is used to absorb
              light for photosynthesis. The goal of this project is to better understand one
              of the enzymes in chlorophyll synthesis.  The enzyme under study is not well
              understood, but is required for the synthesis of chlorophyll by cells. The
              enzyme is also limited in iron-poor cells leading to yellowing of the plants. 
              The project will examine the proteins from bacteria that are involved in the
              reaction. Other components of the cell that are required for this reaction to
              occur will be identified.
 BENNING

