Title       : The Economic Foundations of Mayapan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0109426

Award Number: 0109426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn A. Masson massonma@cnsvax.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will document the political economy of Mayapan, the largest and
              most influential city in the Maya realm during the Postclassic period. Although
              the influence of this center throughout the Maya world achieves considerable
              notoriety in later retrospective mythic/historical accounts, the economic
              foundations of this city have never been investigated with empirical
              archaeological data. Without this data, the comparative analysis of complex
              societies in the pre-capitalist world is severely hindered. Precolumbian Maya
              society represents one of the most innovative civilizations of the New World.
              Hundreds of Maya city state centers and associated territories extended across
              southeast Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and western Honduras over a period of 2000
              years and this society invented the most elaborate set of writing, calendrical,
              and astronomical notation found in the Americas.

Does the degree of
              political centralization and scale of monument building represent the primary
              criteria for measuring a civilization's complexity? While these traits are a
              characteristic of many early states and empires, maturing complex societies
              often culminate in vast geographic tracts of more decentralized polities that
              are extensively integrated through mercantile exchange. The growth in the
              number of literati and merchant factions in maturing old world societies and
              their increase in power often eroded centralized political institutions in
              favor of more extensive economic interaction networks that were heavily focused
              on long-distance trade.

This pattern points to the second important issue
              about Postclassic Maya society that will be addressed from the investigation of
              Mayapan's economy. This period has been characterized as a mercantile era, and
              many decentralized polities across the Yucatan peninsula relied heavily on long
              distance maritime trade for items used in everyday life. This pattern is
              documented from Spanish Colonial accounts of Maya trade at the time of European
              contact, as well as from archaeological investigations of small sites along the
              Caribbean coast that yield evidence of participation in extensive exchange.
              After the rise of Mayapan to power in the 13th century A.D., an amplification
              of local production activities geared toward this exchange is observed at
              distant coastal settlements. An increase in their reliance on long distance
              household items is also observed, along with an increase in population, ritual
              activities, and political hierarchical development in areas outside of
              Mayapan's domain. Ritual and utilitarian artifact and architectural styles at
              sites throughout the Maya lowlands resemble those observed at Mayapan. 

What
              is the meaning of these trends? Did the activities of Mayapan's mercantile
              elites stimulate this trade network and political development? A greater degree
              of economic and ideological integration is inferred across the lowland Maya
              world during Mayapan's reign than during the earlier Classic period. While most
              of this region was organized into modest political hierarchies, Mayapan stands
              out as a striking anomaly for the size and elaboration of its urban settlement.
              It is not possible to understand the political economy of the Postclassic
              period without evaluating the organization and scale of production and exchange
              activities at the great center itself, which was governed by merchant elites.
              Investigations planned by this project will document the variation of
              production and exchange activities within house groups of different social
              status across the city. This work will facilitate core-hinterland comparisons
              and a full reconstruction of economic relationships among Postclassic
              settlements across the lowlands. These investigations will contribute to the
              cross-cultural analysis of the development of civilizations by providing
              critical data from a primate city at the nucleus of a New World mercantile
              society.


This project will document the political economy of Mayapan, the
              largest and most influential city in the Maya realm during the Postclassic
              period. Although the influence of this center throughout the Maya world
              achieves considerable notoriety in later retrospective mythic/historical
              accounts, the economic foundations of this city have never been investigated
              with empirical archaeological data. Without this data, the comparative analysis
              of complex societies in the pre-capitalist world is severely hindered.
              Precolumbian Maya society represents one of the most innovative civilizations
              of the New World. Hundreds of Maya city state centers and associated
              territories extended across southeast Mexico, Guatemala, Belize, and western
              Honduras over a period of 2000 years and this society invented the most
              elaborate set of writing, calendrical, and astronomical notation found in the
              Americas.

Two issues underscore the importance of reconstructing the
              economic systems of production and exchange at Mayapan. First, Postclassic Maya
              society was long interpreted by scholars as a "devolved" era, as monumental
              construction and hieroglyphic writing was performed on a smaller scale and of
              less-enduring materials than in the earlier Classic period. For this reason,
              little research has focused on this period. Such a deflation in monumental
              scale suggests that political hierarchies collapsed in many portions of the
              Maya area, although Mayapan stands out as an important exception. 

Does the
              degree of political centralization and scale of monument building represent the
              primary criteria for measuring a civilization's complexity? While these traits
              are a characteristic of many early states and empires, maturing complex
              societies often culminate in vast geographic tracts of more decentralized
              polities that are extensively integrated through mercantile exchange. The
              growth in the number of literati and merchant factions in maturing old world
              societies and their increase in power often eroded centralized political
              institutions in favor of more extensive economic interaction networks that were
              heavily focused on long-distance trade.

This pattern points to the second
              important issue about Postclassic Maya society that will be addressed from the
              investigation of Mayapan's economy. This period has been characterized as a
              mercantile era, and many decentralized polities across the Yucatan peninsula
              relied heavily on long distance maritime trade for items used in everyday life.
              This pattern is documented from Spanish Colonial accounts of Maya trade at the
              time of European contact, as well as from archaeological investigations of
              small sites along the Caribbean coast that yield evidence of participation in
              extensive exchange. After the rise of Mayapan to power in the 13th century
              A.D., an amplification of local production activities geared toward this
              exchange is observed at distant coastal settlements. An increase in their
              reliance on long distance household items is also observed, along with an
              increase in population, ritual activities, and political hierarchical
              development in areas outside of Mayapan's domain. Ritual and utilitarian
              artifact and architectural styles at sites throughout the Maya lowlands
              resemble those observed at Mayapan. 

What is the meaning of these trends?
              Did the activities of Mayapan's mercantile elites stimulate this trade network
              and political development? A greater degree of
              economi















