Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of Integrated Fluid/Solid/Bio-Kinetic Simulation
               Software for the Characterization of Microsphere-based Bio-analytic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0109762

Award Number: 0109762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivshankar Sundaram sxs@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will demonstrate
              the feasibility and value of advanced simulation methodology for the prediction
              of biomolecular binding on the surface of microspheres used in biosensing
              applications. Models in current use employ many ad-hoc assumptions,
              particularly related to convective mass transport. Large, systematic errors are
              commonly encountered in predictive efforts. Novel, high-fidelity simulations
              proposed here hold the promise of providing a systematic understanding of the
              complex interaction between multiphase flow, diffusion and surface chemistry.
              An integrated simulation environment featuring Discrete Particle Simulations
              (suited for small beads) and Chimera Particle Simulations (for larger beads)
              will be developed in Phase I. Detailed bead-surface chemistry models (featuring
              finite-rate adsorption, desorption and conversion to irreversible state) will
              be developed and fully coupled to the flow model. The technique will be
              demonstrated using Immunoflow , a food bio-sensor based on fluidization
              developed at Utah State University. Both flow and binding simulation results
              will be validated against experiments. In Phase II, both Discrete and Chimera
              particle techniques will be further developed along with more generalized, user
              specifiable surface reaction mechanisms and model development for bio-molecule
              specific binding phenomena.


The commercial application of the technology
              and the software to be developed in this  project is in the area of biosensors
              for marketing to the biotechnology community. The product will enable the rapid
              creation of the next generation of optimized biosensors while simultaneously
              enhancing the  fundamental understanding of biochemical processes. The
              technology would also benefit research in the traditional chemical and
              pharmaceutical industries.

