Title       : An Integrated Approach to Funtional Genomics and Bioinformatics in a Model
               Legume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0109732

Award Number: 0109732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3587432            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro J. Mendes mendes@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Medicago truncatula is a close relative of the world's most important forage
              legume, alfalfa (Medicago sativa). It is a rich source of natural products,
              such as flavonoids, isoflavonoids and triterpenes, which impact its properties
              as a forage legume. The main experimental approach of this project is to
              perturb the expression of these natural products, and other areas of
              metabolism, by exposing cell cultures to biotic and abiotic elicitors. Use of
              cell suspension cultures will allow sufficient material to be collected and
              analyzed in parallel. Three experimental conditions have been chosen that mimic
              natural environmental challenges. The ultimate goal of this project is to
              generate a truly functional genomics data set for control and elicited cell
              cultures. Such data will encompass expressed sequence information and the
              associated mRNA, protein and metabolite identities and concentrations. This
              project will produce a  variety of data so it becomes imperative to establish
              integrative models and software to facilitate relational analysis of the data
              to each other and to previous knowledge on sequences and pathways. Software is
              a facilitator of the discovery process when it enables the user to "navigate"
              the biological data in a dynamic and transparent way, requiring only the most
              basic computational skills. The bioinformatics component of this project will:
              i) construct a relational database to store all data; ii) construct an
              expandable analysis server that will facilitate processing the data with
              several statistical and numerical algorithms; and iii) integrate the above
              components through a web interface. The data as well as the software will be
              made available publicly.
The data generated by this project will be used to
              construct a quantitative predictive model of the time courses after
              elicitation, which is required to interpret the regulation of the underlying
              complex biological processes. The data will provide information about the
              extent and nature of gene expression reprogramming in response to biotic and
              abiotic signals at the transcription, translation and metabolic levels. There
              will also be practical applications in directed gene discovery for important
              agronomic traits involving plant natural products. Finally, this project will
              make available to the scientific community a bioinformatics system capable of
              supporting functional genomics ranging from the transcriptome to the
              metabolome.

