Title       : Landscape Successions and Traces of Oldowan Hominid Land Use at Olduvai Gorge,
               Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0109027

Award Number: 0109027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fidelis T. Masao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With primary support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Robert
              Blumenschine, Fidelis Masao, and Charles Peters will lead an international and
              multidisciplinary team to continue their long-term research on ancestral human
              (hominid) behavior at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Olduvai Gorge preserves among
              the world's richest records of the earliest, Oldowan, stone tool industry and
              abundant vertebrate fossils in geological deposits dated between 1.9 and 1.6
              million years ago. The stone artifacts, and fossil bones bearing butchery marks
              made by the stone tools, provide evidence for the diet, foraging tactics and
              technological activities of hominids in the lake basin that occupied the
              Olduvai area during Oldowan times. These archaeological traces of hominid
              activity are distributed patchily within an area of ca. 400 km2, providing an
              unusual opportunity to understand the nature of hominid adaptations to
              different environmental conditions within the lake basin. When fully developed,
              this understanding will allow us to assess the ecological factors that
              initially selected for humankind's unusual dependence on technology and
              carnivory. 

In order to accomplish this goal, we require a more detailed
              reconstruction of the landscapes occupied by Oldowan hominids in the
              prehistoric Olduvai lake basin. The reconstruction will be made by a team with
              individual expertise in geochronology, stratigraphy, sedimentology, palynology,
              plant phytoliths, marcro-plant fossils, stable isotopic geochemistry and small
              mammal taphonomy. Samples will be collected during two seven-week field seasons
              for analysis in specialized laboratories in the U.S., Europe, Tanzania, and
              South Africa. Landscape reconstructions will focus initially on the alluvial
              fan and lake margin settings of the eastern portion of the lake basin, in which
              we have already produced a large landscape archaeological sample and diverse
              paleoenvironmental indicators. These techniques of landscape reconstruction and
              additional archaeological excavations will be extended to the western portion
              of paleo-Olduvai Basin after we have established stratigraphic and age
              controls. Precise three-dimensional locational control of the archaeological
              and paleoenvironmental samples will be maintained using state-of-the-art
              mapping-level and survey-level global positioning system and optoelectronic
              total station equipment. Our work is designed to understand the ecological
              contrasts between the eastern and western portions of the basin in landscapes
              and hominid land use related to the repeated catastrophic volcanism that
              appears to have affected the eastern basin most severely, and in many cases
              exclusively. 

A small but important portion of NSF support for the project
              will be used to help Tanzania continue to develop its facilities and scientific
              personnel for archaeological and paleontological research. Improvements will be
              made to the laboratory and permanent research camp at Olduvai Gorge in
              cooperation with the Tanzanian Antiquities Unit. The storage capacity for
              fossil and artifact remains in the laboratory established by the researchers in
              Arusha in cooperation with the Tanzania National Museums. Tanzanian students
              and field assistants will continue to receive training in field and laboratory
              techniques. These efforts are critical to the long-term research viability and
              conservation of Olduvai Gorge, for which Tanzanians require facilities and
              well-trained staff to lead archaeological research and to manage archaeological
              collections.


