Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Inhalation Dosage Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0109786

Award Number: 0109786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kang P. Lee klee@aspensystems.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Systems Inc
	      184 Cedar Hill Street
	      Marlborough, MA  017523017    508/481-5058

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              novel drug delivery method for treatment of diseases and symptoms that
              currently require intravenous, subcutaneous injections or oral intake. This 
              method is based on the use of drugs in an extremely fine and ultra lightweight
              particle form called AerohalantTM that is especially formulated for advanced
              inhalation therapy. AerohalantTM particles will have much higher tendency to
              stay aloft than state-of-the-art inhalants and next generation inhalants
              currently under development by the pharmaceutical companies. AerohalantTM
              particles will reach mucous membranes of the innermost part of the patients'
              lungs without depositing any matter in the throat or the thoracic region, and
              therefore, utilize most of the tennis court sized alveolar surface area inside
              human lungs. These ultra light drug particles, on contact with thin fluid layer
              on mucous membranes in the alveoli, can dissolve and reach the blood stream
              much faster than by state-of-the art inhalants, subcutaneous, intravenous
              injections and orally ingested medications. Alternately, these particles could
              also be designed to release slowly. This Phase I project proposes to produce
              one commonly injected pharmacotherapeutic agent in the special powder form and
              to conduct feasibility tests with respect to suspension characteristics of
              Aerohalant TM particulates in the air, the in vitro activity, and the rate of
              dissolution and absorption.

The commercial applications of this project are
              in the medical field for production of inhalable forms of common therapeutic
              drugs.
