Title       : Using Scientific Materials to Compare Disaggregated Versus Holistic Ratings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0109250

Award Number: 0109250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal R. Arkes arkes.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF),
              and other agencies spend billions of dollars each year evaluating scientific
              proposals.  Only the most meritorious should receive taxpayer dollars.  But how
              should these agencies decide which proposals are the most meritorious?

There
              are two general ways to evaluate proposals, candidates, strategies, and nearly
              any other entity.  The first way is called "holistic."  Holistic ratings are
              characterized by a single overall number which reflects one's opinion.  The
              second way is called "disaggregated."  Disaggregated ratings are characterized
              by one rating being given to each of several criteria.  The criteria's ratings
              are then summed or averaged to obtain a single number, which reflects one's
              opinion.  Some research suggests that disaggregated ratings are superior to
              holistic ones.  However in the late 1990s, both NIH and NSF refused to adopt
              disaggregated ratings in their own proposal evaluation procedures, because no
              prior research comparing holistic and disaggregated ratings used materials such
              as scientific proposals.  The proposed research will fill that gap.  Attendees
              at a scientific convention will be asked to rate oral presentations in either a
              holistic or disaggregated fashion.  Two holistic panels of five persons each
              and two disaggregated panels of five persons each will rate every presentation.
               The correlation between the two holistic panels' ratings of the presentations
              will be compared to the correlation between the two disaggregated panels'
              ratings of the presentations.  If prior research applies to scientific
              presentations, then the correlation between the disaggregated panels' ratings
              should be higher than the correlation between the holistic panels' ratings. 
              This will provide evidence that disaggregated ratings of scientific materials
              yields evaluations of higher reliability than do holistic ratings.  This result
              should in turn provide guidance to the scientific agencies as to one way in
              which their evaluation processes might be improved.

