Title       : SGER: Adaptive Beamforming for Spatial and Temporal Sampled Coherent Aperture
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0109944

Award Number: 0109944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth D. Silverstein silverstein@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support to develop, test, and optimize a new approach to
              adaptive beamfroming in coherent imaging that was recently developed by the PI
              [1].  The fundamental approach is based upon the physics of imaging with
              signals that are scattered from targets consisting of many randomly distributed
              scatters.  The resulting alogrithmic methodology which will be refered to as
              the scaled Cross-Corelation Function (SCCF) algorithm provides a robust
              adaptive auto-focusing phase aberration correction algorithm for digitally
              sampled coherent imaging systems.  The underlying fundamental ideas forming the
              basis of this discovery are far more reaching and should have broad application
              to inverse problems in coherent imaging such as coherent optics, Synthetic
              Aperture Radar (SAR), ultrasonics, somar, etc.  

The initial effort will be
              directed towards medical ultrasound.  Here extensive simulations will be
              performed for 1.5 and 2D dimensional transducer arrays to further develop, test
              and optimize the new adaptive beamforming methodolgy.  These simulations
              require computer power beyond the capabilities of a single CPU workstation
              running MATLAB code.  Code, either in C++ or Fortran 90, wil be developed to
              run these simulations on available multiprocessor super computing
              systems.

The full implementation of the new methodology, which has been
              shown in limited simulation tests to be substantially more robust than the
              Flax-O'Donnell [2,3] and the Rigby [4] beamsum algorithms, is computationally
              intensive as it requires the computation of N (N-1)=2 signal correlations for
              all focused cell in the ensemble of cells used to compute the covariance
              matrix.  Here N represents the number of channels.  This computation load is
              too extensive for today's existing ultrasound machines, although future
              generations systems will undoubtedly have these capabilities.  The project
              effort will involve extensively testing of the suboptimal, less computationally
              intensive versions of the SCCF methodology that may be implementable with
              today's hardware.  The project efforts will also consider conceptual extensions
              of the SCCF methodology to microwave, sonar, and optical imaging.  Computer
              simulation testbeds will be developed for these different modalities for the
              purpose of developing and optimizing suitable adaptive algorithms for these
              disciplines.  Adaptive beamforming in SAR is needed to equalize phase errors
              caused by unknown positioning errors of the transmit/receive points (synthetic
              elements) in the synthetically generated array.  The current techniques such as
              the phase gradient algorithm [23] searches  for the brighest cell, and then
              solves for the aberrant phase using phase gradient based upon the nearest
              neighbor cross-correlation functions.  This method is susceptible to image
              artifacts, persumanly caused by a combination of the instabilities inherent in
              a phase gradient method and the errors made using the approximation that the
              good phase in the brightest pixel can be neglected.
