Title       : Control of Microtopography at Silicon Surfaces and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0109641

Award Number: 0109641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387471             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Blakely blakely@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses properties of defects at silicon and other semiconductor
              surfaces and explores methods to control the topography of surfaces and
              interfaces at the atomic level. The research involves the study of surface
              atomic diffusion, the energetics and dynamics of surface atomic steps,
              oxidation-induced strain and detailed control of surface and interface
              morphology. Scanning tunneling microscopy and low energy electron microscopy
              are used to observe the connection between atomic step motion and the evolution
              of overall surface shape.  Results are expected to be of interest to
              fundamental surface science and in the fabrication of advanced semiconductor
              devices and circuits. The research may contribute to the design and control of
              interfaces in heterogeneous magnetic systems such as are used in
              magneto-resistive applications as well. Surfaces with predetermined arrays of
              atomic scale features may also be of value in making patterned substrates for
              biological sensors. 
The primary project goal is to more fully understand the
              fundamental processes involved in Si morphology control and to explore the
              extension and application of these processes to other materials. Specific
              objectives of the project include: 1)Study of the temperature and growth rate
              conditions to create atomically flat mesa structures on Si(001) and Si(111) by
              vapor deposition plus related work on the use of chemical etching as an
              alternative to sublimation. 2)Study of the types of point defects existing at
              high temperatures through AFM and STM observations on quenched Si surfaces with
              extremely large terraces. 3)Develop ways to make potentially useful patterns of
              steps on Si and other substrates as templates for adsorbed or deposited
              structures. Applications will be sought with bio-molecules and with magnetic
              layers. 4)Study of the kinetics of oxide growth on atomically flat Si using an
              X-ray technique to monitor the intensity of forbidden reflections-analogous to
              RHEED oscillations. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a
              topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. The project assists development of technical, communication,
              and organizational/management skills in students through unique educational
              experiences made possible by a forefront highly collaborative research
              environment. Key collaborators in this project include Cornell-based
              researchers Dr. C.C. Umbach (Materials Science & Eng.), Prof. J. Engstrom
              (Chem. Eng.), Dr R. Headrick (CHESS), Prof M. Hines (Chemistry), Dr R. Tromp
              (IBM), and Dr N. Bartelt (Sandia). 
 *** 

