Title       : Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowships and Supporting Activities: Nupe
               Phonology and Phonological Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0109203

Award Number: 0109203
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmadu Kawu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : A,Kawu
	      18 Seminary Place
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/743-1989

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This post-doctoral research fellowships focuses on the phonology and morphology
              of Nupe, a Nupoid language spoken in Central Nigeria and its contribution to
              phonological theory. It follows up on research, which examined intralinguistic
              variation in different domains of Nupe phonology and morphology and the
              implications for Optimality Theory, and it will focus on various aspects of its
              phonology and morphology in the light of recent developments in phonological
              theory. The research will involve a comprehensive description of the sound
              system of Nupe. A reanalysis of various controversial aspects of its phonology
              will be undertaken. This includes the distribution of segments, and the best
              analysis of /Cwa/ and /Cja/ sequences in such forms as /egwa/ 'hand' and /egja/
              `blood'. These sequences are open to different analyses in different languages,
              depending on the phonotactics, morphological distribution, and prosodic
              considerations of the language in question. The sequences will be
              experimentally investigated with a view to determining their true phonetic
              characteristics in Nupe. The study of the morphology of the language will be
              concerned with describing its word structure, namely the structure of
              formatives, phonotactics, prosody, and word formation processes such as
              nominalization and reduplication in the context of recent developments in
              morphological theory. These facets of its morphology have implications for
              phonological and morphological theory that have not been previously explored.
              This research will explore these implications, and the dimensions that they
              bring to linguistic theory. The phonetic basis of such phonological processes
              as palatalization, labialization, nasalization, assimilation, and glide
              formation will be experimentally investigated in order to discover their
              interaction with Nupe prosody. Such other processes as consonant and vowel
              elision that interact with the prosody will be studied, and their implications
              for phonological theory identified and explained. The tonal system of Nupe will
              be studied with particular focus on its complexities, which include
              consonant-tone interaction in noun and verb phrases, and the interaction of
              tone and intonation. The experimental investigation of tone will reveal the
              similarities and differences between Nupe and other tone languages that have
              been reported to exhibit intonation features. The aim is to discover whether
              all three tone systems have similar intonational systems. The results of this
              research will be of interest not only to researchers and scholars in
              descriptive and theoretical linguistics, but also to those in experimental
              linguistics, computational linguistics, philosophy of language,
              psycholinguistics, language acquisition, and cognitive science.
