Title       : Power, Craft Production, and Exchange in Southern Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0109952

Award Number: 0109952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Urban urban@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Patricia Urban,
              Edward
Schortman, and Ms. Marne Ausec have worked to describe and explain
              changes in
prehistoric power relations within the adjoining Naco and lower
              Cacaulapa
valleys, Northwestern Honduras.  The basic question has been, and
              remains,
"How did a few come to rule the many?"  Answering this
              deceptively
straightforward query requires examining the ways in which local
              rulers
marshaled political and economic forces within their societies and
              forged
alliances with peers in neighboring realms.  The hypothesis guiding
              this
research proposes that: 1. Rulers exercised dominion by monopolizing
              local
access to imported commodities valued and needed by the general
              populace, as
well as locally produced items, such as ceramic vessels and stone
              tools; 2.
Commoners surrendered their labor and loyalty to local notables in
              return for
access to these goods; 3. Unwilling to go gently into dependence,
              commoners
also used their skills and immediately available resources to make
              as many
items for their own use and trade as possible, thereby minimizing
              reliance on
local lords; 4. This competition resulted in a population divided
              by the
power ndividuals, families, or factions could wield and the wealth they
              
enjoyed.
Work funded by the National Science Foundation in Naco, from
              1990-1996, was
instrumental in establishing this model; investigations pursued
              in the lower
Cacaulapa valley from 1999-2000, also funded by the NSF, are
              crucial to
testing these ideas.  Survey of 7km2 in the lower Cacaulapa
              drainage
identified a major political capital, El Coyote, with over 340
              prehistoric
structures covering 0.7km2.  Excavation of 2,850m2 on and around
              40 buildings
at El Coyote and in five rural sites revealed a history of
              occupation that
diverged markedly from the expected.  Specifically, emerging
              data patterns
suggest that first, El Coyote came to prominence during the Late
              Classic
period (AD 600-950; the site was founded as early as AD200), possibly
              as an
outpost of its larger Naco Valley contemporary, La Sierra.  Second,
              rather
than staying within La Sierra's shadow, El Coyote's rulers established
              their
independence by AD 1000.  Third, building on their new-found autonomy,
              lower
Cacaulapa notables went on to fashion a realm that was growing in size
              and
complexity, and acquiring goods from as far away as central Mexico
              and
Guatemala's Pacific coast, between AD 1000-1300, when neighboring
              societies,
including those in Naco, suffered profound declines.  Assessing
              these 
preliminary interpretations requires further analyses of ceramics,
              stone 
tools, faunal and floral remains, as well as human skeletons, to be
              conducted 
with National Science Foundation support during May through
              December, 2001.  
These studies will focus on: 1.  stylistic studies of
              artifacts, particularly 
ceramics, designed to help date deposits, and infer
              the external connections 
enjoyed by lower Cacaulapa residents through time;
              2. technological analyses 
aimed at identifying the range and scale of
              specialized production activities 
in which residents of El Coyote and its
              hinterland engaged; 3. functional 
studies aimed at reconstructing changes in
              patterns of consumption and 
production across time and space; 4.
              distributional assessments, to test for 
artifact patterns suggestive of
              wealth and power differences; 5. examination 
of skeletal remains to describe
              demographic processes as well as stresses (for 
example, dietary deficiencies,
              injuries, physical changes from movements 
unique to certain occupations) to
              which lower Cacaulapa populations were heir.
 The planned work is crucial to
              writing lower Cacaulapa valley prehistory and 
comparing the ways in which
              political and economic processes were manipulated 
there and within other
              ancient states.  The research applies not just to 
Honduras, or even the
              ancient New World, but to any society in which those 
seeking power tried to
              alter their societies, while others resisted 
domination.


