Title       : Cooperative Grain Boundary Sliding and Heterogeneities of Grain Boundary
               Character Distribution in Superplastic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0109535

Award Number: 0109535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid Garmestani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Kalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0109535
Garmastani

This project is aimed at greater understanding of
              fundamental mechanisms of structural superplastic deformation in different
              aluminum alloys using the most current digital imaging and insitu microscopy
              techniques. It has been established that grain boundary sliding during
              micrograin superplasticity operates heterogeneously and in a cooperative
              manner. The nature of heterogeneity of cooperative grain boundary sliding
              remains unclear. Fundamental understanding of the origin of this important
              deformation mode can be fruitful for the improvement of theoretical models of
              superplasticity as well as for the design of advanced materials with improved
              superplastic properties. The main goals of this study are: (1) to determine the
              relationship between cooperative grain boundary sliding and grain boundary
              disorientation (mesotexture) in three fine-grained aluminum alloys (AA7475,
              AA5083 and D19) that manifest different micro-mechanical behavior; (2) to study
              topological modes of grain boundary sliding in these alloys; (3) to investigate
              accommodation mechanisms for cooperative grain boundary sliding. To reach these
              goals two different micro-characterization techniques are combined together:
              Orientation Imaging Microscopy (OIM) in Scanning Electron Microscope and
              Nanoscratching with Scanning Probe Microscope. The work is based on insitu
              micro-tensile stage capability that will be used in conjunction with real time
              OIM analysis to provide important information on the nature of the grain
              boundary sliding. The funding for this research provides a first hand exposure
              to research in forefront of science and technology to minority students at
              FAMU-FSU College of Engineering. 
%%%
This research develops new
              understanding of the mechanisms involved with superplasticity beyond the
              present state of the art. The results are applicable for cost savings for metal
              fabrication through near net shaping. The research will make significant
              contributions to minority education and research.
***

