Title       : Cytochrome c and Apoptosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2002    
File        : a0109366

Award Number: 0109366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Pielak gary_pielak@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cytochrome c and apoptosis activating factor-1 (apaf-1) are the judge and
jury
              of mitochondrially-mediated programmed cell death (apoptosis).
              Their
interaction seals a cell's fate by launching a tightly controlled
              program that ends
in cellular disintegration, and imbalances in this
              regulation are associated with
cancer, neurological diseases, and heart
              disease. Given the biological and
medical relevance of this protein-protein
              reaction, it is surprising that its
molecular basis is unknown. The broad
              long-term goal of this project is to
determine the molecular basis for the
              interaction between cytochrome c and
apaf-1. The main hypotheses are: a)
              Cytochrome c uses the same cationic
patch to interact with apaf-1 and its
              redox partners. b) Apaf-1 uses specific
anionic patches to interact with
              cytochrome c.
The specific aims are 1) Quantify apaf-1 / cytochrome c binding,
              2) Identify
probable binding sites on apaf-1 and cytochrome c, 3) Test the
              binding sites.
Sedimentation equilibrium methods will be used to quantify
              binding, but
alternative methods are also discussed. Probable binding sites on
              the WD repeat
domain of apaf-1 have been identified in modeling studies, and
              the redox-partner
binding site on cytochrome c has been known for many years.
              The sites
will be tested by using site directed mutagenesis. To ensure that
              biologically
significant data are obtained, the variants will first be
              assessed by using a quick
and biologically relevant caspase activation assay.
              Once the biologically
relevant residues have been identified, the biophysics
              of the variants will be
characterized. Circular dichroism spectropolarimetry
              will be used to assess their
integrity. Sedimentation velocity experiments on
              apaf-1 variants will be used to
assess their effects on intraprotein
              interactions. Sedimentation equilibrium
techniques from aim 1 will be used to
              quantify their effects on the free energy
and stoichiometry of complex
              formation.
