Title       : SBIR Phase I: Analysis of Combinatorial Bioproducts using Absorbance-Based,
               Multiplexed CE (Capillary Electrophoresis)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0109593

Award Number: 0109593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ho-ming Pang homing.pang@combisep.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CombiSep
	      1915 Scholl Road
	      Ames, IA  500113020    511/294-7135

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will develop high
              sample throughput methodologies via multiplexed capillary electrophoresis (CE)
              for applications in the areas of combinatorial synthesis and proteomics. CE has
              the potential to function as a platform for a high- throughput analysis system,
              but suffers from unacceptable variations in migration times and injection
              volumes. Furthermore, today's multiplexed CE systems use fluorescence detection
              only, which without labeling is ineffective in detecting ~90% of all known
              compounds. This project proposes the fabrication and validation of a
              96-capillary array CE system that employs 1) absorbance-based detection, and 2)
              current measurement in each capillary. The former eliminates the need and
              problems with fluorescence, significantly expanding the scope of multiplexed
              CE. The latter uses the collected current to reduce migration time and
              injection volume variability to the levels required for routine analytical
              work. Success in Phase I will lead to a Phase II program in which the analysis
              system will be optimized and protocols for peptide mapping and combinatorial
              synthesis will be developed and standardized. 

Potential commercial
              applications of this project are in markets needing high throughput screening
              methods. Target customers for the technology include fine chemical makers that
              use combinatorial techniques to develop new catalysts and other materials,
              pharmaceutical firms that conduct high-throughput screening in drug discovery
              for the development of pharmaceutical compounds, biotechnology companies that
              utilize peptide mapping for the rapid fingerprinting of proteins, and  clinical
              and forensic laboratories that require high-throughput screening to analyze
              samples and develop evidence in criminal investigations

