Title       : In Vitro Evolution to Diversify an Enzyme's Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0109668

Award Number: 0109668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ichiro Matsumura imatsum@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to learn how enzymes evolve to recognize new
              substrates. A better understanding of adaptive evolution will explain how the
              complex molecular machinery of life arose, and enable the artificial selection
              of novel catalysts for industrial or medical applications. Enzymes could
              theoretically adapt to new substrates by the following ordered mechanism: 1)
              mutations that destabilize the conformation of the active-site initially
              broaden substrate specificity; 2) active-site flexibility enables the
              occurrence of mutations that introduce novel interactions with the new
              substrate; 3)  mutations that stabilize the new productive active-site
              conformation further improve catalytic activity. This hypothesis will be tested
              by directing the evolution of a model enzyme called beta-glucuronidase (GUS).
              The gene encoding GUS will be randomly mutated. The resulting library will be
              expressed in populations of Escherichia coli, and screened for variant enzymes
              exhibiting increased catalytic activity in reactions with a novel substrate
              analogue. The corresponding alleles will be isolated and randomly mutated for
              another round of screening. After three rounds of evolution, the beta-
              galactosidase activity of GUS has already increased 500-fold, with a
              52,000,000-fold inversion of specificity. The process will be continued until
              the catalytic efficiency and specificity of the wild-type lacZ
              beta-galactosidase has been matched. The entire evolutionary process will also
              be repeated with different substrate analogues. The structural and functional
              changes that occur along each evolutionary pathway will be studied and
              compared, and the rules governing adaptation will be inferred. 

