Title       : In vivo EMG, bone strain and cineradiography in strepsirrhine primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0109130

Award Number: 0109130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Callum F. Ross cross@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The faces of primates exhibit a variety of shapes, particularly around the bony
              orbits, which house the eyes. It is not known whether this variety reflects
              differences in adaptations to feeding or adaptations to vision.  Recent
              research has suggested that the bones around the orbit are strained very little
              during feeding, and a suite of "nonfeeding" explanations for the evolution of
              the primate orbital region have been proposed.  It has also been suggested that
              the orbital region might be adapted for resisting feeding forces in some
              primates, but not in others.  The research proposed here will determine whether
              there are differences between monkeys, apes and humans on one hand, and
              bushbabies on the other in the functioning of the orbital region during
              feeding.  In contrast with the diversity in primate facial shape, primates seem
              to move their jaws in similar ways. This suggests that primates might have
              evolved their shape differences within the limits dictated by an ancient,
              conserved, behavior pattern shared with other mammals. This research will
              collect data on simultaneous jaw movements and muscle activity in several
              species of primates to determine whether changes in bony form really have
              proceeded without significant changes in the way primates move their jaws and
              fire their chewing muscles.

