Title       : Creation of Nanoscopic Structures at Various Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0109077

Award Number: 0109077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shenda M. Baker shenda_baker@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The variables affecting the nanoscopic geometry of diblock copolymers will be
              examined for a variety of amphiphilic diblock asymmetries at the liquid-air,
              solid-air and solid-liquid interfaces.  Because the features of diblocks tend
              to be molecular in scale, the sizes observed naturally fall into the range of
              nanometers.  One aspect of this work focuses on the controlled deposition of
              diblock copolymers on silicon substrates using a Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) trough,
              where the surface density is a selectable parameter.  Different asymmetries of
              an amphiphilic diblock have produced various morphologies due to aggregation of
              the water-insoluble block.  In a complementary fashion to the LB studies, the
              kinetics and surface excess of the same selection of diblocks adsorbed from a
              variety of solvents to a liquid-solid interface will be determined for solution
              concentrations above and below the critical micelle concentration (cmc) using
              Fourier Transform IR spectroscopy in the mode of attenuated total reflection
              (FTIR-ATR).  Atomic Force Microscopy neutron reflectivity and ellipsometry will
              aid in the interpretation of surface excess and three-dimensional structure. 
              The combination of these approaches should provide a better understanding of
              the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters that can b used to control surface
              density and geometry.
%%%
Participants in the research projects will include
              a postdoctoral researcher and several undergraduates.  In addition, the current
              interaction with a local high school will be enhanced with a high school
              student research opportunity and more interactions and follow-up experiences. 
              An advanced course in Surface Structure and Spectroscopy will continue to be
              developed in order to take advantage of new technologies in education.

