Title       : Solar and Space Physics: A Community Assessment and Strategy for the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0109283

Award Number: 0109283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Charo acharo@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to organize a broadly based community assessment of the
              current status and future directions of the U.S. solar and space physics
              research programs. The study will be organized in a manner similar to the
              'decadal survey' that is regularly conducted by the astronomy and astrophysics
              community. The Committee on Solar and Space Physics will establish a 12-person
              survey committee to carry out the study with input from five panels, each of
              which will have up to 10 members. Most Committee on Solar and Space Physics
              members will serve on either the survey committee or the panels, with
              additional membership drawn from the relevant research communities. Special
              attention will be given to appropriate balance between experts from the
              space-based and ground-based research communities. The study will generate
              consensus recommendations from the solar and space physics community regarding
              a systems approach to theoretical, ground-based and space-based research that
              encompasses the flight programs and focused campaigns of NASA, the ground-based
              and basic research programs of NSF, and the complementary operational programs
              of other agencies such as DoD, DoE and NOAA. During this study, the community
              will survey solar and space physics and recommend priorities for the decade
              2003-2013. Attention will be given to effective implementation of proposed and
              existing programs and to the human resource aspects of the field involving
              education, career opportunities, and public outreach. Promising areas for the
              development of new technologies will be suggested. A minor but important part
              of the study will be the review of complementary initiatives of other nations
              in order to identify potential cooperative programs.
