Title       : Dissertation: The Impact of Hunting by Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) on
               Demography and Behavior of Red Colobus Monkeys (Procolobus badius) in the
               Kibale National Park, Uganda.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0109999

Award Number: 0109999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300               (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Watts david.watts@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Predation strongly affects primate social evolution, and chimpanzees and red
              colobus monkeys have a particularly intriguing predator-prey relationship. 
              Chimpanzees regularly prey on various mammals, but red colobus are their
              preferred prey wherever these two species co-occur. There are extensive data on
              hunting frequency and prey offtake for several sites, but few on the impact of
              predation on red colobus social structure and population density and on their
              responses to chimpanzees.  This research will provide data on red colobus
              behavioral ecology and the impact of chimpanzee predation on red colobus group
              size, group composition, and population density at Ngogo, Kibale National Park,
              Uganda.  These data will address questions about primate social evolution, red
              colobus anti-predation strategies, and the sustainability of predation by
              chimpanzee.  Ngogo has the largest known chimpanzee community; predation there
              is unusually intense and might have caused a long-term decline in the red
              colobus population, but demographic data are inadequate to be sure.
Monthly
              censuses along four transects, conducted for 21 months, will provide data on
              population density and group size and composition.  These data, plus previous
              census data and data on the chimpanzees, can assess the relationship of group
              size to predation pressure and whether the population has declined.  Data on
              group composition will test hypotheses about anti-predation strategies (e.g.,
              infant and juveniles survive better in groups with many adult males).  Data on
              ecology will examine tradeoffs between foraging efficiency and protection
              (e.g., feeding competition increases with group size, but individuals are safer
              in larger groups).  Experimental playbacks of chimpanzee vocalizations to red
              colobus, plus observations of responses to naturally occurring vocalizations
              and to chimpanzee proximity, will address hypotheses about anti-predation
              strategies.  This research will improve our understanding of how predation
              influences primate behavior and of the implications of hunting by chimpanzees
              for human evolution.

