Title       : Sexual Development in Phytophthora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0109933

Award Number: 0109933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard S. Judelson howard.judelson@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research will elucidate the developmental biology and genetics of mating
              and sexual spore development in oomycete fungi, using the plant pathogenic
              genus Phytophthora as a model. Oomycetes are an important but understudied
              group of lower eukaryotes that include many economically and environmentally
              significant pathogens of plants and animals, biocontrol agents of other
              pathogens, and saprophytes. In oomycetes as in many other microbes, mating is
              an important element of the life cycle. Mating results in the formation of
              oospores, which are durable structures that can survive season-to-season to
              initiate disease epidemics. The sexual cycle also enables gene flow through
              populations, yielding strains that may be more fit due to new combinations of
              loci determining pathogenicity, host preference, fungicide resistance, and
              other traits. Much of this proposal focuses on P. infestans, which is a
              devastating plant pathogen (potato late blight) that causes many billions of
              dollars of damage per year. It is also a good model system for studying
              oomycete biology. P. infestans is heterothallic, and oospores are normally
              induced when isolates of different mating types interact through hormones. In
              previous work, nine genes induced during mating were identified. In this
              project a multidisciplinary approach will be used to address the function and
              regulation of such mating-regulated genes. This will entail identifying
              additional regulated genes, and for a subset of the genes studying their
              structure, cellular localization of their protein products, and the effects of
              silencing and forced expression. In addition to studies of P. infestans, the
              expression of the genes will also be characterized in a homothallic species, P.
              phaseoli, which produces oospores in single culture. Preliminary studies of
              novel chemicals secreted during mating will also be performed. Results from
              this investigation will have conceptual as well as practical impacts. A better
              understanding will be obtained of the diverse strategies used to direct
              eukaryotic cell differentiation, to respond to stress, and to form survival
              structures. Important issues in development will be addressed such as cellular
              communication, self/nonself recognition, cell type determination, gene
              regulation, and signal transduction. The basis of homothallic and heterothallic
              mating systems will also be illuminated. It is likely that mating in oomycetes
              is regulated differently than in other lower eukaryotes such as ascomycetes and
              basidiomycetes, which lack taxonomic affinity to oomycetes. In the long term,
              if the factors which control mating can be identified, it might be possible to
              control plant diseases by manipulating the life cycles of pathogens using
              rational mechanism-based inhibitors instead of environmentally harmful
              chemicals.
