Title       : Asymptotic Geometric Analysis: Matrices, Operators and Noncommutative Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0109362

Award Number: 0109362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanislaw J. Szarek sjs13@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves continued research on the geometric,
probabilistic and
              combinatorial aspects of functional analysis and
convexity theory, with
              particular attention to noncommutative objects and
phenomena.  While most of
              the problems considered in the project have
motivation in other fields of
              mathematical sciences, they are typically
expressed in the language of local
              or finite dimensional geometry of Banach
spaces and/or analyzed using the
              methods prevalent in that area.  Sample
research topics include:  entropy of
              linear operators and duality of such
entropy, structural properties of
              high-dimensional convex bodies, various
analytic and geometric questions
              related to random matrices, some problems
in the  "local" operator theory,
              Gaussian correlation of convex sets,
concentration phenomenon in the
              noncommutative context and some geometric
questions related to free and
              quantum information theories.


        On an elementary level,  Analysis is
              a study of  functions,  or
relationships  between quantities and the
              parameters on which they depend.
As it happens,  very many naturally appearing
              relationships are linear or
at least convex.   Thus,  a good understanding of
              convex functions and,
consequently, of convex sets is a prerequisite for
              understanding those
relationships. The number of free parameters in the
              underlying problem can
often be related to the dimension of sets in the
              corresponding mathematical
model.  Since real-life problems usually do depend
              on very many parameters,
the high-dimensional setting is of particular
              interest.  This is exactly
the domain of Asymptotic Geometric Analysis, which
              studies quantitative
properties of convex sets as the dimension goes to
              infinity.  It
constitutes a fertile middle ground between the classical
              Functional
Analysis and the classical Geometry.  Functional Analysis is
              usually
concerned with the infinite-dimensional setting  (which frequently is
              an
idealization of a very large dimension), but it often provides
              only
qualitative information.  On the other hand,  Geometry typically
              yields
very precise information for a specific not-too-large dimension.  For
              the
last two decades or so the asymptotic theory has been quite successful
              in
identifying and exploiting "approximate" symmetries of various
              problems
that escaped the earlier "too qualitative" or "too rigid" methods.
              (This
led, among others, to the discovery of many links to Computer
              Science.)
Finally, to explain our interest in noncommutativity we point out
              that it
simply reflects the fact that the final outcome of a process may
              depend on
the order of operations involved;  the best known, but by far not
              the only
manifestation of that principle is quantum mechanics.

