Title       : Adsorption Dynamics on Different Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0109057

Award Number: 0109057
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haskell Taub taubh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Herwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide funds to a senior scientist for
              a project investigating the adsorption of polymers from a fluid mixture onto a
              solid surface.  Whereas considerable progress has been made in understanding
              the structure and thermodynamics of such polymer films near interfaces, little
              is known of the microscopic dynamics of these systems.  This project will
              investigate how polymer chains move so as to anchor, diffuse, and eventually
              desorb from a solid surface.  The particular systems to be studied are linear
              and branched alkane molecules of intermediate size (20 and 40 carbon atoms) on
              graphite and Ag(111) substrates that serve both as interesting prototype
              systems and which contain the principal constituents of commercial lubricants. 
              Quasielastic neutron scattering will be used to investigate the diffusive
              motion within the alkane films on time scales from picoseconds to tens of
              nanoseconds, while their static structure will be determined by neutron
              diffraction and synchrotron x-ray scattering.  These experiments on alkane
              films will provide important tests of computer simulations of selective
              adsorption dynamics and may ultimately lead to the development of better engine
              oils.  Graduate students will be trained in fundamental aspects of polymer
              science, preparing them for careers in the petroleum and rubber industries as
              well as at national facilities for neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering.
              
%%%
Processes in which one chemical component in a fluid mixture
              preferentially sticks to a solid surface occur widely in materials science.  Of
              particular interest is the selective adsorption from solution of long
              flexible-chain molecules, a process that is important in technological
              applications such as lubrication and adhesion.  Whereas considerable progress
              has been made in understanding their structure and thermal properties, little
              is known about motion within these polymer films at the molecular level.  This
              individual investigator award will provide funds to a senior scientist for a
              project investigating this issue.  This project will investigate how polymer
              chains move so as to anchor, crawl about, and eventually depart from a solid
              surface.  The particular systems to be studied are linear and branched alkane
              molecules of intermediate size (20 and 40 carbon atoms) on graphite and silver
              substrates that serve both as interesting prototype systems and contain the
              molecules that are the principal constituents of commercial lubricants. 
              Quasielastic neutron scattering will be used to investigate the molecular
              motion within the alkane films on a wide range of time scales at the atomic
              level, while positions of the molecules will be determined by neutron
              diffraction and synchrotron x-ray scattering.  These experiments on alkane
              films will provide important tests of computer simulations of selective
              adsorption dynamics and may ultimately lead to the development of better engine
              oils.  Graduate students will be trained in fundamental aspects of polymer
              science, preparing them for careers in the petroleum and rubber industries as
              well as at national facilities for neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering.
              
***

