Title       : 2001 CSHL Conference on Eukaryotic mRNA Processing to be held August 22-26,
               2001, Cold Spring Harbor New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0109908

Award Number: 0109908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference "Eukaryotic mRNA Processing", to
              be held August 22 - 26, 2001, will convene scientists studying various aspects
              of mRNA processing, transport and turn-over. Major advances have recently been
              made in these areas, and the conference will be a timely event for discussing
              the latest unpublished results and exchanging ideas, thereby fostering new
              developments in this rapidly moving field. The 2001 conference is the third
              meeting of this conference, which is held every other year at Cold Spring
              Harbor Laboratory. The most recent meeting was held on August 25-29, 1999, and
              attracted internationally 277 scientists who are actively investigating various
              aspects of messenger RNA maturation in eukaryotic cells, using genetic,
              biochemical, molecular, and cell biological approaches. As in the previous
              meetings, a major focus will be on nuclear events in mRNA maturation,
              particularly mRNA splicing and polyadenylation, but the scope will now be
              expanded to encompass the impact of the history of an mRNA on its ultimate
              biological fate. The meeting format will consist of seven plenary sessions and
              three poster sessions. Speakers in the plenary sessions will be selected on the
              basis of the submitted abstracts, which will encourage active participation by
              junior scientists. The main topics covered will include catalytic mechanisms of
              mRNA splicing and 3'-end processing; developmental and cell-type
              specific
regulation of gene expression by alternative splicing and
              polyadenylation; structure and function of snRNP and hnRNP particles; assembly
              of the processing machineries; mRNA transport and turnover; and localization
              and dynamics of RNA processing reactions. 

A messenger RNA (mRNA) is a
              molecule  that carries the information encoded by a gene in a form that is
              useable by the cell. Various types of processing of mRNA's enable cells to
              regulate their use according to the cells' needs.  Proper processing of mRNA's
              is essential for their functioning. This meeting will help disseminate current
              research findings on this vital topic and will stimulate and facilitate further
              advances.  This award will enable graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
              young investigators working in the United States to attend the meeting.


