Title       : Diffusion Studies and Defect Spectroscopy with Isotopically Controlled
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0109844

Award Number: 0109844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene E. Haller eehaller@lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will fund research focussing on self- and
              dopant atom transport in crystalline elemental and compound semiconductors at
              the atomic level.  Multilayer structures consisting of different stable
              isotopes (e.g., 28Si and 30Si) will be doped such that the equilibrium native
              defect concentrations remain undisturbed by the doping process.  Secondary ion
              mass spectrometry (SIMS) will be used to measure directly and simultaneously
              the concentration profiles of the host crystal isotopes and the dopant atoms as
              a function of depth after thermal treatment for specific times.  Analysis of
              these concentration profiles leads to a quantitative understanding of matter
              transport properties.  Specifically, the charge states and the diffusivity of
              the native defects controlling the matter transport will be determined as a
              function of temperature  and the position of the Fermi level.  The knowledge
              gained from these studies will be used in the formation and the study of
              isotopically controlled semiconductor nanostructures.  Neutron transmutation
              will allow the doping of these crystalline nano particles at ambient
              temperature.  The basic parameters to be determined in this research effort
              will benefit directly the understanding of the stability of semiconductor nano
              particles and the advanced modeling of future generations of semiconductor
              devices.  Graduate and undergraduate students will be intimately involved in
              all aspects of this research.
%%%
The ever increasing performance of
              semiconductor devices is, in large part, due to the reduction in device
              dimensions and the concomitant possibility to place more functions on a chip. 
              Introducing the dopant atoms which give semiconductor devices their
              functionality, is reaching limits which can only be overcome by a fundamental
              study of dopant atom transport at atomic dimensions.  Because dopant atoms move
              assisted by native defects such as vacancies and/or self-interstitials, it is
              crucial for the understanding of the atomic transport to measure simultaneously
              the motion of the dopant and of the host lattice atoms.  This can be achieved
              for the first time through the use of crystalline multilayer structures
              consisting of different isotopes of the host semiconductor crystal.  This
              individual investigator award will support research using secondary ion mass
              spectrometry to measure dopant and isotope concentration profiles after
              exposure of the semiconductor structures to elevated temperatures for specific
              times.  The results of these studies will form the basis for the advanced
              understanding of both matter transport parameters required for processing of
              future semiconductor devices and the stability of semiconductor nano particles.
               The graduate and undergraduate students performing this research will obtain
              the training required for challenging positions in the semiconductor industry
              and in academia.
***


