Title       : SBIR Phase I: Microencapsulation of a Biocontrol Agent to Improve Control of
               Soilborne Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0109385

Award Number: 0109385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94207              (Estimated)
Investigator: D K. Cartwright kellyc@oztech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agricultural Resch Init
	      10052 Hwy 206 West
	      Harrison, AR  72601    870/743-6910

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9150,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Phase Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project  will
              investigate microencapsulation technology, including microencapsulated phase
              change materials (microPCMs), to improve biological control of soilborne plant
              diseases. Success in this program would enhance the potential of using this
              technology in a broad range of biocontrol arenas. Previous research has
              demonstrated that microPCM(s) can significantly improve bioherbicide efficacy
              through microclimate regulation. Biocontrol organisms for plant diseases have
              environmental constraints (moisture and temperature) to practical application.
              Additionally, many of these organisms also lack a suitable carrier or delivery
              system. The technology proposed in this program will address these constraints
              by providing supplemental moisture, supplemental nutrients and temperature
              regulation to a viable biocontrol bacterium that is encapsulated inside a
              protective capsule. Innovative microencapsulation techniques will combine
              water, microPCMs and nutrients in a form that can be delivered to seeds or
              vegetative cuttings. The key objectives of the Phase I project  are as follows
              :  (1) to evaluate compatibility of microencapsulated materials, (2) to design
              and to fabricate water microcapsules and microPCMs, (3) to encapsulate a test
              biocontrol bacterium, and 4) to evaluate these formulations individually or in
              combination with the test bacterium to control soilborne diseases in selected
              crops.


The commercial applications of this project will be in the huge,
              multibillion dollar market for materials needed to control soilborne diseases
              in flowers and in crops such as corn, soybeans, cotton, grain sorghum and
              rice.


