Title       : Phases and Dynamics of Disordered Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0109164

Award Number: 0109164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Alan Middleton aam@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0109164
Middleton
This award supports theoretical research, algorithm
              development, numerical simulations and analyses on a wide range of models for
              physical systems with quenched disorder. Sample systems modeled using classical
              degrees of freedom include random magnets, such as spin glasses, type-II
              superconductors, where magnetic flux is pinned by disorder, and even
              biologically important polymers, such as proteins and RNA. 
Optimization
              algorithms developed over the past few years have broadened the number of model
              systems with ground state and equilibrium behavior that can be studied with
              precision. In many cases, exact ground states or partition functions can be
              found in time polynomial in the system size.  The PI will extend the number of
              models that can be studied using such algorithms and develop new algorithms to
              generate excitations and to study nonequilibrium behavior. One application will
              be to determine critical exponents more accurately, for studying scaling
              pictures for these models. In addition, recent work has directly addressed some
              of the more subtle, qualitative questions about disordered systems, such as the
              number of nearly degenerate optima, the nature of the thermodynamic limit, and
              the nature of large, lowest energy excitations. These questions will be studied
              for more models, with the goal of unifying the description of disordered
              models. In addition, the details of thermal activation and equilibration will
              be studied using new approaches.  These will enable the study how memory
              effects take place in disordered magnets.
Collective transport through
              quenched disorder occurs in a number of physical systems, including
              solid-on-solid friction, fluid flowing over rough surfaces, moving colloidal
              crystals in disordered backgrounds, and magnetic flux motion in
              superconductors. Some types of motion, e.g., overdamped elastic media driven
              through disorder, are well understood. There are many simulations and
              experiments for which a general understanding of plastic flow, where particles
              can slide by each other and the transport is inhomogeneous, is lacking. The PI
              plans to continue to explore a model for such flow. This model, which
              interpolates between well understood elastic flow and plastic flow, can be
              solved exactly at the mean field level. This model will be extended to more
              realistic applications in finite dimensions, where potentially universal
              critical behavior, at the transition from hysteretic to non-hysteretic flow, is
              amenable to experimental study in a number of systems. The PI will extend work
              on charge transport in arrays of metallic dots, which is a useful model for
              studying channel-like flow and questions of universality.  The research
              activity supports the training of students in state of the art computational
              and statistical mechanical methods.
%%%
This award supports theoretical and
              computational research, and education on the statistical mechanics and driven
              dynamics of extended physical systems with quenched disorder.  The work
              encompasses a wide range of physical systems, for example, random magnets, such
              as spin glasses, type-II superconductors, where  magnetic flux is pinned by
              disorder, and even biologically important polymers, such as proteins and RNA. 
              The research is interdisciplinary, involving algorithmic development that
              impacts both computer science and computational condensed matter and materials
              physics, and activities at the interface between statistical physics and
              computational complexity. Specific research activities lie in two general
              areas: (1) equilibrium and near equilibrium behavior, including memory effects,
              in disordered statistical mechanical systems, and (2) models for plastic flow,
              which are applicable to flux flow in superconductors and to transport in charge
              density wave materials, and a novel model for charge transport. The thrust of
              the work is fundamental, intended to discover universal properties of, and
              physical connections among, diverse disordered systems, as well as, specific
              physical properties of a large number of models which can be compared with
              experiments, many of which involve phenomena important to everyday uses of
              materials.
***



