Title       : SBIR Phase I: Optical Fiber Chloride Sensor for Concrete Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a0109504

Award Number: 0109504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudio O. Egalon cegalon@intopsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Optical Sys
	      2520 W. 237th Street
	      Torrance, CA  905055217    310/530-7130

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes an
              optical fiber sensor to determine concentrations of chloride ions in composite
              concrete structures such as buildings and bridges. Maintaining the integrity of
              this nation's infrastructure is a major challenge, and the incursion of
              chloride ions into concrete is a major cause of structure failure in the U.S. 
              To solve this problem, Intelligent Optical Systems (IOS) will develop an
              innovative distributed intrinsic fiber optic sensor (DIFOS) that will consist
              of an optical fiber coated with a cladding that contains an indicator sensitive
              to chloride ions.  The cladding changes its spectral properties in the presence
              of chloride, causing the fiber's optical properties to reflect chloride ion
              concentration.  The sensor will detect chloride along its entire length,
              reliably indicating when structures need repair or replacement.  Embedded or
              retrofit in a concrete structure, the sensor will detect the incursion of
              chloride ions and provide real-time monitoring of chloride diffusion within the
              structure. This sensor can be used to prevent structure degradation and
              potential catastrophic failures.

The proposed system will be a valuable tool
              for safeguarding concrete structures. It will be used by civil engineering and
              construction companies.  This sensor can be embedded into new structures during
              fabrication and into old structures that are being repaired.  In addition, the
              concept of an optical fiber cladding that is sensitive to different analytes
              can be extended to smart structures such as aircraft, ships, and buildings to
              increase the safety of these structures and to decrease maintenance and
              inspection costs.

