Title       : Regulation of the Heat Shock Response in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0109940

Award Number: 0109940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Bonner jbonner@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The heat shock response is characterized by the induction of transcription of
              genes encoding protein chaperones.  Many stresses induce this response,
              foremost among them  oxygen stresses.  Most stresses that activate the heat
              shock response cause the unfolding and aggregation of proteins (as well as
              producing the oxygen radical, superoxide anion).  Hence, the current paradigm
              suggests that regulation of the response in eukaryotes occurs through
              competition for chaperones between unfolded protein and the Heat Shock
              Transcription Factor, HSF.  However, recent data indicate that HSF responds to
              superoxide anion in vitro, and suggest that superoxide may be critical for the
              heat shock response in whole cells of yeast, Drosophila, and humans.  Thus, the
              heat shock response may be more properly characterized as a response to
              superoxide, with protein unfolding being a consequence of the stress but not
              the direct trigger of HSF activation.  The purpose of this project is to
              distinguish whether unfolded protein or superoxide is the functional, in vivo,
              trigger of the response.  The experiments to achieve this goal include
              comparing kinetics of production of superoxide and unfolded protein, examining
              complexes between chaperones and unfolded protein as well as chaperones and
              HSF, examining oxidative damage to protein, and determining the effects of
              stresses in yeast cells that are grown anaerobically.  The project will also
              begin the pursuit of cellular components that counteract the effect of
              superoxide via biochemical activity that is dependent on reduced glutathione. 
              To complement these biochemical approaches, genetic analyses will be performed
              to seek genes that, when overexpressed, interact with the heat shock system. 
              In addition to providing genetic confirmation of the biochemistry, these
              experiments will provide an inroad into future analyses.


a
