Title       : Segregation in Multicomponent Macromolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0109610

Award Number: 0109610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica Olvera m-olvera@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0109610
Olvera
This theoretical research grant will model self-organization in
              certain classes of incompatible multicomponent macromolecular systems. 
              Analytical and numerical models will be developed to determine the conformation
              of self-organized aggregates of charged and/or multiblock macromolecules. 
              Both, charged chains and multiblock molecules, are capable of forming highly
              organized self-assembled structures with specific functions.  This is evident
              in the biological world, since nucleic acids and most proteins are charged
              and/or heterogeneous macromolecules.  We will determine the structure of
              simpler self-organized macromolecules designed for specific functions.  In
              particular, we will determine the structure and thermodynamics of dilute and
              semidilute charged polymer solutions in various ionic media.  Flexible
              polyelectrolytes, such as single strand DNA and polysterene sulphonate, for
              example, can undergo reversible expanded to compacted transformations where the
              size of the chains changes by orders of magnitude with the addition of
              multivalent particles of opposite charge.  This suggests their application as
              sensors.  Polyelectrolyte semidilute solutions, on the other hand, form
              physical gels in the presence of multivalent particles.  We will study the
              self-organization of these polyelectrolytes and of other complex multiblock
              molecules, such as triblocks of asymmetric crystallizable rigid rods, spacer
              and bulky oil chains.  These triblock molecules, self-organized into mushroom
              shaped nano-aggregates, are the first examples of achiral pure (non-mixture)
              longitudinal ferroelectric liquid crystals.  Models to explain this
              organization will be developed, and the possibility of supramolecular polar
              order in other complex chemical structures, including charged coil units, will
              be determined.  Finally, the project on hydrodynamic flow in multicomponent
              incompatible fluids, initiated during the last funding period, will be
              completed.  We will analyze the effect of flow in ternary fluids where the
              minority component segregates at interfaces forming vesicle-like droplets
              (wetting case) or forming a liquid droplet at the interfaces (non-wetting case)
              by using the code developed to study flow in multicomponent liquids of
              different viscosities.
%%% 

