Title       : GOALI: Dynamics of Molecules as a Probe of Pore Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0109433

Award Number: 0109433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56212              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Cory dcory@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pabitra N. Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0109433
D. G. Cory, MIT

This proposal, based on Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR), is at the forefront of analysis of the structure and
              flow in porous material, with emphasis to geophysical exploration.  The method
              will significantly improve the effectiveness of NMR to explore and characterize
              the structure and the dynamics of fluid transport through the porous material
              by coherent averaging.  The NMR signature is separated in to an isotropic
              spectrum, a frequency modulation, and an amplitude modulation.  These
              components can report on the chemistry of the mobile phase, the basic field
              variations, and the time/length scale correlation of the solid phase and the
              mobility of the mobile phase.

The proposed work for next year is focused on
              the design philosophy for the NMR coherent averaging scheme that suppress
              frequency modulations, extracting the model independent metrics from the
              amplitude modulation term, and finally to consider the inverse problem in these
              complex systems.  This would be a significant development at the forefront of
              this technology.

This work is in collaboration between university/industry
              (MIT and Schlumberger) with a co-PI from each organization.  The industrial
              partner is making substantial contribution to the project including the time of
              the co-PI from the industry.

BROADER IMPACT

The proposed project being at
              the forefront of NMR technology has broader impact in two fronts.  First, the
              program involves training graduate students with a unique set of expertise.  On
              a more general front, the method is applicable to many industrial and
              biological processes including exploration of material with insight that
              currently is not possible.

Since the proposed project is truly at the
              forefront of a major technology, and the scope is limited to the major
              innovative aspects of the overall research program, and the effective
              collaboration between the university and the industrial partner, the revised
              project is recommended for funding as a GOALI project.


