Title       : Structure and Function of Coatomer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0109794

Award Number: 0109794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rockford K. Draper draper@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the question of intracellular membrane traffic; i.e., how
              do cells move pieces of membranes from one physical location in the cell to
              another?  While much has been learned about this extremely complicated process
              over the past twenty years, there are still many questions that remain
              unanswered.  This project focuses on the function of a particular protein
              complex. COPI, that has been known to be involved in the specific movement of
              certain membranes from one place to another in the cell and in the specific
              inclusion of certain membrane proteins in the membranes that are moved.

Coat
              protein I (COPI) is a macromolecular protein complex consisting of
              ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) and coatomer.  ARF1 is a small GTP-binding
              protein that recruits coatomer to Golgi membranes and coatomer is a soluble
              complex that contains seven protein subunits alpha- through zeta-COP; there's a
              beta and a beta-prime). After assembly on Golgi membranes, COPI surrounds
              nascent vesicles that bud from the membrane. Once a vesicle has formed, ARF1
              hydrolyzes GTP and COPI dissociates from the membrane, releasing coatomer and
              ARF1 into the cytosol for another round of coating.  Although general features
              of the COPI cycle are known, the function and molecular mechanism of COPI
              action are poorly understood. Most researchers agree that COPI-coated vesicles
              carry membrane in a retrograde direction, from the Golgi to the endoplasmic
              reticulum (ER), but there is disagreement whether COPI-coated vesicles also
              carry membrane in the anterograde direction, towards the plasma membrane. It is
              not understood how COPI binds only to certain membranes, how vesicles coated by
              COPI form, or precisely how COPI helps select cargo to be included in a budding
              vesicle. The objective of this project is to better understand the function and
              action of COPI. Participating in the project will be a post-doctoral fellow, a
              Ph.D. student, plus rotating graduate and undergraduate students. The work will
              be done in a university environment where the PI has teaching responsibilities
              in graduate and undergraduate classes as well as research responsibilities.
              

Coatomer contains sites that bind amino acid motifs present in the
              cytoplasmic domains of certain transmembrane proteins. Binding of these motifs
              to coatomer is involved in selecting cargo to be included in a COPI-coated
              vesicle. The best-characterized cytoplasmic motif is the dilysine signal (KKXX
              and related sequences) that functions in the return back to the ER of resident
              ER proteins that have escaped to the Golgi complex. In published work supported
              by a previous NSF grant, Dr. Draper studied di-amino compounds that appear to
              mimic the dilysine motif and inhibit the association of beta-COP and delta-COP
              with Golgi membranes. The research supported by this award is an extension of
              that previous work and contains two related sub-projects.

Sub-project 1 is
              to investigate changes in coatomer caused by di-amino compounds and peptides.
              Dr. Draper has recently discovered that certain di-amino compounds that appear
              to interact with the dilysine binding sites on coatomer dissociate the large
              coatomer complex into smaller particles. This work will be continued to
              determine whether coatomer is dissociated into smaller particles by peptides
              that are natural ligands for coatomer. Coatomer will be incubated with peptides
              and the formation of sub-complexes will be analyzed by velocity sedimentation
              centrifugation. Which coatomer subunits are in the sub-complexes will also be
              determined.

Sub-project 2 is to understand the functional consequences of
              changes in coatomer caused by di-amino compounds and peptides. Dr. Draper has
              preliminary evidence that sub-complexes formed by coatomer in the presence of
              di-amino compounds retain partial function, and this work will be extended to
              study peptides that interact with coatomer. To assess function, Golgi membranes
              will be incubated with cytosol and an energy source in the presence or absence
              of peptides. Which coatomer subunits retain Golgi-binding ability will be
              determined by immunoblotting.

This project will thus examine the possible
              specific role played by the di-lysyl bearing peptides in COPI function.  If
              such a role is substantiated through these and subsequent experiments, it would
              have a major impact on our understanding of membrane trafficking and
              specificity.  Additionally, the project will serve as a vehicle for the
              education of the next generation of scientists as well as for the education of
              scientifically literate members of our society. 




