Title       : Applications of Novel Scanning Probe Methods to Electrochemical Studies.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0109587

Award Number: 0109587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen J. Bard ajbard@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Analytical and Surface Chemistry program supports this project by Professor
              Allen Bard of the University of Texas at Austin in which several new scanning
              probe/electrochemical microscopy techniques will be developed.  First, scanning
              electrochemical microscopy (SECM) will be applied to the measurement of ion
              flux through a single channel of a bilayer lipid membrane, and then of living
              cells.  Preliminary experiments have detected iodine transport across a
              membrane, and other researchers have used Prof. Bard's SECM method to monitor
              molecular ion transport through living cell membranes.  There is the potential
              to use SECM both as an imaging device and as a quantitative tool to extract
              kinetic information about ion transport.  A potential area of application is in
              the neuronal microenvironment and the release of neurotransmitters during
              exocytosis.  A second instrument combines the SECM with electrogenerated
              chemiluminescence.  Previous studies demonstrated the potential, but were
              limited by tip size and tip-substrate spacing.  Newly developed probes will
              overcome these problems and permit detailed studies of electrochemical
              reactions at and near electrode surfaces.  Applications include
              characterization of molecular electronic devices via a method termed "molecular
              voltammetry".  In molecular scale nanostructures, the discreteness of the
              electronic charge has been demonstrated to play a prominent role in device
              performance, and these can be further studied with the proposed analytical
              methods.

Scanning probe microscopy is widely used in the study of surfaces,
              including chemically reactive electrode surfaces to the surface of a living
              cell.  In this project, new techniques will be developed with a goal toward
              improving the quantification of the imaged features.  For example, ion channels
              have been imaged on cell membranes.  The next question is: What is the rate of
              ion transport through the imaged ion channel?

