Title       : Sensitivity of Deterministic Prediction to Model Configuration and Initial
               Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0109241

Award Number: 0109241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Paegle jpaegle@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses predictability of short to medium range weather
              evolution.  The first research component will examine reasons for the
              relatively small benefits of high resolution limited area models compared to
              more crudely resolved global models revealed in the Principal Investigator's
              (PI) recent studies.  These studies suggest that high resolution limited area
              models are superior to more coarse resolution global models at 12 and 24 hours,
              but lose their superiority by 36 hours.  The PI hypothesizes that this short
              period of higher accuracy may be explained by incompatibilities between the
              global model and limited area model that are coupled at one-way imposed lateral
              boundaries of the latter, and by dynamical inconsistencies between these models
              particularly in regard to orographic flow-blocking.  

It is also
              hypothesized that the proximity of the validation domain to the data sparse
              Pacific may limit accuracy of all models.  The relevance of these hypotheses
              will be examined by repeating prior limited area experiments with a global,
              variable resolution model that focuses its high-resolution window upon the
              entire conterminous United States.  This approach allows two-way global
              interaction between the highly resolved domain and the rest of the world and
              will be validated over both the western and eastern United States.  

The
              second portion the research will examine fundamental predictability issues
              regarding saturation of uncertainty growth, the spectral distribution of
              uncertainty evolution, and possible inferences for the spacing of atmospheric
              observations.  This work follows recent studies in which initial state
              uncertainty is determined from the difference of two separate, equally credible
              atmospheric analyses obtained from the United States and European operational
              numerical forecast models.  Those results indicate that initial state
              uncertainty from the larger scales contribute more to error growth than do
              uncertainties at the smaller scales.  These results, however, were based upon
              studies that used relatively coarse simulations of only five days duration that
              did not attain uncertainty saturation.  The PI will extend these investigations
              to higher resolution models with integrations up to two weeks in order to
              obtain more complete estimates of saturation of uncertainty, the spectral
              distribution of uncertainty evolution, and observation/analysis
              requirements.

Successful completion of this research could lead to improved
              weather forecasts and provide guidance for optimal siting of observational
              instruments.

