Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Ultrasensitive Gas Chromatography (GC) Detector with Highly
               Specific Response to Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0109731

Award Number: 0109731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Very bvery@dakotatechnologies.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota Technologies, Inc.
	      2201A 12th Street North
	      Fargo, ND  581021808    701/237-4908

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5371,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project details the
              roadmap to rapid commercialization of a powerful new gas chromatography (GC)
              detector, the Aromatic Specific Laser Ionization Detector (ArSLID).  Like a
              conventional photoionization detector (PID), the ArSLID creates ions by
              photoabsorption.  But its two-photon laser ionization process confers many
              significant advantages over the PID, including: extraordinarily low limit of
              detection, potentially the lowest of any GC detector; extremely fast response
              ideally suited for fast GC; miniscule background signal; far higher selectivity
              for aromatic hydrocarbons; stable  esponse over long periods of time; and
              compatible with all carrier gases, including air. Preliminary data taken with a
              prototype ArSLID already show the low background, selectivity, and sensitivity;
              it is as sensitive as any PID (ca. 1 pg toluene injected on-column).  At least
              an order of magnitude further improvement will be achieved in Phase I with
              incorporation of a compact, low cost microchip laser ionization source that
              also offers much higher pulse repetition frequency and shot-to-shot stability
              compared to the laser source used to date.

The ArSLID will find numerous
              applications that are difficult or impossible for a PID to meet. In the case of
              environmental analysis, the signals from the toxic and hazardous aromatic
              species (specifically the BTEX fraction) are too often buried in the aliphatic
              signals with a PID. Similarly, in pharmaceutical analysis, approximately 75% of
              the drugs contain an aromatic moiety and it is often challenging to find the
              drugs or their metabolites in the sea of endogenous compounds.  It is 
              estimated the annual sales of PIDs for GC detectors at $21 million and expect
              to rapidly capture a significant fraction of this market owing to the superior
              performance capabilities of the ArSLID.

