Title       : Exchange Rates and Prices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0109286

Award Number: 0109286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Engel cengel@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the behavior of foreign exchange rates and goods
              prices. It provides a new time-series analysis of aggregate consumer prices and
              exchange rates. It offers a framework for extending "new open-economy
              macroeconomic" models. The structure proposed incorporates a local sector for
              distribution of imported goods. The project pursues how the volatility of the
              exchange rate depends on the amount of  "exchange-rate pass-through" to
              importers and to consumers, and the elasticity of demand for imported goods by
              consumers and the derived elasticity of demand by importer/distributors.  There
              is further study of the pass-through question, taking into account the separate
              roles of consumers and importer/distributors. Finally, empirical measures of
              pass-through to consumers and importers, along with other parameters are
              derived and used to simulate these new models.

The first phase of the
              project proposes a new way of looking at the "purchasing power parity" puzzle.
              Real exchange rates among advanced countries have been very volatile and
              extremely persistent since the collapse of Bretton Woods. The extreme
              volatility of the real rates seems to point to a monetary or financial force
              driving the exchange rate, as opposed to real productivity or taste shocks. But
              the standard monetary model requires that real exchange rate persistence be
              determined by the persistence of nominal price adjustment. This project breaks
              the link between the speed of adjustment of nominal exchange rates and the
              speed of adjustment of nominal prices implicit in such models. A new approach
              is developed that allows measurement of the speed of adjustment of prices and
              exchange rates to the equilibrium levels, using an unobserved components model.
              The key identifying assumption of the equilibrium levels is the long-run
              purchasing power parity assumption. The approach does not require that the
              equilibrium levels follow random walks, nor is it necessary to restrict the
              correlation of innovations to the equilibrium component and the transitory
              components.

The next part of the proposal advances a framework for extending
              recent dynamic stochastic general-equilibrium optimizing models of open
              economies with sticky nominal prices. It seeks to extend the analysis, and
              build models that reconcile the very low levels of exchange-rate pass-through
              to consumers with the greater degree of pass-through to import prices. Under
              this framework, it should be possible to understand the implications of
              empirical results that find expenditure- switching effects of exchange rates at
              the producer level, but little expenditure switching in final goods prices. One
              disappointment of the new open economy macro literature is its lack of progress
              on understanding nominal exchange rate determination. This project pursues
              potential avenues for understanding the high degree of nominal exchange rate
              volatility.

The framework for generalizing open-economy models takes
              pass-through parameters and elasticities of demand as given. The next part of
              the project develops some ideas for extending the theoretical literature on
              pass-through and menu-cost pricing in the context of models with
              importer/distributors that are distinct from final buyers.  Finally, the
              project proposes uses disaggregated data on consumer prices in conjunction with
              industry-level price and import data to produce estimates of pass-through and
              elasticities that will help calibrate the general equilibrium models.

