Title       : SBIR Phase I: Prevention of Fibrosis of Peritoneal Hydrogel Implants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0109616

Award Number: 0109616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem M. Kuhtreiber wmk@scientist.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BioHybrid
	      910 Boston Turnpike
	      Shrewsbury, MA  015453396    508/842-4460

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will develop the
              technology to inhibit and / or to prevent the fibrosis of peritoneal hydrogel
              implants. BioHybrid Technologies' microreactors are hydrogel-based
              sustained-release devices containing living cells that manufacture and secrete
              therapeutic substances. By encapsulating the appropriate cells derived from
              primary isolates, cell lines or stem cells; BioHybrid's microreactors can be
              geared to the treatment of a large variety of diseases. These microreactors
              have been shown to protect the cells from cellular and humoral immunity.
              However, the current design is still prone to cellular overgrowth, resulting in
              suffocation of cells within the microreactor and ultimately leading to
              microreactor failure. The objectives of this project are to determine (1) if
              anti-fibrotic agents included in the microreactors or those used systemically
              can inhibit fibrosis of microreactors, and (2) if  geometric changes made to
              the microreactors will render them less fibrogenic. The ability to control or
              to eliminate the host fibrotic reaction to such microreactors would represent a
              major advance in this promising technology . This is likely to be the last
              hurdle that must be overcome to finally bring BioHybrid's microreactor
              technology into the clinic.

The commercial applications of this project are
              expected to be immediate and significant. The final refinement in BioHybrid
              Technologies' microreactor technology  is likely to lead to substantial
              improvements in treatment for a large number of human diseases including
              diabetes, Alzheimer's, liver failure, chronic pain, hemophilia, dwarfism,
              anemia, hypocalcemia, ALS, Parkinson's, epilepsy, Huntington's, spinal cord
              injuries, strokes, kidney failure, immunodeficiencies, and several others. The
              commercial market for these diseases is huge, measuring in billions of dollars
              in the U.S. alone. The therapeutic improvements that would result from this
              technology will lower healthcare costs and enable other technologies that can
              take advantage of the advances in therapeutic substance delivery.

