Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Theoretical Study of Colossal Magneto-Resistive
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0109249

Award Number: 0109249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sashi Satpathy satpathys@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0109249
Satpathy  

Description:  This award supports the US-India
              cooperative research, Theoretical Study of Colossal Magneto-Resistive
              Compounds.  The collaborators are Professors Sashi Satpathy, University of
              Missouri-Columbia and T. Saha-Dasgupta, S.N. Bose National Center for Basic
              Sciences, Calcutta.  Colossal magnetoresistive (CMR) oxides are of considerable
              interest because they exhibit a variety of rich physical properties resulting
              from the coupling between the charge, orbital, spin, and lattice degrees of
              freedom.  They have great potential for industrial applications, particularly
              in the area of magnetic devices.  In recent years, a number of new CMR
              materials have been discovered and are being studied both experimentally and
              theoretically.  In this joint project, the collaborators will study the
              electronic structure and electron-lattice interaction in CMR materials and
              their relationship to transport and magnetism.     

Scope:  The PIs are both
              highly experienced in conducting electronic structure studies and this project
              will synthesize the PIs' respective research skills.  Theoretical study of CMR
              is a very current, intellectually challenging topic.  This research will make
              important contributions to the physical understanding and technical
              applications of CMR materials.  It will, also, encourage international exchange
              and greatly benefit the participants and their groups including graduate
              students.  This project is jointly supported by the Division of International
              Programs and the Government of India's Department of Science & Technology.  

