Title       : 'Earth Story' -- A Planning Grant for a Large-format Film
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0109277

Award Number: 0109277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49902              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin I. Shapiro ishapiro@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Irwin Shapiro, Director of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, is
              conducting a planning phase to develop a large format film about the formation,
              evolution and future of the earth.  The goal of the film will be to convey to
              the public that the Earth is a dynamic body and to examine the current evidence
              that scientists have about the origin and possible future of the Earth.  By
              presenting the current state of knowledge and by demonstrating the dynamic
              nature of science, the film will try to disabuse the beliefs held by many of
              the lay public that the Earth was created in the Big Bang and is virtually
              unchanging and that science is a collection of static facts that followed a
              series of "discoveries" by a few brilliant individuals.  

During the
              planning phase, Dr. Shapiro, the PI for the grant, will work closely with
              Bayley Silleck, Producer of the large format films "Cosmic Voyage" and "Lost
              Worlds:  Life in the Balance" to develop both the science content and the
              cinemagraphic aspects of the film.  They will call upon the expertise of a
              group of advisors that includes among others:  David Baum, Assistant Professor
              of Biology, Harvard University; Alastair G. W. Cameron, Donald H. Menzel
              Research Professor of Astrophysics, Harvard University; Howard Dimmick, Earth
              Science Teacher and Chairman of the Science Department at Stoneham High School;
              Janice Gobert, cognitive scientist from Western Michigan University; Jim Head,
              Professor of Geological Sciences, Brown University; and Thomas Herring,
              Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology.

Specific activities to be conducted during the
              planning phase include:

 Convene three meetings of the advisors to develop
              an outline for the film that will assure that it maintains substantive science
              while, at the same time, presenting the subject in a dynamic, visual, and
              educationally provocative manner.

 Engage a third party evaluator to conduct
              focus groups to determine the audience reaction to the topic of the
              film.

Form alliances with museum theaters.

Develop a plan for ancillary
              material to support the film.



