Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integrated Circuit Design for Biological Data Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0109671

Award Number: 0109671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98030              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Morizio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Triange Biosystems, Inc.
	      5114 Huxey Glenn Court
	      Durham, NC  277039293    919/596-8069

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
              integrated, wireless transceiver Complimentary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
              circuits for neuron based data acquisition (DAQ) systems. Currently available
              multi-channel neuron DAQ systems require a tethered connection for the
              surgically implanted analog head stage electronics. This wired connection
              limits the subject's freedom and motion. If a low power, wireless connection
              were possible, these limitations are eliminated. Furthermore, a wireless
              connection broadens the use of DAQ systems to clinical possibilities with
              humans. The critical design parameters for the wireless head stage transceiver
              circuits are 4 Million Bits per second (Mbs) data rate and 1mWatt power
              dissipation. The first is needed to meet the 16-channel bandwidth
              requirement.The second is required because of the miniature size and
              lightweight constraints of the battery power source needed for a wireless
              connection. The specific objective of the project is to design the most
              efficient wireless transmitter and receiver for the neuron DAQ system. Two
              protocols, namely, minimum Frequency Shift Keying (FSK) and Ultra Wide Band
              (UWB) will be considered and evaluated. This comparative evaluation, also
              involving Bluetooth radio chip sets, will be conducted on the basis of
              efficiency, layout area, noise and process immunity. Integrated CMOS filters,
              mixers and oscillators with off chip antennas will be simulated, designed and
              extracted to meet the 4Mbs and 1mWatt benchmark.

The commercial application
              of this project will be in the area of neuroprosthetics to restore sensory and
              motor function in patients with neural damage.

