Title       : SBIR Phase I: No Preparation, Flexible, Dry Physiological Recording Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0109733

Award Number: 0109733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Lisy lisy@orbitalresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Orbital Research Inc
	      673 G Alpha Drive
	      Cleveland, OH  441432140    440/449-5785

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              novel and flexible, dry, physiological recording electrode that conforms to
              non-planar surfaces and does not require extensive surface preparation or
              conductive gels to achieve a low impedance interface with the body. This
              innovative electrode will be fabricated inexpensively using microfabrication
              techniques and priced competitively with existing commercial electrodes despite
              its enhanced performance and features. The proposed dry electrode will provide
              substantial improvement in all areas of biomedical research and medicine that
              involve use of electro- physiological potentials such as EEG, EMG, EOG, and ECG
              signals. This unique electrode is particularly well suited for long-term and
              multiple electrode physiological monitoring as compared to existing commercial
              electrodes,since multiple electrodes can be easily fabricated into a single
              array with a common connector, thereby simplifying application. Additionally,
              by providing a low impedance interface with the body, this electrode will
              eliminate the need for an electrolytic gel or the need to abrade the skin prior
              to applying the electrode. 

The commercial applications of this project will
              follow directly from the development of the novel electrode (Orbital Research
              Dry Physiological Recording Electrode) that seeks to improve
              electro-physiological signal quality (for EEGs, EMGs, ECGs or EOGs), eliminates
              the harsh side effects and signal deterioration common with existing electrodes
              and is competitively priced. By enhancing quality of life at no additional
              cost, this biomedical innovation is expected to lead to new long-term
              monitoring applications.
