Title       : NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0109195

Award Number: 0109195
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Jones Kevin@cajal.csic.es  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : K,Jones
	      Avenida Doctor Arce, 37
	      ,       /   -

NSF Program : 1157      Minority Postdoc Rsrch Flw-New
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1036,1228,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2001.
              The goal of the fellowship is to prepare minority scientists for positions of
              scientific leadership in academia and industry. To attain this goal, the
              fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training of the highest
              quality to recent doctoral recipients. This program is an effort by the NSF to
              increase the number of  research scientists from underrepresented minority
              groups, thereby contributing to the future vitality of the Nation's scientific
              enterprise. It is expected that Fellows trained through these fellowships will
              play important roles in training of the future workforce.

The research and
              training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Investigating the Merging of
              Ionotropic and Metabotropic Signals at the Ionotropic Kainate Receptors." 
              Neurotransmission at chemical synapses is carried out by two distinct classes
              of receptors-  ionotropic and metabotropic. Ionotropic receptors are
              ligand-gated ion channels that respond to neurotransmitters by allowing ion
              flux across cell membranes. Metabotropic receptors, however,  mediate
              neurotransmission less directly by activating second messenger molecules which
              subsequently modulate cellular communication. Contemporary models of
              neurotransmission maintain that the signals evoked by ionotropic and
              metabotropic receptors are autonomous and exclusive. Recent data, however,
              suggests that kainate receptors, members of the ionotropic glutamate receptor
              family, may be capable of initiating both ionotropic and metabotropic signals.
              This research is elucidating the merging of these distinct signaling pathways
              by (1) reconstituting the putative pathway in a heterologous expression system;
              and (2) identifying proteins that directly interact with the ionotropic kainate
              receptors as potential mediators of  metabotropic coupling. These aims are
              being achieved by utilizing Xenopus oocyte expression and yeast two-hybrid
              screening, respectively.
