Title       : Putting the 'New Open Economy Macroeconomics' to a Test
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0109006

Award Number: 0109006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bergin prbergin@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops and implements a means of testing recent theories of
              current account and exchange rate determination. Recent years have witnessed a
              significant shift in international macroeconomic theory, with the development
              of an approach that combines the nominal rigidities essential to evaluating
              monetary policy, along with the analytical rigor of intertemporal microeconomic
              foundations. Widely known as the "New Open Economy Macroeconomics," these
              models offer greater insight into sources of current account and exchange rate
              fluctuations, and permit a means to judge their welfare implications.  This
              analytical approach might eventually provide a rigorous framework for analyzing
              macroeconomic policy, and thereby replace the more traditional Keynesian models
              that have long been useful but flawed workhorses for policy makers.  While the
              theoretical literature on New Open Economy Macroeconomics has proliferated, the
              empirical literature has lagged far behind. The econometric techniques used for
              previous generations of international models cannot accommodate the more
              complex models of the new generation. Without empirical testing, it is
              difficult to know which of the many versions considered in the theoretical
              literature is preferable, or if the general approach is accurate enough to
              eventually be used for policy analysis.  This project proposes and implements
              an empirical methodology that could facilitate the development of an empirical
              literature in the New Open Economy Macroeconomics. The research estimates by
              maximum likelihood a series of structural general equilibrium models of open
              economies. The research also develops and estimates an unrestricted counterpart
              model, so that a comparison of likelihood values can indicate if the data are
              generally consistent with the restrictions implied by the theory. Further,
              horseraces between competing theoretical models can help guide the direction of
              future theoretical work.

Preliminary work by the investigator has tested the
              methodology on a benchmark open economy model with wage and price stickiness.
              Results are surprisingly supportive of the New Open Economy approach, in that a
              likelihood ratio test is unable to reject the theoretical restrictions implied
              by the model for two of three countries considered. Nominal rigidities appear
              to be an essential element in this success, since a version that assumes no
              such rigidities is rejected strongly for all three countries. However, the
              presence of rigidities is more important for explaining some variables in the
              data set than others. Finally, the estimated model offers some additional
              insight into the source of fluctuations in real and nominal exchange rates,
              finding a larger role for monetary policy than was uncovered in past studies.
              Further work is needed to apply the methodology to a wider variety of models
              proposed in the burgeoning theoretical literature.

