Title       : Sulfolipid and Betaine Lipid Head Group Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0109912

Award Number: 0109912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Benning benning@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Non-phosphorous polar lipids are very abundant in membranes of photosynthetic
              organisms. In plants and bacteria, phosphate limitation increases the ratio of
              non-phosphorous lipids to phospholipids and a functional substitution of
              phospholipids by non-phosphorous lipids has been proposed. Examples are the
              sulfolipid sulfoquinovosyldiacylglycerol (SQDG) substituting for
              phosphatidylglycerol and the betaine lipid
              diacylglycerol-N,N,N-trimethylhomoserine (DGTS) replacing phosphatidylcholine.
              The sulfolipid is present in all plants and most photosynthetic bacteria while
              betaine lipids are abundant in non-seed plants, bacteria and fungi. The SQDG
              head group is a sulfonic acid derivative of glucose (sulfoquinovose). The SQD1
              protein of Arabidopsis is the key enzyme involved in the formation of the
              sulfolipid head group from UDP-glucose and sulfite. The crystal structure for
              the protein has been solved and an in vitro assay is available. These are the
              prerequisites for a detailed analysis of the SQD1 reaction mechanism pursued in
              this project. Furthermore, the interaction of SQD1 with other proteins and its
              true activity in vivo are under investigation. Two genes essential for betaine
              lipid biosynthesis in the purple bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides have been
              isolated. Based on preliminary analysis, one gene, btaA, is proposed to encode
              an S-adenosylmethionine:diacylglycerol 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl transferase
              catalyzing the first reaction of betaine lipid biosynthesis. The second enzyme
              presumably encodes an S-adenosylmethionine:diacylgycerolhomoserine
              N-methyltransferase converting diacylglycerol-homoserine to DGTS. Experiments
              are underway to test this hypothesis and to understand the reaction mechanism
              of these two enzymes in greater detail.  The chemical synthesis of sulfonic
              acids is well known, giving rise to numerous compounds encountered by humans
              during daily life. The sulfolipid of plants is a prominent example of a
              naturally occurring sulfonic acid. Carbohydrate and sulfur metabolism meet in
              the biosynthesis of sulfolipid. Understanding the biosynthesis of the
              sulfolipid head group will provide a model for the de novo formation of
              sulfonates in nature. This project focuses on the detailed analysis of the
              function of the Arabidopsis SQD1 protein in the test tube and inside the plant
              chloroplast. This protein is responsible for the introduction of the sulfonic
              acid into a precursor of sulfolipid biosynthesis. Betaine lipid biosynthesis is
              mediated by two interesting proteins. The first makes an unusual use of a
              common metabolite, S-adenosylmethionine. A similar reaction occurs in the
              biosynthesis of the antibiotic nocardicin. Elucidating the basic reaction
              mechanism of this enzyme is one of the goals and may provide clues for the
              synthesis of useful compounds. The second enzyme methylates the amino group of
              a lipid substrate. Experiments planned to understand the mechanism of this
              enzyme will provide fundamental insights into the general mechanism of
              lipid-linked N-methylation.


