Title       : Cheap Sturm-Liouville Spectral Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0109022

Award Number: 0109022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles T. Fulton fulton@zach.fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Pruess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The software package SLEDGE (Sturm-Liouville Estimates Determined by Global
              Error-control) is currently the only Sturm- Liouville code that can compute
              approximations to the singular spectral function of singular problems having a
              simple continuous spectrum. The present research will greatly reduce the amount
              of computation required, and thereby the computer time, by making use of a new
              real-variable formula for the spectral function. The new formula requires only
              that the zeros of the one solution that comes into the expansion formula, and
              its quasi-derivative at these zeros, be computed. The new code produced will be
              able to handle the following two cases of singular Sturm-Liouville problems
              having simple spectrum: (1) left endpoint regular and right endpoint OSC-NONOSC
              with finite cut-off value and (2) left endpoint of NONOSC type (Limit Circle or
              Limit Point) and a Regular Singular Point and right endpoint OSC-NONOSC with
              finite cut-off value.

The continuing development of software for
              Sturm-Liouville problems to be done under this project will yield much more
              rapid routines for the spectral density functions for Sturm-Liouville problems
              that have a continuous spectrum. The existence of such a rapid computational
              capability is bound to stimulate activity and aid research in a wide range of
              disciplines where such problems arise: (1) Problems of the above type
              frequently arise in the Schroedinger wave mechanics which physicists developed
              to study the nature of atoms and atomic particles. (2) Similarly, in the study
              of more complicated molecules quantum chemists make use of quantum mechanical
              theory to describe the nature of energy exchange in molecules. (3) In the area
              of ocean dynamics the theory of acoustic waves in the ocean gives rise for some
              very interesting applications of Sturm-Liouville problems. (4) Certain types of
              nozzles for spraying water involve fluid flow problems for high speed jets from
              the nozzle which involve the above type of Sturm-Liouville problem over a
              finite range. In addition to a wide variety of applications in disciplines
              outside of mathematics, the current research can also be expected to stimulate
              the activity of pure and applied mathematicians and theoretical physicists who
              work on various related topics such as "Inverse Spectral Theory" (the attempt
              to reconstruct potential functions from scattering data), "Resonance Problems"
              in quantum theory (the problems of identifying and modelling positive energy
              bound states), and "Periodic Potentials and Band Spectra" which arise in the
              theory of crystals. The ability to run spectral function calculations quickly
              on small to medium size computers will greatly aid in the teaching and training
              of mathematicians, physicists and computer scientists interested in the
              theoretical and computational aspects of Sturm-Liouville problems and their
              applications.      

