Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Baculovirus-mediated Gene Silencing Biocontrol Agent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0109737

Award Number: 0109737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98182              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott W. Chouinard schouinard@cambriabio.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambria
	      2 Preston Court
	      Bedford, MA  01730    781/275-2800

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project seeks to modify insect
              viruses for the purpose of generating a new class of species-specific insect
              biocontrol agents. The approach will combine the emerging technique of RNA
              inhibition (RNAi) with existing baculovirus technology to generate recombinant
              insect viruses capable of targeting individual or closely related insect pests
              with great specificity . Standard molecular biology techniques will be used to
              engineer baculoviruses containing a portion of an essential host insect gene
              inserted between convergent promoters, which when activated by host
              transcription factors, will synthesize both the sense and antisense RNA strands
              of the inserted gene. This double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) molecule specifically
              inhibits the expression of the corresponding gene in the host insect, thereby
              killing the animal. Standard bioassays will be performed in which the
              recombinant baculovirus will be delivered to host insects by feeding or
              injection, and the LD50 of this virus will be compared to that for an
              unmodified baculovirus and for a recombinant baculovirus expressing  an insect
              neural toxin. 

The commercial application of this project will be in the
              market for insect biocontrol agents. The recombinant insect viruses have the
              potential to serve as highly selective and environment- friendly insect
              biocontrol agents that kill pest insects faster than unmodified viruses and
              with greater specificity than viruses expressing insecticidal toxins that also
              affect beneficial insects.
