Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ferroelectric Thin Films on Low-Cost Substrates for Wireless
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a0109447

Award Number: 0109447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stollberg dstollberg@microcoating.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Atlanta, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
              producing high-quality BaxSr1-xTiO3 (BST) films with low dielectric losses and
              high tunability on low-cost substrates (sapphire and metal). These
              ferroelectric thin films are of great interest for advanced tunable microwave
              devices that are being used in, for example, wireless telecommunication
              hardware. To date, there are only two process technologies (PLD and MOCVD) that
              allow depositing BST onto sapphire and none exists for depositing BST onto
              metallic substrates. Hence, there is a compelling technical and commercial need
              to develop an advanced deposition process that can overcome these apparent
              shortcomings.  In related work we have shown that the proprietary Combustion
              Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD) process can deposit high-quality, epitaxial
              BST thin films onto a variety of substrates. The goal of this Phase I program
              is to demonstrate the capability of the CCVD process to produce tunable
              microwave devices using CCVD-grown thin films of ferroelectric BaxSr1-xTiO3
              (BST). The effect of systematically varying film composition and substrate on
              thin-film properties will be investigated with a special focus towards the
              intended wireless applications.

The market for low cost, tunable microwave
              devices continues to grow every year as the world untethers itself from the
              telephone lines. Over $300 million worth wireless handsets were sold this past
              year and that number is projected to rise to over $1.5 billion by the year
              2005.  Tunable devices also benefit the manufacturers of RF radios, satellite
              communication equipment, and active antennas. There is a tremendous interest in
              low-cost phase shifters with a price target of approx. $5. This goal is
              achievable with the right combination of advanced thin films, low-cost
              substrate and high-volume deposition technology.

