Title       : SBIR Phase I: Next-Generation Nonlinear Optical Materials for Production of
               Ultraviolet Laser Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0109851

Award Number: 0109851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Reynolds treynolds@rey-tech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ReyTech Corporation
	      742 SE Glennwood Drive
	      Bend, OR  977021316    541/617-1556

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused upon
              demonstrating the feasibility of developing a new class of nonlinear optical
              (NLO) materials.  Continued advances in laser-based system components are
              essential for keeping the nation's technology infrastructure at the forefront.
              Diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) laser systems represent one of the most
              important technologies being developed for many of these applications-with
              particular emphasis being placed on generation of coherent light at heretofore
              unrealized combinations of power levels and wavelengths extending from the IR
              to the deep UV. A limiting factor in the development of DPSS laser technology
              is the lack of suitable laser and nonlinear optical (NLO) crystals having
              optimized physical properties.  The development of new, efficient, robust,
              versatile, and readily manufacturable fixed- or tunable-frequency laser and NLO
              crystals is essential for the continued advancement of DPSS technologies. 
              Demonstrating the potential to develop materials having these required NLO
              properties-coupled with unprecedented transparency into the DUV combined with
              superior thermal and mechanical properties-is the Phase I goal. 

Successful
              completion will lead to commercialization of a new class of materials that will
              enable production of a variety of state-of-the-art laser-related products. In
              the private sector, laser materials and systems have become critical components
              in the manufacture of essentially all microprocessor-based electronic devices
              and in a variety of medical therapeutic and diagnostic procedures. Other key
              government and commercial uses include sensors for remote sensing of pollution
              and atmospheric gases such as ozone and water vapor, satellite-to-satellite
              communications, optical computing, and advanced communications.  Clearly, the
              potential market for this type of next-generation technology is substantial and
              diverse.

