Title       : Experimental Studies on Primate Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0109331

Award Number: 0109331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan G. Larson slarson@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack T. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brigitte Demes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past forty years, many studies have collected empirical data
              documenting aspects of the locomotor behavior of anthropoid primates (monkeys
              and apes).  The results of some of this research have revealed unusual
              characteristics of the form of quadrupedalism that primates display.  This has
              in turn led to suggestions of distinctiveness in primates among mammals in such
              things as patterns of neural control of movement.  However, based largely on
              data for anthropoids only, such conclusions are premature without comparable
              data on prosimian primates.  The goals of the proposed study, therefore, are to
              undertake a set of laboratory based studies concerning aspects of locomotor
              behavior among prosimian primates in order to supplement the currently sparse
              empirical data base, and allow comparisons with the better-documented locomotor
              behavior of anthropoid primates as well as nonprimate mammals.  The specific
              questions this study will address include documentation of patterns of muscle
              recruitment during quadrupedal locomotion in a variety of prosimian species
              including Lemur catta, Eulemur. fulvus, and E. rubriventer using the technique
              of electromyography (EMG); analysis of issues associated with the mechanics of
              leaping, a locomotor behavior that displays its most specialized development
              among certain prosimian species such as Propithecus coquereli using force-plate
              recordings; and examination of the locomotor behavior of Daubentonia
              madagascariensis, the Aye-aye, one of the most enigmatic of prosimian species,
              using a combination of motion analysis, EMG and force-plate recordings to
              attempt to interpret some of its many unusual postcranial morphological
              features.  The results of this research will significantly expand our empirical
              data base on primate locomotor behavior, permitting legitimate conclusions
              regarding what is or isn't characteristic of the Order.  Such information will
              contribute to a more precise definition of what it means to be a primate, and
              what factors were involved in the origins of the Order and its eventual
              dispersal and diversification.  

