Title       : New Directions in the Study of Ice and Water Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0109243

Award Number: 0109243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwin J. Singer singer@chemistry.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sherwin Singer of the Ohio State University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to study a wide range of aqueous systems, from
              small water clusters to bulk water and ice, using both analytical and numerical
              theoretical methods. One unifying thread in this research is the analysis of
              water structures in terms of the topology of the hydrogen bond network. Working
              with the hydrogen bond topology yields analytical results for systems where
              only numerical simulations would seem feasible. Moreover, the analytical
              approach allows extraction of hydrogen bonding properties from small water
              clusters or ice unit cells and, in a very general fashion, application of these
              parameters to systems large enough for statistical simulations. In this way,
              the results of high level ab initio calculations on small systems can be
              extended to predict statistical properties in the thermodynamic limit.
              Statistical simulations will also be performed with empirical potentials,
              including the PI's own dissociating water model.  Other plans include checks on
              the performance of empirical potentials with ab initio studies, quantum Monte
              Carlo studies of vibrational motion, and development of new ab initio molecular
              dynamics methods.

Modeling the behavior of biological molecules, systems in
              atmospheric chemistry, or pollutants in the ground water requires accurate
              models for liquid water, ice, and water clusters.  The models for liquid water
              that exist are in need of improvements, which will result from the outcomes of
              this research.
