Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION IMPROVEMENT GRANT: IDENTITY, RITUAL, AND EXCHANGE ALONG
               THE LOWER RIO PUERCO DRAINAGE NEW MEXICO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0109885

Award Number: 0109885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4610               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Ms Suzanne Eckert will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze large series of ceramics
              recovered from two archaeological sites, Hummingbird Pueblo and Pottery Mound
              located in the lower Rio Puerco drainage of New Mexico. These large multi-room
              sites are typical of the late prehistoric period of the region and date to
              approximately 1150 to 1400 AD. Within the Southwest the centuries immediately
              before Spanish contact are characterized by population movements from multiple
              widely dispersed small sites into a more limited number of larger entities.
              This of necessity required the development of social mechanisms which
              integrated previously distinct social groups. In addition to such local
              aggregation, long distance migration which characterized early historic
              Southwest groups also occurred in prehistoric times and evidence indicates that
              people from well outside the local region also lived at both the Hummingbird
              Pueblo and Pottery Mound sites. Ms Eckert wishes to understand how integrating
              mechanisms developed, the extent to which distinctive social identities were
              retained and the degree and nature of ties beyond the local Rio Puerco region.
              She will also examine how these factors changed over time

To address these
              questions, she will focus on the large well controlled ceramic material
              excavated at both sites. Because they reflect different aspects of social
              interaction she will: 1. analyze pottery designs and overt stylistic
              attributes; 2. examine the technology, such as paste manipulation, by which
              pottery is produced; 3. use petrographic analysis to identify and determine
              source location of raw materials to determine whether specific pottery types
              were imported or locally made; 4. reconstruct vessel size to provide insight
              into function. Ms Eckert has developed a model which, through the interplay of
              these variables, will allow her to examine such issues as retained ethnicity
              and trade and the potential importance of ritual feasting.

This research is
              important for several reasons. It will increase understanding of the complex
              interactions which characterize social group formation and how these develop
              over time. It will provide important data of interest to many archaeologists
              about a relatively poorly known region of the Southwest and will also
              contribute to training a promising young scientist.

