Title       : A Retrospective Dendroecology of American Chestnut in the Southern Appalachian
               Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1995 
File        : a9509307

Award Number: 9509307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stahle dstahle@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrica J. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm K. Cleaveland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509307  Stahle  The catastrophic chestnut blight destroyed one of the most
              important species of the eastern deciduous forest and initiated dynamic forest
              responses that may last for centuries. The scarcity of quantitative data on
              pre-blight forests has complicated efforts to understand the environmental
              impact of the blight. Fortunately, an exact and detailed record of chestnut
              growth can still be recovered from blight-killed logs in a few selected forests
              that are otherwise largely undisturbed. This project will develop 200- to
              300-year long tree-ring chronologies of American Chestnut from blight killed
              logs at six ancient forest locations in the southern Appalachian region.
              Tree-ring chronologies will also be developed at the same locations for three
              age categories of hemlock, and oak. These three categories will be ancient,
              young pre-blight, and young post-blight trees. At least 24 chronologies will be
              developed, including 3 chestnut and nine oak from xeric sites. The chestnut
              chronologies will be extended when possible with ancient chestnut timbers
              recovered from early historic buildings. All chronologies will be compared with
              monthly climate data which begin as early as 1871 in order to define the
              climate response of chestnut in pre-blight forests, and two of its important
              former associates in pre- and post-blight forests. The chronologies will be
              used to test hypotheses concerning possible changes in the climate forcing of
              southern Appalachian forest ecosystems following the blight. The PIs will test
              the hypothesis that the mature growth rates of chestnut were limited by
              specific climate variables unique to chestnut. If true, this unique climate
              influence on an important fraction of presettlement forests has been greatly
              diminished by the selective removal of chestnut. They will also test the
              hypothesis that the microclimate changes initiated by the blight have altered
              the specific seasonal climate variables most limiting to the growth of chestnut
              associates such as hemlock and oak. The p roposed tree-ring chronologies will
              salvage a priceless record of chestnut growth that has been ignored for over 50
              years and may soon decay beyond recovery.
