Title       : Applications of Group Theory to Large Scale Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9509783

Award Number: 9509783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene Cooperman gene@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Finkelstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project addresses computational issues for finite  groups that are
              currently beyond the scope of current    algorithms and existing  technology.
              The groups are  represented either as permutation   groups or as  matrix groups
               defined over finite fields. The questions of   interest  concern  both group
              theoretic structure and applications of  the group   theory.    A  central
              motivation for the research is the construction of    representations for
              matrix groups defined over  finite   fields.  This is an  important part of a
              large-scale  international effort to   develop a suite of  computational  tools
              for performing matrix group   computations.  The tools  to be  developed have
              application to problems in the  physical   sciences,  engineering, and those
              parts of  mathematics dealing with   high dimensional  matrix  representations
              of groups.    A second research area   computational techniques for  solving
              the minimum word   problem for finite  groups.  This  problem arises in many
              contexts, such as   routing in  interconnection networks and coding theory, and
              is known to    be computationally  difficult.  The research will lead to new 
              algorithms which    use group  automorphisms to prune the search tree of
              possible    solutions.    A third  research area is the development of a
              software  architecture   to bring parallel  computers to bear on large  scale
              problems in computational   group theory, such  as the  construction of very
              large matrix and permutation    representations.  Such as integrated,
              interactive environment  will enable   researchers to quickly  overcome the
              initial  learning barrier for effective use of   parallelism.  They  will  be
              able to combine readily available networks of   workstations  at their  home
              site (such as student labs), with an already  familiar   language, such as GAP
              or LISP.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
