Title       : Molecular and Morphological Systematics of Stanhopeinae (Orchidaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9509071

Award Number: 9509071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Whitten whitten@FLMNH.UFL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509071  Whitten   The Stanhopeinae orchids of the American tropics are a group
              of ca. 250 species of epiphytic orchids with flowers of strange and contorted
              shapes and usually with strong fragrances.  Many are now known to be pollinated
              by male fragrance-collecting bees, which are suspected to use these floral
              fragrances in the manufacture of their own pheromones.  The diversity of floral
              shape and size in these orchids appears linked to the pollination behaviors of
              native tropical bees.  Yet the taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships of the
              orchid species are typically based on these same morphological characters of
              the flowers.  This raises the problem of circular argument in arguing the
              co-evolution of plants and insects, and emphasizes the need for an independent
              set of characters on which to construct a phylogeny of the orchids. 
              Researchers Mark Whitten and William Stern at the University of Florida, in
              collaboration with Mark Chase at Kew in England, are analyzing chloroplast and
              nuclear DNA sequences in Stanhopeinae orchids, in order to assemble a large
              dataset of independent molecular characters, as well as new features of
              vegetative and reproductive anatomy.   Preliminary molecular data of mutational
              differences between DNAs of different species show promise for resolving close
              species-level relationships in this group of orchids.  By comparing and
              combining the molecular data with new and traditional morphological characters,
              the researchers will be able to construct an improved classification that
              reflects phylogenetic relationships.  Using this framework, they can then
              superimpose various ecologically related traits onto the phylogenetic tree, to
              generate hypotheses about the rate and direction of change in floral features. 
              In turn, such hypotheses will guide the study of how pollinating inects have
              interacted or coevolved with their plant associates.
