Title       : Accommodation Site Autonomy in Distributed Constraint Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9509789

Award Number: 9509789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhasish Mazumdar mazumdar@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Integrity is a guarantee offered by Database Management Systems, both
              centralized and distributed, against nonmalicious errors in its data, i.e., the
              data is faithful to the relevant external world objects and their constraints.
              Heterogeneous distributed databases (HDDBs), by allowing shared access to
              pre-existing databases, are growing in importance.  They exhibit site autonomy,
              the right of each local database to reject arbitrary global demands.
              Unfortunately, site autonomy seriously exacerbates global integrity
              maintenance. The aim of this research is to develop methods for maintaining
              integrity in distributed databases while accommodating site autonomy. The
              research plan is to explore three related techniques: generation of local
              sufficient constraints from global constraints, automated theorem proving, and
              relaxation of constraints. Some global constraints can be transformed into
              relatively simple, adjustable local ones needing little coordination, thus
              satisfying autonomy. This project investigates both the theoretical questions
              regarding what class of constraints is so transformable, and the p ractical
              question of how to produce a tool for generating such transformations. The
              proposed tool extends theorem proving  techniques previously applied to
              centralized databases and allows special predicates that capture the  notion of
              relaxation of constraint checking. This work will result in better integrity
              assurance in  distributed databases in spite of site autonomy, with
              applications in decision support systems,  optimization of material flow, and
              integration of scientific data from several sources, and other the  areas where
              these requirements are important.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
