Title       : Coevolution and Selective Abscission in the Yucca-Yucca Moth Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9509056

Award Number: 9509056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94207              (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Olof Pellmyr olle.pellmyr@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509056  Pellmyr    Ecological specialization is a powerful engine driving
              diversification and species formation among organisms.  For this reason, it is
              important to understand the pathways of specialization:  how often are new
              traits truly novel, and when do they arise through modification of preexisting
              traits?  Answers to this question have major bearing on our understanding the
              evolutionary plasticity of interactions.  This issue will be explored using
              highly specialized yuccas and yucca moths as a model system.  These species
              depend on each other for reproduction, with the moth being the sole pollinator
              of the plant and yucca seeds being the exclusive food of the moth's larvae.  A
              mechanism of selective abscission of young fruit allows the plant to balance
              the degree of seed destruction caused by the moth against pollination quality. 
              This project explores whether components of the abscission mechanisms are novel
              or modifications of preexisting traits.  First, experiments will be performed
              to test whether selective abscission based on pollination quality exits in more
              basal members of the yucca family.  Second, the physiological mechanism
              mediating abscission will be explored, using an experimental approach to test
              the effect of a chemical faator from eggs of yucca moths and their relatives on
              seed development.    The results from these experiments should provide a
              detailed understanding of the role of coevolution and preadaptations in
              ecological specialization.  The answers can have immediate implications for
              applied biology in, for example, how we manage new agricultural pests.
