Title       : Can Non-Random Mating Result in Evolutionary Change: A Selection Experiment
               Using Wild Radish as a Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9509184

Award Number: 9509184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Marshall marshall@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509184   MARSHALL   Understanding plant reproduction is important for both
              basic and applied   science. From the basic science perspective, plant ecology
              and evolution cannot be understood without knowledge of the causes of variation
              in plant reproductive success. From an applied perspective, plant reproduction
              is important because many of our agricultural products are the direct products
              of reproduction, seeds, and because understanding of reproductive success is  
              necessary to plant breeding programs. However, knowledge of plant reproduction
              has been limited because most current information is about success of plants as
              seed parents, even though plants reproduce both as seed and pollen parents.  If
              selection is occurring on the ability of plants to achieve reproductive success
              through pollen donation, then some of the features of plants may have
              misinterpreted or under-utilized.    This study focuses on testing whether
              selection is occurring on plants that act as pollen parents. An artificial
              selection experiment is used to address whether pollen donating ability is
              genetically based and to test whether selection on this ability alters other
              characteristics of plants. Wild radish has been chosen for  the model organism
              because it is very easy to work and is closely related to crucifers that are
              grown as crops. The study directly addresses a fundamental issue in plant
              evolutionary ecology and may have rather direct agricultural implications as
              well. Because it involves selecting seeds from different regions of the fruits
              the research will address whether this   form of selection could be useful in
              plant breeding. A study of alfalfa has already shown that seeds selected from
              different regions of fruits have different growth and reproductive
              characteristics.  This project can be used to address whether the most vigorous
              seeds typically come from particular regions of fruits in an unrelated plant
              and thus whether this might be a generally useful method of selection in plant
              breeding programs.
