Title       : The Balance Between Benefit and Detriment in a Plant-Nectar Robber Mutualism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9509563

Award Number: 9509563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124691             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Morris wfmorris@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509563  Morris  That ecologists have paid little attention to mutualisms
              relative to other kinds of species interactions may reflect the attitude that
              mutualisms are fragile constructs subject to invasion by "non-cooperators" that
              profit from another species without providing compensating benefits. However,
              few studies have explored the full range of possible benefits and detriments in
              mutualistic systems, even those in which apparently non-cooperative behavior is
              common. The proposed study will address the balance between benefit and
              detriment in the mutualistic interaction between panicled bluebells and
              nectar-robbing bumble bees. Contrary to preconceived notions, nectar-robbers,
              especially those that also pay legitimate visits to flowers, may provide
              benefits to the plant that equal or outweigh the negative effects they inflict
              while nectar-robbing. A full exploration of the balance between positive and
              negative effects in the bluebell and nectar-robber interaction requires three
              new approaches. First, it is necessary to measure the impact of nectar-robbery
              on both the male and female success of the plant. Second, the plant's
              reproductive success must be measured at an appropriate scale. Third, it is
              necessary to determine if the   production of a reward that is obtained by a
              non-cooperative behavior is actually necessary to assure that the plant
              receives a mutualistic benefit from facultative nectar-robbers.    The
              experiments in this study will be the first to assess the effects of
              nectar-robbery on both male and female fitness measured at the scale of entire
              clones. Additional experiments will manipulate the nectar-producing flowers to
              elucidate the role of floral rewards in eliciting beneficial behavior from
              nectar-robbing pollinators. These experiments will examine whether mutualisms
              in general, and the archetypal mutualism between plants and their pollinators
              in particular, contain elements of both benefit and detriment.
