Title       : Molecular Differences, Adaptive Radiation, and Geographic Speciation in the
               Hawaiian Lobelioids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9509550

Award Number: 9509550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Givnish givnish@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Sytsma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509550  GIVNISH  The plant subfamily Lobelioideae in Hawaii represents
              one-ninth of the plant species native to Hawaii.  There these plants have
              undergone an amazing radiation with striking specializations in leaf shape,
              flower form and seed dispersal adaptations.  Most species are restricted to
              individual islands and the species diversity seems to be rapidly disappearing
              with habitat alterations.  Relationships among these Hawaiian species and the
              group's relationships to other Pacific lobelioids remain controversial.  This
              project will utilize sequence data from both chloroplast and nuclear DNA to
              construct family trees for the species in the two largest genera of Hawaiian
              lobelioids and to address relationships to other genera and suggested ancestral
              groups.  Goals of the study include: 1) deriving a molecular based family tree
              with which to interpret patterns of morphological variation in the Hawaiian
              lobelioids in a non-circular fashion; 2) determining the amount of agreement
              between family trees based on molecular data and those previously proposed from
              morphological data, in order to evaluate the reliability of the morphological
              traits that have been used to classify the Hawaiian lobelioids; 3) Analyzing
              the tie between ancestry and distribution and inferring the number of
              inter-island dispersal events required to account for the diversification seen
              in the two largest genera; 4) comparing the apparent rates of molecular change
              in these genera, calibrated against the geological ages of each island, and
              estimating their approximate time and place of origin; and 5) assessing the
              relationships of the Hawaiian lobelioids to each other and allied groups to
              determine if the Hawaiian lobelioids are descended from a single ancestor and
              identifying which of the proposed groups are implicated in their origin.  %%% 
              This study will provide knowledge on the biodiversity and its origins for an
              important and threatened group of native Hawaiian plants.  ***
