Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Costs of Exploiting Poisonous Prey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9509295

Award Number: 9509295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509295  9521429  Brodie  Brodie   A critical element of many theories of
              evolutionary change is the idea that there is a "cost" to adaptation: increased
              adaptation in one trait necessarily restricts the potential for increased
              adaptation of some other traits. One way that costs of adaptation, or
              evolutionary tradeoffs, are thought to arise is through coevolutionary
              interactions.  Predator-prey systems that represent many generations of
              reciprocal selection are ideal situations to test this explanation for the
              evolution of tradeoffs.   Only one natural predator-prey system has provided
              population level evidence of increased ability to exploit prey evolving as a
              result of antipredator adaptations in the prey.  Newts of the genus Taricha 
              occur along the west coast of the United States and produce the neurotoxin
              tetrodotoxin (TTX), which is one of the most potent nerve toxins known.  The
              only known predators resistant to this toxin are Thamnophis sirtalis that occur
              with, and feed on, the newts.   Snake populations differ markedly in their
              resistance to TTX, and within resistant populations there is preliminary
              evidence suggesting that decreased locomotor performance accompanies increased
              resistance to TTX. This system provides an exceptional opportunity to study the
              costs of adaptation associated with arms race coevolution.      This research
              will examine potential costs of adaptation in resistant and nonresistant
              populations of garter snakes.  Locomotor performance and TTX resistance will be
              studied in each population, and the correlation between these traits will be
              used to assess tradeoffs.  A phylogeny describing the evolutionary
              relationships between populations will be constructed and used to examine the
              historical evolution of both resistance and the tradeoff between resistance and
              performance.  This approach will allow tests of alternative explanations for
              the evolution of tradeoffs.  Examining the evolution of resistance to TTX is a
              first step to understanding how organisms survive in th e face of widespread
              and dangerous natural toxins.
