Title       : Mechanism of Integration in Human Leukemia Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1995      
File        : a9509144

Award Number: 9509144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colleen B. Jonsson cjonsson@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9509144  Jonsson  This research addresses the biochemistry and genetics of the
              human T-cell leukemia virus  (HTLV) integration pathway. Specifically, the
              underlying basis for integrase (IN)-LTR recognition will be defined. One
              approach will be to construct chimeric HTLV-I and HTLV-II integrases to
              identify the LTR recognition domain. Import of the amino acid domain for
              recognition of HTLV-I IN's LTR to HTLV-IIg IN would correspond to a loss of
              recognition for the HTLV-IIg LTR and gain of recognition for the HTLV-I LTR by
              the HTLV-II/I chimeric protein. Once the domain has been identified,
              site-directed mutagenesis will be employed to ascertain the important
              functional amino acid residues. A second aspect of the research will focus on
              the molecular details of binding and recognition of the LTR by IN using
              fluorescence technology. This fluorescence approach is useful in that it offers
              a more dynamic and sensitive approach to binding, which will be important in
              the light of the "weak" DNA binding activity of integrases. Direct impact of
              these studies will be toward increased understanding of the biochemical pathway
              of retroviral integration. In a broader sense, however, the reactions catalyzed
              by IN have implications in several other areas such as "weak" protein-DNA
              interactions, and recombinases where scientific advancement has not been as
              rapid as with other DNA-protein interactions.  %%%  This research focuses on
              the protein-DNA interactions of the retroviral protein, integrase. 
              Retroviruses are a large family of single stranded RNA viruses.  All
              retroviruses contain the gene that encodes for integrase, which functions to
              insert the viral DNA into the cell's DNA. The insertion of the viral DNA is
              essential to the viral life cycle. In order for integrase to insert or
              integrate the viral DNA, the protein must "recognize" the viral DNA and the
              cell's DNA. The specific aim of this project is to define the manner whereby
              integrase recognizes the retroviral DNA and the cell's DNA.  ***
