Title       : Cloning and Characterization of a Novel Endothelin Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9509289

Award Number: 9509289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Parema Narayan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9509289  Narayan  The importance of endothelin-l (ET-l) as a potent
              vasoconstrictor and mitogen in cardiovascular and pulmonary systems has become
              well established. The presence of both endothelin and endothelin binding sites
              in the brain also has been documented; however, the role of endothelin in the
              central nervous system is obscure. The overall objective of this research is to
              elucidate, at the molecular level, the role of endothelin and its receptor(s)
              in the central nervous system.  Competitive binding experiments using
              endothelin receptor agonists and antagonists with SCP cells suggest the
              presence of two classes of binding sites for ET-l: a high affinity site with an
              ICso of 0.9 nM and a super-high affinity site with an ICso of 0.1 pM. Both
              binding sites exhibit the pharmacological characteristics of the ETA receptor
              subtype, but the super-high affinity binding site is unique in that
              ligand-receptor interactions with this extremely high affinity have not been
              previously documented. The results of the binding studies suggest that the SCP
              cells contain two distinct receptor molecules encoded by two separate mRNAs or
              that a single receptor molecule can exist in two affinity states. The immediate
              goal of this research is to clone the normal, high affinity as well as the
              novel, super-high affinity receptor cDNAs from SCP cells. The working
              hypothesis is that this novel receptor maintains sufficient homology with the
              normal ETA receptor to facilitate the cloning. The cloned receptor will be
              expressed in a heterologous cell line and its ligand binding properties will be
              determined. The predicted results are that two clones that share sequence
              homology and exhibit different binding affinities will be obtained or that one
              clone that yields two binding affinities will be produced. With the receptor
              clone(s) in hand, it will be possible to examine the distribution of the
              receptor in different parts of the brain and cell types within the brain. This
              information will be extremely valuable in determin ing the physiological role
              and possibly the mode of action of endothelin in the central nervous system. 
              %%%  The imortance of endothelin-l (ET-l) as a potent vasoconstrictor and
              mitogen in cardiovascular and pulmonary systems has become well established.
              The presence of both endothelin and endothelin binding sites in the brain also
              has been documented; however, the role of endothelin in the central nervous
              system is obscure. The objective of this research is to begin to elucidatethe
              role of endothelin and its receptor(s) in the central nervous system by cloning
              the normal, high affinity as well as the novel, super-high affinity endothelin
              receptor cDNAs from sheep choroid plexus (SCP) cells.  With the receptor
              clone(s) in hand, it will be possible to examine the distribution of the
              receptor in different parts of the brain and cell types within the brain. This
              information will be extremely valuable in determining the physiological role
              and possibly the mode of action of endothelin in the central nervous system. 
              ***
