Title       : A Study of Long-Term Architectural Limits to Computing: Galileo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9509589

Award Number: 9509589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265861             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Goodman goodman@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Galileo is an investigation into the implications of long  range  technology
              advances across the computer field.  While projections  of  narrow scope are
              difficult and risky because of the rapid  progress over a very  broad range of
              technology, it is possible to  extrapolate current trends and  make intelligent
              guesses about  future computer building blocks.  Extrapolating  current rates
              of  progress to as little as a decade hence suggesting that  incredibly
              powerful computer systems might not be only possible,  but even  affordable. 
              Current technology trends will undoubtedly  be affected by new  discoveries and
              by limitations long before  such performance levels are reached.  It is the
              goal of this  research to identify those development directions that  are
              likely  to come into conflict or otherwise be retarded, and to  investigate 
              the implications of these effects.  Future machines  will undoubtedly much
              lower  costs of all operations, but some  operations will become much cheaper
              than  others.  A major goal is  to identify the relative improvements on
              different  kinds of  operations, and to understand how these changes will
              affect  architecture, the programming environment, and the algorithms  used.   
              The  processor has long been the heart of a computer system, and  though much
              has  been written about other limitations, the CPU  still plays a central role
              in  today's architectures.  Increasingly the processor is becoming less
              effective,  limited  not by its peak processing power, but by the ability of
              the  system to  provide work to keep it busy.  While processing power  is
              rapidly becoming  cheaper, the effective use of memory and  communication is
              becoming the critical  challenge in achieving  higher performance.  Memory
              costs have declined rapidly  and  steadily for more than twenty years, and will
              continue to decline  in cost  per bit.  Access time has not improved
              dramatically,  however, and  high-bandwidth, low latency-memory will always be 
              relatively expensive.  Limitations in memory  access tile and  bandwidth are
              already posing difficult  design challenges, and  this will only be aggravated
              by technology trends.  This  research  is investigating how a system can get
              higher performance form its  memory system by applying cheap processing power
              wherever it can  be used  effectively.  In some sense, the system becomes a 
              collection of memory modules  with processing power distributed in  ways to
              maximize the effective use of  memory by minimizing  communications between
              memory modules.    Memory access  time and memory latency are intimately
              related.  Both are critical for a  high-performance system, and either can  be
              optimized at the expense of the  other.  Today memory latency  seems to be the
              more urgent problem, and much  current research is  devoted to reducing or
              tolerating memory latency.  Assuming  that  some of these techniques are
              successful, the more fundamental  problem of  memory bandwidth emerges.  While
              it may be possible to  build systems of  arbitrarily high bandwidth, it appears
              that one  of the most important emerging  challenges is to make the most 
              effective use of whatever bandwidth is available  between modules.    By
              today's standards, future systems will have enormous  processing power, huge
              amounts of memory, and incredible  communications  bandwidth.  Computer systems
              will be limited by  memory modules of insufficient  capacity and communication
              paths  of limited bandwidth, with processor  distributed generously  wherever
              needed to optimize the effectiveness of memory  and  communication bandwidth. 
              Galileo is investigating how the  architecture of  such systems should differ
              from systems of today.  Galileo is investigating how  the architecture of such
              systems  should differ from systems of today, and how  such systems should  be
              programmed.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
