Title       : Molecular Biology of Epithelial Sodium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1995       
File        : a9509222

Award Number: 9509222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Middleton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9509222  Middleton  The primary structure of a family of proteins has been
              identified  as components of the rat colon epithelial sodium channel.  The 
              coexpression of three homologous subunits, a, B, and g, in Xenopus  laevis
              oocytes results in the expression of a sodium current that  is like that
              described in the sodium transporting epithelia.   Partial clones of each
              subunit from Xenopus kidney mRNA have been  obtained.  The objectives of this
              research are (1) to determine if  the three clones encode renal sodium
              channels, and (2) to determine  if the clones are sufficient to produce sodium
              channel activity,  and whether all three are necessary for proper channel
              activity.   Specifically, antisense oligonucleotides will be used to suppress 
              sodium channel expression in A6 cells, a cell line derived from  Xenopus
              kidney.  Subunit specific antisense oligonucleotides have  been generated from
              the sequences of the partial clones.  The  effectiveness of the
              oligonucleotides at suppressing protein  expression will be assessed by looking
              at target mRNA and protein  levels with Northern and Western analysis,
              respectively.  Protein  levels will be ascertained by Western analysis, and the
              suppression  of sodium channel activity will be determined 
              electrophysiologically.  %%%  The importance of epithelial sodium transport in
              maintaining proper  organismic sodium levels is very clear.  Understanding the 
              structural correlates of function of the epithelial sodium channel  will lead
              to a better understanding of sodium transport and its  regulation.  This
              research will determine whether a family of  proteins encoded by three Xenopus
              clones represents the sodium  channel responsible for regulated sodium
              transport in the distal  nephron.  It will be a first step in the investigation
              of  structure-function relationships of the epithelial sodium channel.  ***
