Title       : CAA: Evolution of Archosaur Hindlimb Muscles: Use of Muscle Protein Isoforms as
               Molecular Markers for Homology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9509088

Award Number: 9509088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Annalisa Berta                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. McKitrick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kate F. Barald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509088  McKitrick         Birds possess more hindlimb muscles than their
              closest  living relatives, the crocodiles and alligators.  In addition,  some
              muscles primitively present in birds have been lost numerous  times within the
              avian lineage during the course of history.  If  historical relationships among
              crocodilians and birds  (archosaurs) are to be understood, hypotheses must be
              constructed  about the sequence of appearance and loss of specific muscles or 
              muscle parts.  Prior to such analysis, however, it is crucial to  develop
              hypotheses about which muscles in birds and crocodilians  are homologous in the
              historical sense, i.e., which muscles  correspond in the two groups. 
              Identifying these homologies has  not been possible with traditional techniques
              such as gross  anatomical study of muscle form.  In this proposal, a new 
              approach will be taken to analyze homologies in archosaur  hindlimb muscles by
              the use of developmental studies of muscle  proteins using avian and
              crocodilian embryos.  Muscle proteins  have different types, termed isoforms,
              at different stages of  organismal development,and these are highly conserved
              among  species.  The developmental shifts in isoforms of contractile  proteins
              such as actins, myosins, tropomyosins and troponins, as  well as other related
              proteins follow specific patterns.  The  earliest forms of these proteins are
              replaced by embryonic  versions and later by neonatal and adult forms.  Since
              individual  muscle groups bear "signature" sequential patterns, the PI will 
              examine the protein isoforms and their messages in birds and  crocodilians to
              see whether muscles of known homology in the two  groups have retained the
              ancestral patterns.  If so, such  patterns can be used to hypothesize
              historical relationships  between muscles of heretofore questionable homology. 
               %%%  This approach has the potential to solve important problems in 
              comparative biology about the relationship among traits in  related organisms
              where historical change has in effect   obliterated the record.  ***
