Title       : GIG: Algorithms, Combinatorics & Optimization: An Interdisciplinary Ph.D.
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9509581

Award Number: 9509581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egon Balas eb17@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Frieze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravindran Kannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Cornuejols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9509581  Balas       The last half century has seen an increasing use of 
              computers insolving the complex decision problems that arise  in a modern
              society.The methods needed to solve many of  these problems are a fusion of
              ideas from Mathematics,  Computer Science and Operations Research, Linear 
              Programming, Integer Programming and Combinatorial  OptimizationTechniques are
              widely used in today's world.  Problems of production, distribution, and
              allocation are  routinely modeled in this way. New techniques drawing from 
              developments in all three disciplines are needed to solve  the ever larger
              problems that arise in a technologically  advanced society.  In addition, new
              areas of application  emerge repeatedly. For example, the recent upsurge of 
              activity in Computational Molecular Biology relies heavily  on Discrete
              Mathematics to untangle the knotty sequencing  problems that it throws up.     
               The knowledge needed to solve such problems transcends  the traditional
              boundaries of a modern university.  Researchers in Mathematics, Operations
              Research and Computer  Science Departments often find themselves working on
              similar  problems.       On the other hand the idea of training graduate 
              students simultaneously in all three areas has been slow to  get off the
              ground. Carnegie Mellon recognized this several  years ago.  Using it's
              internationally recognized strengths  in all three areas it responded by
              setting up the Ph. D.  program in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Optimization. A
               unique feature of the program is that students are given a  thorough grounding
              in the foundations of all three areas  before they embark on their research. 
              Now nearly 30  students have taken part in the program. The quality of the 
              students has been excellent and the first crop of graduates  have taken up
              positions in major universities and research  laboratories.The program has
              inspired other institutions to  provide similar courses.The money from this
              grant will be  used to support graduate students and to provide t hem with  an
              environment in which they can acquire knowledge and  research skills in all
              three areas.
