Title       : A Taxonomic Monograph of the Genus Cuphea (Lythraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9509524

Award Number: 9509524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley A. Graham sgraham@phoenix.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509524  Graham   The flowering plant genus Cuphea is the largest member of the
              loosestrife family, the Lythraceae, with about 250 species. It is a significant
              component of neotropical herbaceous vegetation, especially in Mexico and South
              America where it occurs in areas of major environmental and biological concern.
              The genus is currently the focus of biotechnological research into the
              mechanisms of fatty acid synthesis, and is under development as a new oilseed
              source. Specialized floral and vegetative characters of Cuphea, such as the
              large, irregular, red flower tubes that attract hummingbirds in the mountains
              of western Mexico and the heath-like plants with minute rolled leaves in the
              rocky campos of Brazil, provide exceptional character syndromes for studying
              evolutionary diversification and adaptation. The projected research by Dr.
              Shirley Graham of Kent State University will test hypotheses about the
              evolution of selected characters and the frequency of geographic dispersal
              events that have been important in the species radiation of this large, diverse
              genus.   Funding will support preparation of a modern taxonomic monoraph of
              Cuphea.  The new monograph will be exceptional for its depth of coverage by
              inclusion of floral, vegetative, pollen, chromosome, seed oil composition,
              reproductive and distributonal data. The extensive database will be analyzed
              cladistically, to reconstruct probably phylogenetic relationships, elucidate
              patterns of character change, increase understanding of the history of plant
              distribution in the New World, and provide a framework for a new natural
              classification. The largest section of the genus will be revised taxonomically
              in a collaboration with a young Brazilian specialist in Lythraceae, and the
              monograph will be made available electronically via World Wide Web and in
              published hard copy.
