Title       : SGER: Reformulation of System Theories in Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9509537

Award Number: 9509537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49678              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Benjamin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This award, in the SGER mode, explores how the formulation of a  system's
              motion affects the efficiency of synthesizing a plan to  bring the system to a
              desired state. In general, a system's motion  can be described in a variety of
              ways whose computational  properties may differ. An especially important
              computational  property is the decomposability of a theory of motion. A theory
              is  decomposable if it is expressible as the composition of a set of 
              subtheories. Decomposability is important because it implies that  global
              properties of the system can be derived from local  properties, thereby
              reducing the expense of computing these  properties. In particular, global
              plans can be built from local  plans. Decomposition is usually performed by the
              human designers of  the system, who have prior knowledge of the demands that
              will be  placed on the system, and engineer a representation whose  properties
              will aid the system in meeting these demands  efficiently. In robotics and
              artificial intelligence, the goal of  designing truly autonomous problem
              solving systems requires a  method for automatic decomposition. This research
              is built upon a  new method for reformulating and decomposing theories of
              motion.  Each representation of a theory is analyzed using the tools of 
              semigroup theory. Each distinct representation corresponds to an  abstract
              coordinate system, which then yields a matrix  representation that is used to
              transform and decompose the  representation into its irreducible invariants.
              Furthermore, this  decomposition is guaranteed to hold for all tasks in a class
              of  tasks inductively defined from the given task, permitting reuse of  the
              decomposition on all members of this class. The ultimate goal  of this research
              is to build systems that can automatically design  and modify their
              representations by deriving algorithms for  automatic reformulation of
              representations to improve their use in  synthesis. Previous research in
              robotics and AI has produced  powerful methods for searching task  spaces -
              spaces whose states  are configurations of the task domain. If successful, this
              research  should produce reformulation methods of sufficient power that the 
              search of the space of representations will be as automated as the  search of
              task spaces currently is.
