Title       : Parallel Architectures for Speech Recognition: Nonlinear Optimization of
               Expectation-Maximization (EM) Training of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) in a
               Reconfigurable Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9509505

Award Number: 9509505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey F. Silverman hfs@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the development, construction and testing of  new
              architectures for high-speed computing. The idea being  exploited is that of
              combining in a loosely-coupled fashion,  general-purpose, RISC-based processing
              nodes each with multiple  field-programmable-logic-array(FPLA) based
              coprocessor systems.  With this kind of system, one has the hardware properties
              of a  general-purpose computer, but the advantage, brought about by  suitable
              reconfigurability, of performance more akin to that of a  special-purpose
              engine. In particular, the 20-node Armstrong III  system has been built and is
              operational and provides nearly  two-orders of magnitude improvement over
              current advanced  workstations. The hardware system, combined with its
              configuration  compiler, a program that automatically translates a C function 
              subroutine to both machine code and to the hardware design of the 
              reconfigurable coprocessors, are the basic building blocks for this  class of
              architectures. Thus, this research is directly focused on  one of the strategic
              areas of national concern, that of high  performance computing.    There is
              uniqueness to this program in that not only has the  hardware/software system
              been built, but it is also being tested on  important, real applications. In
              particular, the training of a  modern hidden Markov model(HMM) based speech
              recognition system  requires hundreds of hours, even with some of the variants 
              developed recently at Brown and elsewhere. The reduction of this  training time
              to ten or so minutes means that research progress in  this area may be made at
              a faster rate and/or that expensive  nonlinear optimization techniques may now
              be applied to the  problem. Also, this means that data from a less cumbersome
              sensor  system (the microphone array systems in place and being developed  at
              Brown) can be suitably incorporated into a more robust speech  recognition
              system. Currently, eight PhD students, two ScM students  and five
              undergraduates are involved with this project; ni ne PhD's  have been graduated
              from this project under past funding.
