Title       : Host Plant Phenology and Insect Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9509125

Award Number: 9509125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89091              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas K. Wood sympatry@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509125  WOOD   Many insect species are restricted to feed on specific host
              plants.  How this specialization comes about, whether it is a requisite for
              speciation and whether it requires geographic isolation are open to debate. 
              When insects acquire novel host plants it is important to understand the
              mechanisms and consequences, for a number of reasons.  Changes in host plant
              usage occur in natural communities and thus are important factors in attempts
              to understand the origin / structuring of insect-plant communities and
              geographic patterns of insect species diversity.  If a new host plant is
              commercially important, the result is often the creation of a new pest.  In
              cases of existing pest species such host plant changes can lead to genetic
              alterations between populations on different plants that require new management
              practices.  Thus to understand natural and managed plant communities the
              processes that initiate and the ultimate consequences of insect shifts to new
              host plants must be understood.   In this proposal insects from a single
              population will be manipulated by placing them in seven different environments.
               Each environment consists of different combinations of natural and novel host
              plants.  Three environments consist of novel and natural hosts which allows the
              determination of whether divergent host specialization can occur when there is
              potential free insect movement between host species.  The remaining
              environments are to examine the process of host specialization when free insect
              movement between natural and novel host plants is prohibited.  The experiment
              will be done in the field utilizing 28 large screened walk-in rooms.  Each of
              the seven environments will be replicated four times.  Variables to be examined
              will be host plant species effects on insect life history timing of egg hatch,
              mating, and egg deposition.  At each of these life history stages differential
              host effects on survival will be determined.  The extent of movement between
              hosts within each of the seven enviro nments will be determined using marked
              insects.
