Title       : A Picture Retrieval System Based on Contents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9509253

Award Number: 9509253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clement T. Yu yu@cs.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2891,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is an inter-institutional collaborative research project involving
              University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) and Wright State University (WSU).
              Pictorial systems which retrieve pictures based on contents have wide
              applications. For example, learning can be facilitated by retrieving pictures
              from electronic encyclopedia; radiologists can be assi  sted in diagnosis;
              satellite images of desired contents can be retrieved by earth scientists to
              perform research; appropriate garments can be viewed by customers before
              deciding where they go shopping, etc. The purpose of the project is to
              construct a generic picture retrieval and analysis system which can be easily
              adapted to various applications  , including the construction of digital
              libraries and their use in retrieval of information. Similarity based retrieval
              involving spatial relationships, and fuzzy and precise matching is used one of
              the approaches investigated. Other techniques that play a significant role are:
              multi-dimensional searching; parametrized similarity functions; visual   query
              tools; image analysis techniques such as segmentation; object recognition; and
              color and shape analysis. The retrieval subsystem is developed at UIC, while
              the image analysis subsystem is developed at WSU. The two subsystems will be
              combined to form an integrated system. The usefulness of the system will be
              demonstrated for the following ap  plications: retrieval of photographs for the
              photo-shop at  UIC, and retrieval of images for diagnosis of skin cancer at
              Rush-Presbyterian Medical Center in Chicago.
