Title       : Improvement of Entomological Collections at Carnegie Museum of Natural History
               with Emphasis on Lepidoptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1998   
File        : a9509570

Award Number: 9509570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899938             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Rawlins rawlinsj@carnegiemuseums.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen W. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The entomological collections at The Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CMNH)
              are  scientific resources of international significance, containing 6.5 million
              prepared specimens and more  than five million unprepared ones.  Among New
              World institutions, CMNH has the third largest  collection of Lepidoptera and
              the most diverse collection of Afrotropical insects, associated with a  library
              of exceptional historical coverage for systematic research.  The rate that CMNH
              specimens are  being used by researchers and students has risen dramatically in
              recent years with specimen loans and  scientific visitors at the highest levels
              in CMNH history.  Collection growth is at unprecedented  levels, due to
              fieldwork worldwide, donation of private collections,  and survey programs
              addressing  biodiversity issues.   Specimen integrity, research use, and growth
              of the collection are hindered by  housing problems.  More than half of
              available wooden storage equipment is in perilous condition; only  22% of
              existing storage is acceptable by modern standards.  Old insect drawers housing
              the Lepidoptera  are frag ile and breaking with age, and are unsuitable for
              using unit trays.  Specimens are packed  into drawers at maximum density,
              preventing curation and hindering use in research.  Collections in  fluids and
              on glass slides require modern storage.  Backlog preparation is required for
              specimens of  unique value, including 130,00 papered Lepidoptera and fragile
              specimens in alcoholic bulk samples.  This three-year project will resolve
              these problems by accomplishing the following goals: 1.  Renovate  new space in
              the Carnegie Museum for expanding collection storage and associated research
              areas (CMNH cost-sharing; see Appendix 2, J-49). 2.  Transfer and rehouse 41%
              of the Lepidoptera collection into a compactorized storage system containing
              quality drawers and unity trays (NSF funding requested for labor and storage
              equipment; CMNH cost-sharing for labor). 3.  Transfer to new drawers and unit
              trays all non-Lepidoptera currently in unacceptable temporary containers (NSF
              funding requested for labor and storage equipment). 4.  Obtain equipment
              necessary for transfer, maintenance, and curation of the collection (NSF
              funding requested for stereomicroscopes, computers, printers, and freezers for
              non-  chemical pest control). 5.  Provide special attention to specimens of
              exceptional scientific value (  NSF funding requested for labor to segregate
              and conserve type specimens and to prepare specimens of  greatest value form
              backlog storage; CMNH cost-sharing for labor to recondition historically
              important  specimens). 6.  Provide preliminary curation of taxa currently
              represented by large numbers of  prepared but unsorted specimens (CMNH
              cost-sharing for visiting specialists).                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
