Title       : RPG: Developmental Changes in Myelin Membrane Fluidity Evaluated with Novel
               Bioengineering Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9509181

Award Number: 9509181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Martin Poe                              
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Husted   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9509181  Husted  The overall goal of this research is to evaluate central
              nervous  system (CNS) myelin membrane fluidity as a function of temperature- 
              induced development in fish.  In particular, the following  questions will be
              addressed: (1) How do temperature-induced changes  in myelin lipid composition
              affect myelin membrane fluidity in fish  adapted to different growth
              temperatures?  (2) How do these changes  affect the interaction forces between
              myelin lipids and proteins?   To address these questions, the following
              specific aims will be  accomplished: Aim 1. Membrane fluidity of cerebral and
              spinal cord  myelin lipids from fish adapted to different growth temperatures 
              will be characterized using carbon-13 magic angle spinning NMR  spectroscopy
              and correlated with variations in myelin lipid  composition to determine how
              changes in myelin lipid composition  affect myelin membrane fluidity. Aim 2.
              Short-, intermediate-, and  long-range attractive and repulsive forces in
              myelin membranes from  fish adapted to different growth temperatures will be
              evaluated  with the Surface Forces Apparatus and correlated with changes in 
              membrane fluidity to determine how changes in myelin membrane  fluidity affect
              myelin lipid-protein interactions  %%%  The dynamic state of lipid in
              biological membranes is a central  feature of current models of membrane
              organization.  The motion of  membrane constituents is referred to as membrane
              fluidity.  This  research will evaluate central nervous system myelin membrane 
              fluidity as a function of temperature-induced development in fish.   In
              particular, the following questions will be addressed: (1) How  do
              temperature-induced changes in myelin lipid composition affect  myelin membrane
              fluidity in fish adapted to different growth  temperatures? (2) How do these
              changes affect the interaction  forces between myelin lipids and proteins?
              Membrane fluidity will  be characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy.    Short-, intermediate-, and long-range attr active and
              repulsive  forces in myelin membranes from fish adapted to different growth 
              temperatures will be evaluated with the Surface Forces Apparatus  and
              correlated with changes in membrane fluidity to determine how  changes in
              myelin membrane fluidity affect myelin lipid-protein  interactions.   ***
