Title       : Designing Communication Support for Mobile Hosts in Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1997     
File        : a9509620

Award Number: 9509620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Badri R. Nath badri@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz Imielinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The rapidly expanding technology of cellular communications, wireless LAN, and 
              satellite services will make it possible for users to access information 
              anywhere and at anytime.  In  this environment, users will be mobile, use low 
              powered computers, and communicate with the network  over narrow bandwidth 
              links.  Such an environment introduces new challenges in the design of 
              communication mechanisms due to constraints such as bandwidth, energy, cost,
              and  the availability of  computing resources due to host mobility.  Hence, 
              communication protocols should be designed for  adaptability to changing 
              environments brought by mobility.  The research project will design and build 
              support for mobile communications applications that explicitly take into
              account  bandwidth  limitations, energy limitations, and mobility using the
              following  approaches:    (1) The communication  between the client and the
              server will be  via an intermediary. Indirect interaction allows for 
              optimization and  development of specialized protocols for the wireless link
              and mobile host  without  having to change any protocol that  is running on the
              fixed hosts.  (2)  Design environment aware  communication primitives that will
              have access to the  current environment state and also be notified  about any
              changes.  Thus, the  type of communication to use can be tailored to the
              prevailing  conditions.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
