Title       : SEA-NET LITE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9509870

Award Number: 9509870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale N. Chayes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur L. Lerner-Lam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is a cooperative grant to Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO),
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) and Joint Oceanographic
              Institutions (JOI) for activities associated with the acquisition and
              development of a shipboard communications system that will be capable of high
              data rate transfers from ship to shore.  The communications system will be
              installed on the research vessel THOMAS THOMPSON, a 279-foot vessel, owned by
              the Navy and operated by the University of Washington.  The system will be
              heavily used in 1995 and 1996 to support the JGOFS Arabian Sea Program.    This
              proposal is part of a cooperative proposal to develop a prototype shipboard
              communications system called SEANET.  Proposals included in the cooperative
              grant are:   Proposal #           PI       Institution   #95-10117 Andy Maffei 
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution   #95-09870 Dale Chayes  Lamont Doherty
              Earth Observatory   #94-19306 Ellen Kappel  Joint Oceanographic Institutions   
              These three proposals outline an effort to develop a prototype shipboard
              communications systems as follows:    1) Dale Chayes at LDEO will purchase the
              shipboard hardware ($53,000), work with Andy Maffei to integrate the hardware,
              travel to Oman to install the system on the R/V THOMPSON, and participate in
              one cruise in order to trouble shoot the system and teach the THOMPSON's
              technicians/scientists how to use it.  LDEO will also provide some
              administrative support to establish a billing system for INMARSAT charges
              resulting from use of the system during the year, and Chayes will remove and
              redeploy the system on another ship when JGOFS cruises are completed.    2)
              Andy Maffei at WHOI will assist Chayes with the integration of the hardware and
              will provide user-friendly software for the shipboard communications system. 
              He will integrate the system's hardware and software, including the ship's
              system, INMARSAT satellites, earth groundstations, routers, and Internet
              connections.  He will be available to trouble-shoot the sy stem as necessary
              during operations.    3) Ellen Kappel (JOI) and Rex Buddenburg (NPGS):  Kappel
              will provide overall program management, including communication of program
              goals and progress to all UNOLS institutions, and will integrate the NSF's
              SEANET effort with complementary efforts of other agencies, including but not
              limited to NOAA, USCG and NASA.  Buddenburg, a satellite communications expert,
              will provide technical coordination with NASA during the system development and
              analysis of options to use other satellite systems.    The goals of creating a
              system that will support high-speed-data transfer from ship to shore and
              connections to the Internet are part of OCE's plan for the High Performance
              Computing and Communications (HPCC) initiative.  Therefore, joint support for
              this effort will be provided by the Oceanographic Sciences Research Section
              (OSRS) and by the Oceanographic Facilities Section (OCFS).  ??          1
