Title       : The Genetic and Physiological Basis of Life Cycle Convergence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9509802

Award Number: 9509802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Bradley Shaffer hbshaffer@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Grosberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9509802    One of the outstanding problems in ecological and evolutionary
              physiology is understanding the mechanisms by which major new features evolve. 
              In particular, when we see the same adaptation in two or more unrelated
              species, we may ask the fundamental question "Do those species utilize the same
              physiological and genetic mechanisms to solve their adaptive problem, or do
              they use different mechanistic solutions to achieve the same adaptive
              solution?".  An answer to this question is needed if we are to understand how
              organisms adapt to changing environments. To address this question, this
              research will use a model group of salamander species from Mexico and the US
              that have altered their physiological pathway to metamorphosis:  some species
              go through a normal metamorphosis, while others forego metamorphosis and
              complete their lives as sexually mature, aquatic larval animals.  Several
              strategies, ranging from molecular analyses of the genes responsible for
              metamorphosis, to administering hormones that regulate metamorphic completion,
              will be used to determine the mechanism used to achieve this ecologically
              important life-history shift in six different species of salamander.  If the
              mechanism is the same in all species, this will indicate that there is
              essentially only one physiological and genetic mechanism by which this
              life-history shift can evolve, and all species have independently evolved the
              same solution.  Alternatively, if different mechanisms are involved, there will
              be compelling evidence that truly independent solutions to the same adaptive
              problem can and do occur during evolution of closely related species.  The
              research will introduce a novel approach for studying key adaptations, where
              both phylogenetic and molecular perspectives are simultaneously treated within
              a comparative, mechanistic framework.  It will establish a case study linking
              ecological, physiological, and genetic levels of causation.  The data will
              increase our understanding of the processes of evolution and  the origin of
              biological diversity.
