Title       : Biological Collections from Polar Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9509761

Award Number: 9509761
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1208105            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristian Fauchald Fauchald.Kristian@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian F. Kensley  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9509761  Kensley  The objectives of this project are to manage and maintain the 
              biological collections (and their associated systematic,  geographic and
              ecological data) generated through past and  current research activities in the
              World's polar regions, and to  facilitate the collections-based research
              activities of  systematic biologists studying the biota of the polar regions.  
              The collection will be curated and maintained according to  collection
              management standards.  Specimen-lots will be  identified with unique lot
              numbers and will be cataloged.  The  cataloged specimens will be accessioned
              and incorporated into the  department's permanent collections.  The specimen
              records will be  maintained in appropriate departmental computerized catalogs. 
               Sorting and identifications will be done as time and staff  expertise allow. 
              Collection related data will be maintained in  appropriate automated or
              paper-based files.  Computerized  specimen and station databases will continue
              to be developed and  maintained.  Work will continue on the development of
              automated  acquisition and loan databases.  All database development will 
              conform to departmental data standards and procedures.   Collection-based
              research activities will be facilitated through  the administration of a modest
              research grant program and through  the improved availability of
              collection-related data.  Station  data, polar type specimen data, and
              identified polar specimen  catalog records will be made available to the
              scientific  community through the Internet.  The project will insure the long 
              term care of the polar biological collections and their  associated data.  The
              specimens that comprise the polar  collections are an irreplaceable biological
              resource.  By  providing an historical community baseline, they serve a 
              fundamental role in documenting the current biodiversity of the  polar marine
              environment.  Their study provides significant  insights into the
              phylogenetics, evolution and systematics of all  of the major groups  of marine
              organisms.  Several hundred new  taxa have been described from the polar
              environment.  It is  reasonable to expect that many more undescribed taxa will
              be  discovered as researchers continue to study the polar specimens.
