Title       : RPG: The Evolutionary History of a Female Preference in Poeciliid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9509211

Award Number: 9509211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra L. Basolo basolo@cricket.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9509211  Basolo    One model for the evolution of female mating preferences,
              the  preexisting bias model, suggests that a bias favoring a trait can  arise
              prior to the trait itself. This model has been suggested to  influence the
              evolution of a female preference favoring a sword and  sword evolution in the
              genus of fish, Xiphophorus. Swords are  multi-colored extensions of a specific
              set of caudal rays at the  base of the caudal fin found in a number of species
              of Xiphophorus.  Previous work suggests that swordlessness is the ancestral
              state,  as all outgroups to this genus lack a structure homologous to the 
              sword. In the three species of Xiphophorus that have been tested,  one species
              that possesses a sword and two other species lacking  swords, females have been
              shown to prefer conspecific males with  swords. In addition, in the sister
              genus, Priapella, females have  also been shown to have a preference favoring a
              sword. Using  parsimony, it appears that while swords arose within the genus 
              Xiphophorus, a preference favoring the sword arose prior to the  divergence of
              Priapella and Xiphophorus. These results then suggest  that the preference
              arose prior to appearance of the sword and can  be explained by the preexisting
              bias model for the evolution of  female preferences for male traits. This
              proposal is to compare the  strength of a female preference favoring a sword
              across species.  While two of the species share the preference, one exhibits
              the  ancestral condition for the trait, i.e. lack of a sword, and the  other
              exhibits the derived condition, i.e. presence of a sword.  Presence of the
              preference has not previously been tested in the  third species to be examined
              and it lacks a sword.  ***
