Title       : Computational Systems with Biological Roots II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9509831

Award Number: 9509831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Head tom@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis G. Pixton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The objective of this `applied algorithm` project is to  continue  the
              establishment and study of the  interrelationships between formal language 
              theory and the  structure and behavior of the informational macromolecules. 
              The  formal representation of recombinant behaviors exhibited  by double
              stranded DNA  in the presence of specified sets of  enzymatic activities is of
              crucial  interest.  This project  includes the continued investigation of
              splicing  systems and  the languages they define.  The fact that DNA occurs 
              naturally in  both linear and circular forms, which interact  through
              recombination, has  motivated the initiation of a  unified theory of
              interacting linear and circular  words.  This project includes further
              development of this theory  with emphasis  on splicing.  A treatment of
              languages of  bi-infinite words and semi-infinite  words is made, which  will
              initiate the integration of these theories with the  theories of languages of
              circular and finite words.  This  project directs  special attention to the
              sofic shifts, which  are a class of languages of  bi-infinite words that play a
               major role in dynamical systems.    This project  is significant in that it
              establishes and  clarifies relations between formal  language theory and 
              molecular biology. It develops an additional source of  suggestive problems and
              imagery for formal language theory.  Also, over a time  scale of decades, it is
              expected to  suggest questions and contribute precision  to biochemical 
              thought about informational macromolecules and their  behavior.  Additionally,
              the project provides new problems  and approaches to the study of  symbolic
              dynamics.  This  project combines theoretical computer science,  biology and
              dynamical systems in a mutually stimulating and  reinforcing way.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
