Title       : The Yeast 3-Hybrid System: A Genetic Method for Screening RNA-Protein
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9509081

Award Number: 9509081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tien-Hsien Chang chang.108@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9509081  Chang  Specific RNA-protein interactions are crucial in a variety of
              biological processes. These interactions are accomplished by proteins which can
              recognize a specific RNA structure rather than a particular RNA sequence.  At
              present, identification of the physiologically relevant RNA ligand for a given
              RNA-binding protein is laborious and difficult.  As the number of proteins
              predicted to bind RNA continues to grow, there is an urgent need for a reliable
              method for identifying their RNA ligands.  To this end, this project will
              develop a "3-hybrid" genetic system, building on the concept of the well-known
              yeast 2-hybrid system.  A "3-hybrid" test system consisting of  two fusion
              proteins (the first and the second hybrids) and a "bipartite" RNA molecule (the
              third hybrid) will be produced in a yeast reporter strain.  If the specific
              "sandwich-like" protein-RNA-protein interaction can be achieved in vivo, then
              GAL4 transcriptional activity may be reconstituted, leading to the
              transcriptional activation of a reporter gene.  The long term goal of this
              research is to develop this in vivo screening method for identifying the RNA
              ligand for any given RNA-binding protein, or vice versa.  %%%  Specific
              RNA-protein interactions are crucial in a variety of biological processes.
              These interactions are accomplished by proteins which can recognize a specific
              RNA structure rather than a particular RNA sequence.  At present,
              identification of the physiologically relevant RNA ligand for a given
              RNA-binding protein is laborious and difficult.  As the number of proteins
              predicted to bind RNA continues to grow, there is an urgent need for a reliable
              method for identifying their RNA ligands.  To this end, a "3-hybrid" genetic
              system will be produced in yeast so that specific protein-RNA-protein
              interactions in vivo will result in the transcriptional activation of a
              reporter gene.  The goal of this research is to develop this in vivo screening
              method for identifying the RNA ligand for any given RNA-binding  protein, or
              vice versa.  ***
