Title       : High Resolution Studies of Late Quaternary Climate and Oceanographic Change,
               Santa Barbara Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9509839

Award Number: 9509839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329774             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Kennett kennett@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9529839  Kennett    Funds are requested to conduct high resolution paleoclimatic
              and paleoceanographic investigations of Site 893 (588 m water depth), a late
              Quaternary sediment sequence (200 m thickness) of very high quality from Santa
              Barbara Basin, California.  Initial chronological, oxygen isotopic and
              foraminiferal assemblage investigations reveal a complete to near-complete
              climate record representing near-linear sedimentation rates at ~15 cm/100 years
              for the last 160 kyrs.  The sequence is well located to monitor changes in
              upwelled intermediate waters associated with changing modes of thermohaline
              circulation in the north Pacific.  The sediment sequence records many
              oscillations between low oxygen conditions, represented by sediment laminations
              and low oxygen tolerant benthic foraminifers, and higher oxygen conditions,
              represented by non-laminated bioturbated sediments and oxygen-loving benthic
              forminifers.   Our relatively detailed studies for the last 20 ky interval
              suggests close coincidence between switches in basinal ventilation and global
              climate changes as recorded by foraminiferal    18O and planktonic forminiferal
              assemblages.  Oxygenated conditions prevailed during colder intervals  (Younger
              Dryas and last glacial maximum).   Conversely, suboxic conditions occurred
              during warmer intervals (Bolling/Allerod and Holocene),  Radiocarbon age
              differences between planktonic and benthic foraminiferal pairs are smaller (av.
              90 yrs) during  cool intervals;   larger (av. 470 yrs) during warm intervals. 
              We have interpreted these oscillations in sediment facies and radiocarbon ages
              to reflect changes in intermediate waters with a greater proportion originating
              from a relatively proximal source during cooler intervals compared with a
              distal source during warmer intervals, including the present day.  Our initial
              studies suggest an absence of any significant lags between the ventilation and
              climate changes during the last 20 kyrs.  This suggest that a tight coupling
              existed between changes i n circulation influencing Santa Barbara Basin and
              climate. The  Santa Barbara Basin sequence has been an inherently  unstable
              environmental  system that is highly sensitive to global climate change.  We
              have also recently discovered that the sequence of laminated sediment intervals
              in Site 893 closely correlated with almost the entire sequence of glacial
              interstadials (Dansgaard-Oeschger events) as recorded in the Greenland ice
              sheet and indirectly in sediment sequences in the north Atlantic.    We
              proposed to conduct studies to test several hypotheses: 1. that the changes in
              ventilation in Santa Barbara Basin are intimately linked with global climate
              change during the last 70 kyrs; 2. that the changes in ventilation during the
              last 70 kyrs were linked to the north Atlantic deep sea sediment record through
              changes in oceanic conveyor circulation, or through thermohaline changes in
              Pacific intermediate waters resulting from global climate change, or to both in
              unison; and 3. that climate during peak-warming of the last interglacial
              episode (substage 5e or Eemian; 125-115 ka) was sufficiently different from
              that of the Holocene to affect major change in Pacific thermohaline circulation
              at intermediate water depths that, in turn, caused fundamental changes in
              basinal environmental conditions that we record in Santa Barbara Basin.
