Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Manifolds and Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9509744

Award Number: 9509744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Goodwillie tomg@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9509744  Goodwillie       This project uses several kinds of 'functorial
              calculus' to  investigate the homotopy types of spaces of diffeomorphisms and 
              spaces of smooth embeddings.  These techniques exploit  multirelative
              connectivity estimates to describe continuous  functors of various types in
              terms of special values; for example,  a functor of topological spaces might be
              recovered from its values  at highly connected spaces, or a functor of
              subspaces of a  manifold, from its values at zero-dimensional subspaces, or a 
              functor of real inner product spaces, from its values at  high-dimensional
              spaces.  The project is to refine and combine  these techniques and to apply
              them to various questions in  differential topology.       Each 'functorial
              calculus' mentioned above is so called  because of a not-entirely-fanciful
              resemblance to the ordinary  'functional calculus' of Newton and Leibniz. 
              Sometimes a fact  about numbers is best proved by placing it in a context where
              a  number is part of a huge family of numbers -- a numerical function. 
              Properties of the function then lead, by general theorems of  calculus that may
              seem a bit magical on first encountering them, to  a computation of the number.
               So it is here: sometimes a fact about  some geometrically defined object is
              best proved by placing it in   a context where the object is part of a huge
              family of such objects  -- a functor -- and using some magic of a more modern
              kind.  This  analogy may convey something of the flavor of the research; the 
              content is harder to convey, because most of the 'geometric'  objects in
              question are connected to everyday reality only by  rather long chains of
              abstract ideas.  (Despite the intervention of  similar long chains of abstract
              ideas, however, one finds that the  'objects' physicists study predict real
              physical phenomena with  uncanny precision.)  ***
