Title       : Nonlinear Stability of a Premixed Flame Under Confinement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9509760

Award Number: 9509760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15236              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. McGreevy mcgreevy@hslc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the Scs in Philade
	      43rd St Kingsessing Mall
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/596-8800

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9509760  McGreevy    This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for
              Women  Scientists   and Engineers Award.  The project will involve conducting a
               preliminary   investigation and setting the ground work for a full nonlinear 
              study of flame   propagation in a closed tube.  The nonlinear stability
              analysis  will be carried   out by investigating, via asymptotic analysis,
              bifurcation  theory, multiple   time scales, and numerical analysis, the
              evolution of finite  amplitude   disturbances superimposed on an otherwise
              smooth planar flame.   The goal   of the project will be to identify the roles
              of hydrodynamic and  diffusional-  thermal processes and the role of the
              mixture composition on the  stability   properties and complex spatial and
              temporal dynamics of the  process.  The   first part of the study will
              concentrate on the stage of the  combustion   process prior to when acoustic
              disturbances become significant,  as   manifested by a rapid acceleration of
              the flame, shock wave  formation   ahead of the flame, and transition from
              laminar to turbulent gas  flow.  The   second part of the study will involve
              examining the fully coupled    fluid/acoustic transition process.    The
              National Science Foundation's mandate to ensure the vitality  of the   Nation's
              scientific enterprise includes concern for the quality,  composition,  
              distribution and effectiveness of the human resource base in  science and  
              engineering.  Within this context, the Foundation is committed to  enhancing  
              the current rate of participation of women in science and  engineering  
              careers, in general, and as active participants in all of its  programs.   
              Research Plannine Grant awards are made: (1) to help increase the  number   of
              new women investigators participating in NSF's research  programs; and,   (2)
              to facilitate preliminary studies and other activities  related to the  
              development of competitive research projects and proposals by  women who   have
              not previously had independent Federal research funding.    Research   Planning
              Grants are one-time awards that may be used for  preliminary work   to
              determine the feasibility of a proposed line of inquiry,  and/or for other  
              activities that will facilitate proposal development.
