Title       : Improvement of the University of Arkansas Arthropod Museum Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1995 
File        : a9509082

Award Number: 9509082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51920              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Whitfield   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher E. Carlton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                 d                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                        d    
                d        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                               )   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9509082
              Whitfield  The University of Arkansas Arthropod Museum (UAAM) is located in the
              Ozark Plateau,  within a short distance of the Ouachita Highlands.  These two
              regions represent important areas of geographical endemism for many of the
              species in the collection, represented by more than 650,000 specimens.  Because
              of its unique geographical coverage and history of excellent collection and
              curation, UAAM maintains the most important regional collection of insects from
              the Ozark and Ouachita interior Highlands. UAAM has recently added to its value
              as a scientific and educational resource with completion of the Insect
              Molecular Systematic Laboratory, and extensive computerization and linkage with
              Internet for database exchange these new facilities enable the museum to keep
              pace with the most recent developments in systematics.  However, a recent
              increase in the expansion rate of the collection (upwards of 10% in the last
              year) has created an immediate need for increased storage capacity.  In
              addition, the UAAM collection requires rearrangement to enhance storage
              efficiency and accessibility. An in crease in the capacity and upgrading of the
              hardware of the museum will be accomplished through the replacement of old wood
              cabinets by modern metal storage cabinets and the purchase of new cabinets
              designed for the safe and efficient storage of alcohol-preserved specimens in
              vials.  The reorganization will have an immediate impact on the appearance and
              ease of use of the collection by the museum staff and visiting scientists, as
              well as enhance the visibility of the display space for use by the local
              community.                         ;       S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n 
                                       (                                                   ( 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        Oh     +'  0                                       $ 
                   H       l                                               D       h         
                                                       R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT         
                                           9509082                             Jethro
              Moorefield                   Jethro Moorefield           @     f  d            
                           @                                   @     f  d                    
                                                                                           @ 
                                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                    
                                               1                                             
                                                       ;                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  e =       e
                            b                       b                                       j
                    j   j       j       j       j       j                                    
                                                ;   1                                        
                                                                    #                        
                l   T       =   ;                       j                                    
                                                  ;               j       j                  
                                                                  j               j          
                                          ~               j       j       j       j          
                              0                                                              
                                                9509082 Whitfield  The University of Arkansas
              Arthropod Museum (UAAM) is located in the Ozark Plateau,  within a short
              distance of the Ouachita Highlands.  These two regions represent important
              areas of geographical endemism for many of the species in the collection,
              represented by more than 650,000 specimens.  Because of its unique geographical
              coverage and history of excellent collection and curation, UAAM maintains the
              most important regional collection of insects from the Ozark and Ouachita
              interior Highlands. UAAM has recently added to its value as a scientific and
              educational resource with completion of the Insect Molecular Systematic
              Laboratory, and extensive computerization and linkage with Internet for
              database exchange these new facilities enable the museum to keep pace with the
              most recent developments in systematics.  However, a recent increase in the
              expansion rate of the collection (upwards of 10% in the last year) has created
              an immediate need for increased storage capacity.  In addition, the UAAM
              collection requires rearrangement to enhance storage effi
