Title       : Convergence of Comparative Modeling, Molecular Dynamics and Simulated Annealing
               Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1995    
File        : a9509100

Award Number: 9509100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcela Madrid   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9509100  Madrid  This research will explore the convergence of comparative
              modeling, molecular dynamics and simulated annealing techniques, as a function
              of the degree of homology of the protein structures used as templates.
              Comparative modeling techniques will be used to predict the structure of
              several proteins from  weakly and highly homologous sequences. The predicted
              structures will be subject to molecular dynamics and simulated annealing
              protocols, to study the efficiency and accuracy with which these techniques
              bring the predicted structures into better agreement with those experimentally
              determined. Novel protocols will be tested and compared, including molecular
              dynamics in the picosecond and nanosecond time scales, sequential simulated
              annealing and parallel Monte Carlo simulated annealing. The accuracy of the
              calculations depend, among other factors, on the approximations used to treat
              the electrostatic interactions and to simulate the solvent effects. A novel
              treatment of the electrostatic interactions, the Particle Mesh Ewald protocol,
              will be applied. Both crystal and solution structures will be simulated, for
              comparison purposes. Proteins will be selected from the Brookhaven Protein Data
              Bank (PDB) based on the existence of a family of experimentally determined
              structures from different species. They will include phospholipase, lysozyme
              and myoglobin. The calculated protein structures will be compared to the
              corresponding X-ray crystallography and NMR-determined structures from the PDB.
               %%%  This research will explore the convergence of comparative modeling,
              molecular  dynamics and simulated annealing techniques, as a function of the
              degree of   homology of the protein structures used as templates. Comparative
              modeling   techniques will be used to predict the structure of several proteins
              from  weakly   and highly homologous sequences. This will be valuable in
              determining the   confidence level that can be placed on predicted structures.
              The knowledge gained   from this research  can be directly applied to the
              prediction of unknown protein   structures and mutants, the refinement of
              experimentally determined structures,   and to the rational design of
              macromolecules to be prepared by site-directed   mutagenesis techniques.  ***
