Title       : Studies of High-Tc and Buckminsterfullerene Superconductors Under High
               Hydrostatic Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9509885

Award Number: 9509885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243390             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Schilling schill@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9509885  Schilling  This  project  will search for oxygen ordering in  High-Tc 
              oxide  superconductors  in  order to determine the essential  structural  and  
              cation   characteristics  responsible  for  the   ordering.  Temperature 
              dependent oxygen relaxation phenomena will  also  be  examined in detail. An
              objective is to establish any link between  these   phenomena   and  
              photo-induced  superconductivity.   The  functional    dependence   of   the  
              superconductor   transition  temperature  and  the electronic density of  state
               in  fullerene  superconductors   such  as  K3C60  and  Ru3C60   will   also  
              be  investigated.  The project will focus on the pressure  dependence  of  the 
              transition  temperatures  as  well  as  the  Pauli  spin  susceptibility. This
              project is devoted to a fundamental study of  superconductivity,  however,  the
              results  may  be  of  technical  interest  in  the  context of pressure 
              effects  on  high-Tc  and  related materials.  %%%  In  a typical
              high-temperature superconductor, approximately half  of  the  constituent 
              atoms are oxygen. These  atoms,  via  there  arrangement  in  the crystal
              lattice, sensitively  influence  the  temperature  at  which a material becomes
              a superconductor.  This  project  is devoted to the study of the oxygen atoms, 
              and  their  ordering  (arrangement)  in the high-Tc  materials  lattice.  The 
              materials  will be studied as a function of both temperature  and  pressure 
              (these  are important thermodynamic variables  for  the  high-Tc  materials).
              The methods will also be applied to  another  interesting superconductor
              material: "fullerenes", which  contain  potassium  or  rubidium. The
              experiments,  which  probe  how  the  conducting properties of the materials
              vary with temperature  and  pressure,  will  yield information that will be  of
               considerable  interest  to  theorists. The project is of a fundamental 
              nature,  but  may  have technical relevance if it leads to new  routes  to 
              higher temperature superconductors.  ***
